Economic Report President of the Transmitted to the Congress February Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February together with THE ANNUAL REPORT of the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Internet : bookstore.gpo.gov Phone : toll free ( ) ; DC area ( ) Fax : ( ) Mail Stop : SSOP Washington DC Economic Report of the President | i C O N T E N T S Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT.............................................. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * OVERVIEW....................................................................................................... CHAPTER MACROECONOMIC PERFORMANCE IN CHAPTER CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND ITS REFORM CHAPTER POLICIES FOR DYNAMIC LABOR MARKETS CHAPTER REGULATION IN A DYNAMIC ECONOMY......................... CHAPTER TAX POLICY FOR A GROWING ECONOMY........................ CHAPTER A PRO-GROWTH AGENDA FOR THE GLOBAL ECONOMY.................................................................................................... APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION...................................................... * For a detailed table of contents of the Council s Report see page Economic Report of the President | iii ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Economic Report of the President | v ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : The economy is recovering from the effects of the slowdown that began in the middle of and led to the subsequent recession. The American economy has been hit hard by the events of the past three years most tragically by the effects of the terrorist attacks of September Our economy and investor confidence were hurt when we learned that some corporate leaders were not playing by the rules. The combined impact of these events along with the three-year decline in stock values that impacted business investment slowed growth in Despite these challenges the economy s underlying fundamentals remain solid including low inflation low interest rates and strong productivity gains. Yet the pace of the expansion has not been satisfactory ; there are still too many Americans looking for jobs. We will not be satisfied until every part of our economy is vigorous and every person who wants a job can find one We are taking action to restore the robust growth that creates jobs. In January I proposed a growth and jobs plan to add needed momentum to our economic recovery. We will accelerate the tax relief already approved by Congress and give it to Americans now when it is most needed. Lowering tax rates and moving more Americans into the lowest tax bracket will help our economy grow and create jobs. Faster marriage tax relief and a faster increase in the child tax credit will especially help middle-class families and should take effect now. We will take steps to encourage small business investment helping them to expand and create jobs. We will end the unfair double taxation of corporate income received by individuals. By putting more money back in the hands of shareholders strengthening investor Economic Report of the President | confidence in the market and encouraging more investment we will have more growth and job creation. These steps will allow Americans to keep more of their own money to spend save or invest. They will boost the economy ensure that the recovery continues and provide long-term economic benefits through higher productivity and higher incomes As our economy recovers we also have an obligation to help Americans who have lost their jobs. That is why we extended unemployment payments for workers who lost their jobs and improved incentives for investment to create new jobs. I also proposed a bold new program of reemployment accounts to help workers searching for jobs Our commitment to a strong economy does not stop with these important steps. We will continue to strengthen investor confidence in the integrity of our markets. We will develop better ways to train workers for new jobs We will make the Nation s regulations and tax code less onerous and more reflective of the demands of a dynamic economy and expand opportunities for open trade and stronger growth in all nations especially for emerging and developing economies Our Nation s economic progress comes from the innovation and hard work of Americans in a free market that creates opportunities no other system can offer. Government does not create wealth but instead creates the economic environment in which risk takers and entrepreneurs create jobs. With the right policies focused on growth and jobs strong economic fundamentals and hard work I am confident we will extend economic opportunity and prosperity to every corner of America THE WHITE HOUSE FEBRUARY | Economic Report of the President THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Economic Report of the President | LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. January MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Robert Glenn Hubbard Chairman Randall S. Kroszner Member Economic Report of the President | C O N T E N T S Page overview chapter macroeconomic performance in GDP and Its Components in Consumption Nonresidential Investment Residential Investment................................................................ Net Exports Government Purchases................................................................ The Labor Market Productivity and Real Wages Macroeconomic Policy and the Budget Outlook Monetary Policy Fiscal Policy The Federal Budget The President s Jobs and Growth Initiative.................................. The Effect of Tax Relief on Interest Rates.................................... Developments in the Rest of the World............................................ The Economic Outlook................................................................... Near-Term Outlook.................................................................... Inflation Forecast Long-Term Outlook Interest Rate Outlook Income Forecast.......................................................................... Conclusion chapter corporate governance and its reform Foundations of Corporate Governance............................................. Market-Imposed Discipline : External Governance Mechanisms Internal Governance Mechanisms Legal and Regulatory Institutions................................................ Corporate Governance Reform Information Accuracy and Accessibility....................................... Management Accountability Auditor Independence Corporate Governance and the Global Economy Conclusion Contents | Page chapter policies for dynamic labor markets Employment Dynamics and Labor Market Policy Unemployment Assistance Policy Dynamics of Program Participation and Social Policy....................... Fostering Skill Development Conclusion chapter regulation in a dynamic economy....................... The Demand for Regulation Regulation to Address Market Imperfections............................... Regulation to Address Specific Interests....................................... Principles of Regulation Can the Market Achieve the Desired Outcome ? Can Private Regulation Suffice ? Will Government Regulation Impede or Distort Market Dynamics ? Is There a Less Restrictive Alternative ? Do the Benefits Justify the Costs and How Are Both Distributed ? The Demand for Regulatory Reform Regulatory Review and Regulatory Reform Effects of Reform on Prices Effects of Reform on Innovation and Consumer Satisfaction....... Effects of Regulatory Reform on Resource Allocation.................. Pitfalls of Regulatory Reform Failure to Coordinate Reforms Deviation from Competitive Conditions..................................... Creating Perverse Incentives........................................................ Putting the Principles to Work Conclusion chapter tax policy for a growing economy Objectives of Tax Reform................................................................. Simplicity : Freeing up Resources for Productive Use Fairness : Relating Taxes to Ability to Pay and to Economic Well-Being Long-Term Growth : Boosting Economic Performance by Improving Incentives.............................................................. Analysis of Alternative Reforms........................................................ What Does the Current System Tax ? Taxation of Human Capital Taxation of Housing | Economic Report of the President Page Taxation of Nonprofits Distributional Consequences of Tax Reform Decisions on the Path to Reform...................................................... Integration and the Double Tax on Corporate Income Uniform Taxation of Investment Broadening the Tax Base and Lowering Tax Rates Income Versus Consumption as the Base..................................... International Tax Considerations Conclusion chapter a pro-growth agenda for the global economy... The Importance of Growth.............................................................. The Global Growth Experience The Benefits of Growth Promoting Growth Pro-Growth Principles Economic Freedom : Competition and Entrepreneurship............. Governing Justly : Rule of Law and Government Accountability Investing in People : Health and Education.................................. The Administration s Policies to Enhance Growth Trade Promotion Authority......................................................... The Millennium Challenge Account........................................... Reforming the Multilateral Development Banks.......................... Conclusion appendixes A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production list of tables Administration Forecast Accounting for Growth in Real GDP Accounting for the Productivity Acceleration Since SEC Enforcement Efforts and Outcomes Legal Rules That Shape the Roles of Institutional Investors Some Corporate Governance Initiatives of NYSE and Nasdaq...... The President s Ten-Point Plan and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act Household Saving in Tax-Preferred and Taxable Accounts Contents | Page Tax Rates on Capital Income for a Hypothetical Investor in Effective Tax Rates by Asset and Sector Under Current Law and Various Reforms Income Per Capita and Social Indicators Millennium Challenge Account Indicators.................................. list of charts GDP Growth and the Contribution of Consumption Net Worth and Consumption Propensity.................................... Equity Prices and Fixed Private Nonresidential Investment.......... Nonfinancial U.S. Equity Issuance.............................................. Credit Market Liabilities of the Nonfinancial Business Sector...... Equity Markets and Risk Spreads Corporate Bond Risk Spreads Housing Starts Duration of Unemployment Saving Investment and the Current Account Balance International Investment Position and Investment Income Merger and Acquisitions Transactions by Industry with Deregulation Tender Offers Net New Venture Capital Funds Percent of Equity Held by Institutions Employment-to-Population Ratio for Women Employment-to-Population Ratio by Race and Ethnicity EITC Benefit and Labor Force Participation of Unmarried Women with Children EITC Benefit by Family Earnings and Number of Children for Fraction of Unemployed Workers Finding Work by Number of Weeks Unemployed.......................................................... Unemployment and AFDC/TANF Recipients Light Vehicle Sales Ratio of Costs of Command-and-Control to Least-Cost Regulation California Power Exchange Prices per Megawatt-Hour Emissions of Selected Pollutants Under the Clean Air Act and Clear Skies | Economic Report of the President Page Projection of Returns Affected by the Alternative Minimum Tax. Marginal Federal Income Tax Rates for Hypothetical Couple in Distribution of Marginal Federal Income Tax Rates for Joint Filers in Alternate Tax Bases The Largest Tax Expenditures FY2002.................................. Effective Marginal Tax Rates by Age for Hypothetical Couple Regional Economic Performance................................................. Growth Rates of National Income and Income of the Poorest Regulatory Quality and Income per Capita Rule of Law and Income per Capita............................................ Inflation and Growth in Income per Capita Openness and Growth list of boxes Measuring the Effect of Stock Market Wealth on Consumption.. Measuring the Effect of Mortgage Refinancing on Consumption New Measures of Consumer Price Inflation Calculating the Effect of Higher Government Debt on Interest Rates.................................................................................... Accounting for the Recent Strength in Productivity Growth........ Do Bad Bidders Make Good Targets ? Who Owns Corporations ? What Incentives Do CEOs Face ? Markets Accountability and the Enforcement of Rules............... Has There Been a Decline in Long-Term Employment ? Two Ways to Look at Income Mobility The Earned Income Tax Credit................................................... The Growth in SSDI and SSI Disability Caseloads The Government Is Not Perfect Either...................................... Assessing the Economic Impact of Major Regulatory Initiatives The Toll of Two Taxes : Compliance with the Regular and the Alternative Minimum Tax What Tax Rate Do Taxpayers Really Face ? How Are Consumption Taxes and Individual Retirement Accounts Similar ? Taxpayers Exhibit Substantial Fluidity Across Tax Rate Brackets.. Combating the HIV/AIDS Epidemic in Africa China the WTO and the Rule of Law....................................... Contents | Overview T he events of brought new challenges for the U.S. economy and for America s economic policy. Efforts to strengthen homeland security and prosecute the war against terrorism placed new demands on the economy The recovery from the economic slowdown continued but with an unsatisfactory pace of job creation. These developments make it all the more important to undertake policies that promote growth both in the United States and in the global economy Reliance on markets is key to enhancing growth. Thanks to the flexibility of markets consumers businesses workers and investors can continuously adapt to changing economic circumstances. The market constantly reshapes and redirects economic activity and economic output in response to changes in producers supplies and costs and in consumers incomes demands and the prices they face. In turn the market itself evolves as new information new technologies altered supplies and other changes in the economic and physical environments pose new problems and open up new opportunities Put simply markets are dynamic This Report emphasizes the importance of dynamic markets in the U.S economy and the need to design public policies so as to preserve and build on this dynamism. In particular it discusses recent developments and policies in the areas of corporate governance labor markets regulation taxation and international economic development. It describes the lessons that have been learned from recognizing the dynamic flexibility of the U.S. economy and how the President s policy initiatives are putting those lessons into practice to foster economic growth and prosperity in the United States and around the world Assessing Macroeconomic Performance Chapter of the Report reviews the most important events for the economy in The components of aggregate demand consumption investment government purchases and net exports are discussed in turn Particular attention is paid to the valuation of the Nation s stock of productive assets and to the link between these asset values and demand. The chapter then discusses the near-term outlook for the economy and the outlook for productivity growth because growth in productivity output per worker is the main influence on long-run growth and living standards The U.S. economy grew at an annual rate of percent through the first three quarters of ( The advance release for GDP in the last quarter of became available only after this Report went to press. ) Although output rebounded after the terrorist attacks of September job growth during the recovery has remained unsatisfactory. However the continued recovery in output over the past year and especially the robust improvements in productivity foreshadow a return to more vibrant job creation in the future The contraction of although one of the mildest on record turned out to have started earlier and to have been more severe than data available before July had indicated. The revised data that became available at that time revealed that output had dropped moderately in each of the first three quarters of before the rebound began in late and early Output fell by a cumulative total of percent from the peak at the end of to the trough in the third quarter of much less than in most previous recessions. The mildness of the recession in spite of the effects of terrorist attacks continued declines in the stock market and concerns over corporate governance reflects in large part the benefits derived from the flexibility of the market-driven U.S. economy Monetary and fiscal policy also provided support for demand in the face of these adverse developments. In faced with signs of a slowing of economic activity the Federal Reserve reduced the target Federal funds rate times during the year for a total reduction of percentage points to percent. The Federal Reserve then held the Federal funds rate steady through most of until a half-percentage-point cut on November brought it down to percent Recent U.S. fiscal policy has pursued the goal of promoting economic growth. Among the central components of a pro-growth fiscal policy are measures to limit the share of output commanded by the government and measures to reduce disincentives to work save and invest. The Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act ( EGTRRA ) enacted in June lowered marginal tax rates for all taxpayers. This tax cut will have important incentive effects that will lead to higher incomes and improved long-term living standards. EGTRRA also provided important support for economic activity in the short term because of the way in which the tax rate reductions were set in place and the timing of the act s passage On January the President proposed a plan to enhance the longterm growth of the economy while supporting the emerging recovery. The President s plan would accelerate to January many features of the tax cut that are currently scheduled to be phased in over several years ( including reductions in marginal income tax rates additional marriage penalty relief a larger child credit and a wider percent income tax bracket ) ; it would eliminate the double taxation of corporate income by excluding dividends from individual taxable income ; it would increase to | Economic Report of the President $ the expensing limit for small business investment ; and it would provide $ billion to the States to fund Personal Reemployment Accounts for unemployed workers ( described below ) The package would provide near-term support to investment and improve the long-term efficiency of capital markets while at the same time insuring against a softening of consumption by putting more money in consumers pockets Relatively slow economic growth in several countries that are important U.S. trading partners contributed to a widening of the U.S. current account deficit a broad measure of the balance of the Nation s international goods and services transactions in The current account is equivalent to the difference between net national investment and net national saving and therefore a large current account deficit can reflect high investment low saving or both It follows that there is no one right level for the current account balance Indeed the crucial question in assessing the current account is not how large it is but instead whether investment is growing at a rate that supports higher income and improved living standards for American households. The foreign capital inflows that are the counterpart of the current account deficit are a potentially important way in which to fund this investment Improving Corporate Governance Corporate governance is the system of checks and balances that serves to align the decisions of corporate managers with the desire of shareholders to maximize the value of their investments. It is a largely private sector activity built on the bedrock of the Nation s legal infrastructure. Good corporate governance can substantially reduce the costs to investors of delegating decisions to managers as must inevitably occur when corporations obtain external financing. Good governance also contributes to the ability of U.S corporations to maintain dispersed ownership and to the existence of welldeveloped financial markets. It enables corporations to compete more effectively in financial and product markets that have become increasingly global. The economy then benefits through more effective use of the available factors of production including managerial talent external capital and natural and human resources. Importantly strong corporate governance improves the attractiveness of corporate investments to households and other investors by more closely aligning managers actions with investors interests and by making information about the corporation and the quality and diligence of its management more transparent to outsiders Chapter of this Report examines the evolution of institutions for corporate governance in the United States. Last year was marked by important reforms in U.S. corporate governance including new laws government regulations Overview | and private sector initiatives. The reforms were in part a response to the failure of some managers and accountants to provide accurate information about corporate financial and operating performance events that drew attention to possible weaknesses in the current system of governance In calling for reform in March of last year the President articulated a plan based on three core principles of good corporate governance : accuracy and accessibility of information accountability of management and independence of external auditors. The plan recognizes both the complexity of modern corporate governance systems and their inherent flexibility. Its call for a careful reexamination of private governance customs and legal rules was followed by a series of private and public sector initiatives. These include stepped-up enforcement efforts by State and Federal Government authorities facilitated by the President s creation of a Corporate Fraud Task Force in July to focus on conduct by managers and accountants that has been a source of concern. The President also signed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in July which the Securities and Exchange Commission is now implementing through a series of new regulations Under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act a new regulatory body is being created to strengthen the incentives of auditors to meet their legal obligation to serve the interests of shareholders and other investors. The Securities and Exchange Commission must issue new disclosure regulations including rules designed to make it easier for investors to gauge the incentives and performance of corporate managers. State governments are also instituting changes ; State law is fundamental to the governance structures of corporations. Private sector organizations were among the first to respond to the President s call for reform. Self-regulatory organizations such as those that operate the Nation s stock exchanges contribute in important ways to the quality of U.S. corporate governance. Along with individual investor organizations corporate officials and others these organizations have taken steps to strengthen U.S corporate governance Even in the midst of these reforms it is important to remember that change is not new to U.S. corporate governance. The U.S. system of corporate governance is designed to be flexible. This flexibility indeed accounts for its capacity to support economic growth over the decades and for its strong global reputation. The chapter highlights the three main components of the U.S. corporate governance system : external governance mechanisms internal corporate governance and laws and regulations. External and internal corporate governance mechanisms serve to align managers interests with those of shareholders and can adapt to changing market conditions. The surety provided by the U.S. legal system in upholding the contracts that investors enter into when they supply capital to corporations contributes to the flexibility of the corporate governance system. This framework which relies | Economic Report of the President on both the flexibility of private institutions and the integrity of public institutions remains in place throughout the present reforms and provides a model for other economies to follow Designing Dynamic Labor Market Policies As noted above and in Chapter employment growth during did not keep pace with the recovery in output. From December through December nonfarm payroll employment fell by while the unemployment rate stayed between and percent. These statistics may give the impression of a static labor market. Yet dynamism remains the predominant characteristic of the labor market in the United States : in millions of workers found new jobs started new businesses and raised their earnings. Chapter of this Report documents some important dimensions of these labor market dynamics and discusses their implications for employment and productivity growth and for the design of policy The mobility of workers across jobs up the opportunity ladder and even in and out of employment is one important dimension of a dynamic labor market and one of the great strengths of the U.S. labor market. American workers change jobs frequently particularly during the first decade of their working lives in part because doing so allows them to gain new experience and skills and importantly to increase their earnings most earnings growth for younger workers comes about through job changes. For these new entrants however employment itself is the key aspect of this dynamic because tenure on a job provides returns in terms of skill development and onthe-job training. This improvement in skills in turn makes possible the upward ratcheting effect through which movement between jobs contributes to increased earnings. Although staying on the ladder of upward mobility means maintaining an attachment to the labor market it does not necessarily mean staying put in any one job. In a well-functioning labor market there are large and constant flows between employment and unemployment and a substantial number of jobs are created and destroyed each year. These large bidirectional flows are further evidence of the flexibility of the U.S. economy as expanding firms and industries take on more workers while those in decline contract their labor forces. Research shows that frequent job changes for the young are in an important sense the means through which individuals are matched to the jobs that will provide them with the best opportunities Government policies are more effective when they recognize and foster labor market mobility. Policies can support this mobility and earnings growth by encouraging skill development and education. Another important policy goal is to meet the desire of individuals for social insurance Overview | against the adverse consequences of short-term macroeconomic fluctuations and personal misfortune. Policymakers face some difficult tradeoffs in designing social insurance however because the provision of insurance can itself distort behavior making individuals less likely to enter employment or to exert full effort toward finding a job. As an example for decades the Aid to Families with Dependent Children program provided insurance against destitution but it also created a financial incentive for recipients to stay out of the work force. Welfare reform and the Earned Income Tax Credit are examples of policies that have supported individuals in time of need while also giving them incentives to enter the labor market and find jobs The Administration has proposed a new policy to foster skill development and increase the rewards associated with work for those unemployed workers who face the most difficulty in finding new employment. Qualifying workers would receive a Personal Reemployment Account with funds to be used for expenses such as training child care or relocation. These accounts would be targeted to those unemployed workers who are deemed most likely to exhaust their unemployment benefits before finding a new job. Those who find a new job within weeks would be entitled to a cash payment of the remaining funds in the account as a reemployment bonus. Personal Reemployment Accounts thus would provide not only support for training and skill development but also a monetary incentive for unemployed workers to find new jobs Developing Regulation for a Dynamic Economy Competitive efficient and equitable markets are the cornerstone of a flexible and dynamic economy. Regulation of economic activity is an essential element of a market economy but regulation can hinder economic growth and well-being just as it can advance them. Well-formulated regulation can lead to improved market outcomes but regulation that is ill conceived or that is not cost-effective can have unintended consequences that actually make matters worse Chapter of this Report illustrates how both the government and the private sector play critical roles in ensuring a flexible economic environment that promotes growth and prosperity by allowing economic resources to be redeployed as opportunities evolve. The chapter provides a framework for the evaluation of regulatory policies focusing on Federal regulation and how it can foster or hinder economic dynamism Regulation stems from a number of needs. Some demands for regulation reflect a desire to improve the efficiency of markets rendered imperfect by | Economic Report of the President spillover effects informational problems or lack of competition. By compensating for or correcting these market imperfections such regulation may enhance growth. Other demands for regulation in contrast reflect a desire to change market outcomes for reasons that may be compassionate or selfish far-sighted or opportunistic. Regulatory policy must identify and deny those demands for regulation that seek only economic rents for a privileged few and instead be based on sound science and economics along with a careful evaluation of the social needs behind the desire for regulation The chapter suggests some guidelines for evaluating both new regulations and proposed regulatory reforms that will help reduce the costs of regulation and achieve the best possible outcomes. When regulation is necessary it should be flexible and market based and the burden of each regulation should be justified by the benefits it confers. An important Administration initiative is the revision of the Office of Management and Budget s Guidelines for the Conduct of Regulatory Analysis and the Format of Accounting Statements. Conducted jointly by the Council of Economic Advisers and the Office of Management and Budget this initiative stresses the principles of sound regulatory policy based on economic analysis Part of a complete understanding of the consequences of regulation is recognizing that the impact and efficacy of specific regulations can change over time with changes in technology economic conditions and scientific knowledge. The chapter provides several examples one of which is the President s Clear Skies Initiative. Aimed at reducing power plant emissions of atmospheric pollutants this program was designed in light of scientific evidence linking impairments of human health to exposure to certain polluting chemicals. Importantly however Clear Skies has also been crafted in such a way that economic incentives provide the mechanism for reduction of these pollutants at least cost to the economy Regulatory review and reform offer an important means for policymakers to control the buildup of regulatory costs and limit the economic harm of outdated regulations. Yet although many regulatory reforms have been clear successes others have created new problems. Examples include the experience with reform of the savings and loan industry in the 1980s and the more recent experience with electricity markets in California. To avoid in the future the kinds of unsatisfactory outcomes that resulted from these episodes regulatory reform should be guided by the same basic principles as the development of new regulations Overview | Analyzing Tax Policy An efficient tax system adequately finances government activities while imposing as few distortions as possible on household and business decisions A tax system with high marginal tax rates or a complicated structure impedes work effort and saving and hinders the risk taking and entrepreneurship that are the foundations of growth. Tax rates that are unequal across activities encourage tax avoidance and lead to potentially wasteful efforts at regulation reporting and monitoring to control it. Tax deductions exclusions and credits are often undertaken with the aim of targeting resources to worthwhile social goals but they can create considerable complexity for taxpayers. They can also impose high effective tax rates in the range of income over which the tax benefits are gradually withdrawn in some cases discouraging additional work effort among the very people the preferences were intended to help. The combined result of all of these imperfections can be a tax system that imposes significant compliance costs and wastes resources by misallocating them to nonproductive activities Chapter of this Report considers how tax policy changes could improve economic growth and real incomes for all Americans. Such changes involve difficult questions of how best to balance the sometimes competing objectives of simplicity fairness and faster long-term growth. The chapter considers some approaches that economists have identified to achieve the gains of higher incomes and efficiency within the framework of the existing tax system. Even relatively modest changes can lead to important improvements in economic incentives and efficiency. In particular the opportunity exists to reduce significant differentials in tax rates across different activities and to lower the tax on the return to capital in ways that improve incentives Small improvements in this regard can have large long-run effects because saving and investment decisions made now will affect capital accumulation technological change and innovation for years to come The chapter discusses the President s proposal to abolish the double tax on corporate income. The current taxation of corporate income is an important example of how the current tax code falls short of the goal of taxing income only once. Taxing corporate income twice once at the corporate and again at the individual level reduces the after-tax reward to investing. It distorts corporate financing decisions diminishes capital formation and results in too little capital being allocated to the corporate sector. As a result the capital stock grows more slowly than it could otherwise lowering the productivity of workers and thus the growth of their real wages. The President s plan to eliminate this double taxation will boost long-term efficiency and support increased investment that will promote higher near-term growth and job creation | Economic Report of the President Taxing all income once but only once would greatly improve the efficiency with which government revenue is raised. Tax preferences represent a policy decision to exclude some income from the tax base but this poses a tradeoff : a higher overall tax rate is then required to raise a given amount of revenue and the higher rate in turn increases the inevitable distorting effects of taxation on the economy. Even taxing all income just once however would leave in place the tax code s current distortion of the decision between current consumption and future consumption ( that is saving ) A tax system based on consumption rather than income would remove this distortion but it would also require a higher average tax rate than a system based on comprehensive income because the consumption tax would have a smaller tax base ( although it would be larger than the present income tax base ) The benefits of a consumption tax would have to be weighed against the disincentive effects from this higher rate The chapter also discusses ways in which the dynamism of the U.S economy affects the evaluation of tax policies. For example the effect of the tax system on an individual taxpayer is not well represented by a one-year static snapshot of his or her income. Rather its impact changes significantly over time as the taxpayer proceeds through the stages of life and his or her earnings rise and fall. Earnings typically rise through the working years as the individual gains experience and accumulates human capital and then fall as the individual retires and exits the work force. One s tax bill is also affected by among other things changes in employment marriage and divorce having and raising children giving to charity starting up a business and buying and selling assets. The ebbs and flows of the business cycle also have an impact. In evaluating the distribution of the tax burden and how changes in the tax code affect that distribution it is therefore important to consider the full range of individuals lifetime experiences. For example a college student is likely to have little income today but will benefit from tax relief upon entering the labor force. Conversely a working couple nearing retirement who currently pay the top marginal income tax rate would benefit today from a reduction in that rate but they might benefit less in the future once they have retired and their income is lower. In short because everyone s tax situation changes over time for a variety of reasons proper analysis of the distribution of taxation must consider not just who will benefit from tax relief today but who will benefit in the future as well Promoting Global Growth Chapter of this Report examines how countries throughout the world can promote economic growth and thereby enhance the well-being of their people. In recent years many countries especially in the developing world Overview | have experienced robust growth which has led to reduced poverty lower infant mortality improved health outcomes and longer life expectancy Many others however have been far less successful at promoting growth and have not seen similar improvements in social indicators The central theme of the chapter is that all countries can experience faster growth by creating an economic environment in which market signals lead to better economic performance. Three principles guide these growth-oriented policy reforms. The first is economic freedom in which encouraging competition and entrepreneurship leads to stronger growth. Economic freedom involves among other things a stable domestic macroeconomic environment with low inflation appropriate government regulation encouragement of entrepreneurial initiative and openness to the global economy. The second pro-growth principle is governing justly. This involves safeguarding the rule of law controlling corruption and securing political freedom all aspects of policy that are vital for developing trust in the accountability and reliability of government. The third principle is investing in people. These investments include those that promote the health and education of the population making workers more productive No one of these principles is enough to guarantee strong growth ; rather all three are mutually reinforcing aspects of a pro-growth agenda. The specific policy measures that will implement these pro-growth principles similarly involve a number of elements : responsible fiscal and monetary policies an appropriate size and role of government domestic flexibility and internal competition openness to the global economy a healthy and educated population and sound institutions. Countries that pursue a broad range of policies consistent with these principles perform better than those that do not. During the 1980s and 1990s for example those countries that were more open to the international economy grew much faster on average than those that were more closed The President has inaugurated three important policy initiatives designed to stimulate economic performance in countries around the world : trade liberalization initiatives negotiated pursuant to Trade Promotion Authority which will promote countries openness to international trade and investment ; the Millennium Challenge Account which will provide direct financial assistance to developing countries adopting pro-growth policies ; and reform of the multilateral development banks which will encourage private sector involvement in results-oriented development programs undertaken by the World Bank and the regional development banks Through these and other policies the United States will help countries address the challenge of improving their economic growth. Ultimately however creating a pro-growth environment is up to each country s own people and government. The initiatives of the United States will help in | Economic Report of the President important ways especially by reinforcing pro-growth decisions by governments and individuals. They are not however substitutes for the adoption of good policies in developing countries themselves which are ultimately the key to success The pro-growth agenda embodied in these three policy initiatives will enhance growth and prosperity both at home and abroad. This is the most direct way to improve standards of living and thus the lives of people around the world Conclusion The United States is recovering from both an economic downturn and the aftershocks of the terrorist attacks of September Government policies have aided this recovery in important ways with support from both fiscal and monetary initiatives. Perhaps most important in ensuring recovery however has been the underlying flexibility and dynamism of the U.S economy. In the midst of the downturn workers continued to find new opportunities savers continued to reallocate their funds in search of greater returns and firms continued to regroup and to invest in future growth. The economic policies of the Administration will likewise continue to support this quest for growth both here at home and around the world Overview | C H A P T E R Macroeconomic Performance in T he U.S. economy solidified its forward progress in with the third quarter of the year marking the fourth consecutive quarter of economic growth. This progress followed a contraction in that was deeper and longer than initial data suggested but still mild by historical standards. Real gross domestic product ( GDP ) declined by percent during the first three quarters of about one-fourth the average percentage decline over the previous seven recessions. Growth resumed in the fourth quarter of despite the terrorist attacks in September and real GDP rose at an annual rate of percent in the first three quarters of ( Chart ) Although economic activity probably weakened in the fourth quarter the ongoing improvement in productivity growth together with lean inventories foreshadowed a return to more normal levels of production and job growth in the quarters ahead The economic recovery of resulted from a constellation of factors including the resiliency of the economy after the terrorist attacks and the lagged effects of stimulative monetary and fiscal policy in Although the Federal Reserve lowered the Federal funds rate only once in by half a percentage point on November the 475-basis-point reduction over the course of continued to stimulate the economy throughout the year ( A basis point is percentage point. ) Monetary stimulus was complemented by fiscal stimulus in the form of the tax rate reductions included in the Economic Growth and Taxpayer Relief Reconciliation Act of ( EGTRRA ) and the investment incentives in the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act ( JCWAA ) of In the long run EGTRRA s reductions in marginal tax rates will raise potential output by increasing labor supply and encouraging the entrepreneurial activities that are the building blocks of economic growth. In the short run however the tax cuts buoyed disposable income and helped keep consumption high. Robust consumption in turn was a crucial locus of strength in the overall economy contributing an average of percentage points to real GDP growth during the first three quarters of the year. Additionally the tax incentives in JCWAA which the President signed in March provided needed support to investment at a time when stability in this component of final demand was especially important In discussions of both economic activity and economic policy paid particular attention to the valuation of the economy s stock of productive assets. One of the more favorable developments for many Americans in was the continued appreciation of their most important investment : their home. Housing prices rose percent from the third quarter of to the third quarter of following an percent increase in the same period a year earlier. As discussed below housing values were buoyed not only by low mortgage interest rates which reached levels not seen in more than a generation but also by rising demand continuing strength in purchases of second homes and ongoing improvements in mortgage finance. Strength in housing values contributed to robust increases in residential investment providing another important impetus to final demand in In the aggregate however the appreciation in housing wealth was overshadowed by continued losses in the stock market. Like those for all of the world s major equity exchanges U.S. stock indexes lost ground in continuing a general slide that began in the spring of From the market s high point in the first quarter of to the fourth quarter of stockholders lost nearly $ trillion in equity wealth. These losses continued to weigh heavily on economic growth and job creation in by reducing the wealth of consumers and raising the cost of equity capital for investing firms. The precise reasons for the bear market of are subject to debate but the market s 3-year slide was probably influenced by two general factors : a decline in expected profit growth and an increase in the premium that investors required to hold risky assets. These factors continued to play important roles | Economic Report of the President in the first three quarters of as the stock market continued its decline Specifically corporate accounting scandals called into question the reported profits of some firms while risk premiums ( as measured by the difference or spread between the yields of corporate bonds and those of U.S. Treasuries ) rose to near-record levels. Although some observers attributed most of the market s decline to the corporate scandals it is worth noting that equity prices fell around the world even in countries with different accounting systems and governance institutions The stock market s decline has caused some to question the productivity improvements of the late 1990s. Yet even though investors may have overestimated the value of particular technology-intensive investments it would be a mistake to infer that technological improvements hold little promise for future economic growth. Detailed analyses of the sources of productivity growth indicate that the post-1995 productivity improvement owes much to the U.S. economy s ability to profit from technological innovation. If technology continues to progress at its recent pace rising productivity will continue to bring about improvements in living standards that compare quite favorably with the more modest gains of only one or two decades ago In the short run however economic growth is determined by demand factors as well as by the economy s technology and potential to supply goods and services. The next section discusses the individual components of GDP from the demand side. There and elsewhere in the chapter the discussion pays particular attention to the links between asset markets ( which set the prices for stocks bonds and houses ) and the components of real aggregate demand ( consumption investment government purchases and net exports ) GDP and Its Components in Consumption Consumption continued to be the prime locomotive for the recovery in rising at an annual rate of percent over the first three quarters of the year. ( GDP data for the fourth quarter were not yet available as this Report went to press. ) Expenditure on consumer durables was especially strong in large part because of strong motor vehicle sales. Zero-percent financing offers and other aggressive sales promotions sent automobile sales soaring to more than million units at an annual rate in July and August. ( Automobile sales were also especially strong in December. ) Largely as a result expenditure on consumer durables accounted for more than percentage points of GDP growth in the third quarter. Consumption of nondurable goods was especially Chapter | strong in the first quarter rising percent at an annual rate but tailed off afterward. Finally consumption of services remained robust accounting for about percentage point of GDP growth in each of the first three quarters of the year Disposable Income and Consumption In strength in consumption resulted in large part from strength in purchasing power as low inflation tax relief and steady nominal income growth kept real disposable incomes high. On the price side financing incentives reduced the effective cost of new cars allowing motor vehicle sales to be a main driver of final demand in the middle of the year. Other categories with favorable price developments for consumers included food and beverages where prices rose only percent in and apparel where prices declined percent. On the income side nominal personal income rose at an annual rate of percent during the first three quarters of and tax cuts enacted the previous year allowed consumers to keep more of their income gains for themselves. The passage of EGTRRA in reduced Federal tax liabilities by about $ billion in calendar year and about $ billion in helping disposable personal income or nominal income net of taxes to rise at a robust annual rate of percent during the first three quarters of the year. Taken together low price inflation and healthy growth in nominal disposable personal income meant that real disposable personal income grew at an annual rate of percent during the first three quarters of which compares well with past recoveries. Ultimately the strong growth in real disposable income is a reflection of the high rate of productivity growth that the Nation continues to enjoy The Stock Market and Consumption One of the most closely watched influences on consumption in was the stock market as many observers feared that continued retrenchment in equity values would dampen consumers willingness to spend. One link between the stock market and consumption arises from the market s role as an informal measure of the strength of the economy. Because consumers often look to the stock market for information about the health of the economy consumer attitudes from survey data have long been closely correlated with stock indexes and that correlation remained robust in Yet the stock market is much more than an informal economic barometer Because equity holdings are an important component of household wealth changes in the stock market affect consumers ability to purchase goods and services not just their views of the future Economists have long been interested in precisely how changes in stock prices affect consumption decisions. As a matter of accounting an increase in | Economic Report of the President an individual s wealth ( equities as well as other assets ) must ultimately bring about an increase in his or her consumption unless the extra wealth is to be passed on to heirs as a bequest. The important empirical question is whether the increase in consumption occurs quickly enough for wealth to affect consumption at short horizons. The empirical relationship between aggregate wealth and the average propensity to consume out of disposable income suggests that the answer is yes at least according to evidence through Chart shows that as household net worth rose in the late 1990s ( primarily because of the increase in stock prices ) the average propensity to consume increased to levels not seen in half a century. In more sophisticated analyses that take other determinants of consumption into account aggregate data on wealth and consumption suggest that a one-dollar reduction in stock market wealth eventually reduces yearly consumption by to cents Although economic theory suggests a direct causal impact of stock market wealth on consumption patterns in aggregate data do not by themselves prove that this impact exists. Wealth and consumption might move together over time because both are determined by some third factor such as expectations about the future. Indeed the aggregate relationship between wealth and consumption does not appear to have been very strong in the past years as wealth has declined yet the average propensity to consume has remained stable However recent empirical analysis using individual-level data is generally supportive of the theoretical link between wealth and consumption ( Box ) Chapter | Box Measuring the Effect of Stock Market Wealth on Consumption Economists have long recognized that a close relationship between wealth and consumption exists in aggregate data but until recently attempts to find microeconomic evidence isolating a true causal relationship between the two variables have had limited success. Part of the reason is the general difficulty of finding evidence for macroeconomic relationships in microeconomic data. Data on individual consumers are often noisy in that period-to-period changes in their consumption are influenced by a number of idiosyncratic factors. For example a family s decision whether to buy a new car might be influenced by an increase in stock market wealth but also by the arrival of a new baby or the decision of one family member to take a new job. The noise problem is compounded when available datasets measure certain crucial household variables imperfectly. Most individual-level datasets are adapted from surveys or administrative data that were not expressly designed to test economic theories and so they often omit important information such as precise measurements of wealth holdings or consumption choices The noise problem in microeconomic data becomes less important if the underlying changes in macroeconomic variables are large relative to any background idiosyncrasies and measurement errors. As an example the large runup in stock prices before March gave researchers a valuable opportunity to observe the link between wealth and consumption at the individual level. One such study found that from to U.S. households that owned stocks did tend to consume more when stock prices rose whereas households that did not own stocks left their consumption patterns unchanged. A second study used another dataset and focused on the second half of the 1990s when the increase in stock prices was most pronounced. This study attempted to identify from a number of demographic factors those U.S. households that were likely to hold stocks and it found that these households were the ones that increased their consumption the most during this period. Studies such as these suggest that the aggregate relationship between wealth and consumption reflects at least in part a true causal component so that the decline in aggregate stock market wealth would be expected to slow consumption growth somewhat after the market began to decline in | Economic Report of the President If one takes the midpoint of the range noted above for the relationship between changes in stock market wealth and changes in consumption ( to cents per dollar ) the $ trillion reduction in equity wealth since early would be expected to eventually lower yearly consumption by about $ billion. A reduction of this magnitude would have represented nearly percent of consumption and almost percent of GDP in Empirical findings also suggest that the response of consumption to changes in stock market wealth is drawn out over time and this has crucial implications for the precise path of consumption over the next few years Because one would expect that the appreciation of equities before would still be increasing consumption today some of the implied $ billion drop in consumption after may simply represent a cancellation of a consumption increase that had not yet taken place. Moreover positive influences from the other determinants of consumption ( such as current income and the continuing appreciation in housing wealth ) are likely to offset the stock market s negative effects on personal spending. For these and other reasons private forecasters predict that actual consumption will continue to grow in the years ahead along with GDP The Housing Market and Consumption Along with healthy growth of disposable income another positive determinant of consumption growth in was the strength of the housing market. ( The sources of this strength discussed in more detail below include record low mortgage rates and continued growth in housing demand fueled in part by high immigration and the demand for second homes. ) Housing wealth is more widely distributed among American families than stock market wealth and housing equity continued to rise in A common way for this equity to support consumption is through borrowing against home equity : the outstanding value of revolving home equity loans at commercial banks rose from $ billion in December to $ billion in December Another way that homeowners can tap the equity in their homes for higher consumption or for spending on home improvements is by refinancing their outstanding mortgages when interest rates have fallen. Of course simply refinancing a mortgage at a lower interest rate can reduce monthly mortgage payments and free up extra cash. Many refinancers however choose to remove equity from their homes by taking out a new mortgage with a larger principal than the amount outstanding on the original mortgage. These cash-out refinancings boomed in as a result of the continued appreciation in housing prices and declining long-term interest rates. According to the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( Freddie Mac ) holders of conventional conforming mortgages liquefied about $ billion in equity in the first three quarters of It is impossible Chapter | to know for certain how this money was allocated among consumption home improvements the paying down of nonmortgage debts and the purchase of other financial assets. Some survey research suggests however that about half of this $ billion would be allocated toward consumption and home improvements ( two sources of aggregate demand ) which would have raised GDP by about percent above its baseline level through the first three quarters of the year ( Box ) Finally housing equity can also be liquefied from the sale of an existing home. Typically the buyer of a new home takes out a mortgage that is larger Box Measuring the Effect of Mortgage Refinancing on Consumption Mortgage refinancings boomed in as interest rates fell and housing prices rose. Many refinancers chose a cash-out option that left them a pool of funds to spend after they retired their original mortgage. A key question is how consumers used these funds : spending on consumption or home improvements would add directly to aggregate demand whereas paying down debts making a purely financial investment or paying taxes would not. Some new data released in showed that the potential effect of cash-out refinancing on aggregate demand was large. According to Freddie Mac holders of conventional conforming mortgages cashed out $ billion through the first three quarters of and they used about half of the proceeds ( $ billion ) to pay down second mortgages or home equity lines of credit. ( A conforming mortgage is one that falls within the acceptance limit for securitization by Freddie Mac or Fannie Mae which was $ in ) This left a maximum of $ billion that could be used for spending that would boost aggregate demand. The amount of funds freed up by cash-out refinancing among holders of larger mortgages is not known precisely but would add to this total To learn more about how this liquefied equity is being used the Federal Reserve has sponsored occasional surveys of households to ask how they spent funds obtained through cash-out refinancing. The most recent survey covered refinancings in and early The survey found that about percent of liquefied equity was used for consumption and percent for home improvements for a total of percent that would add to aggregate demand. ( Another percent of the funds was used to pay down nonmortgage debt and the remaining percent was used to fund investments in private businesses or financial securities or to pay taxes. ) These percentages are almost identical to results from an earlier survey that covered refinancings in and early which also found that about half of liquefied equity | Economic Report of the President added to aggregate demand. Allocating percent of the $ billion in cashed-out equity to demand in the first three quarters of suggests an increase in GDP of about percent One reason that only a portion of the liquefied funds added to aggregate demand is that many consumers do not need to borrow against their houses to finance their spending. By taking out a nonmortgage loan or by drawing down savings these consumers are free to adjust month-to-month spending as they see fit. Some evidence that only liquidity constrained consumers spend much of the funds freed up by refinancing comes from another survey which follows a sample of families over time and has often been used to study income dynamics in the United States. In addition to its standard questions on income and spending patterns this survey has included some questions related to refinancing activity. Using these data researchers found that among those who refinanced from to spending increases were far more pronounced among families that were likely to have trouble borrowing from other sources than that retired by the seller. The increase in net debt is often close to the seller s capital gain on the house. From the economy s point of view such a transaction allows the capital gain to be turned into liquidity although the seller often uses this liquidity to purchase another home. If so this type of equity liquefaction does not raise the seller s consumption of other goods although it may raise residential investment if the new home purchase by the seller of the original house results in a net increase in housing construction Nonresidential Investment Nonresidential investment was one of the weakest components of demand in In the first three quarters of the year business fixed investment declined at an annual rate of percent in large part because of a precipitous percent fall in investment in structures. The other larger component of business fixed investment equipment and software fell at an annual rate of percent in the first quarter of the year but then rebounded to rise at an annual rate of percent in the second and third quarters. In light of the weak investment performance many observers wondered whether the economy suffered from a capital overhang built up by excessive investment in the years immediately before the recession. As discussed in last year s Report this possibility is hard to verify because it requires an estimate of the correct amount of capital relative to the economy s output a figure that is hard to know with certainty. Yet as the Report also noted Chapter | some empirical evidence had emerged in indicating that a modest overhang had developed the previous year for some capital goods notably servers routers switches optical cabling and large trucks. However evidence that a widespread overhang continues to hinder overall investment outside of a few particular industries is harder to find. In any case the growth rate of capital services has fallen sharply over the past years from an average of more than percent a year from to to percent in and about percent in This low rate of growth means that any general capital overhang that had developed by is likely to have been significantly reduced by the end of Another important business investment development in was the change in business inventories. In firms drew down $ billion in real inventories ( in dollars ) but real inventory investment turned positive in the second and third quarters of Although the level of inventory investment remained modest the change in that investment after the drawdown of added several percentage points to GDP growth especially in the first quarter. As the year drew to a close inventory-to-sales ratios remained close to their lowest levels in years suggesting further room for inventory expansion in Although the short-term outlook for investment in both inventories and equipment and software is positive the outlook for investment in structures is more uncertain. One potential positive influence on structures investment going forward is the Congress passage of a terrorism risk insurance bill in late which will facilitate the construction of projects that are difficult to insure privately against terrorist attacks. Yet vacancy rates for both office and industrial space remained high in suggesting that the rebound in structures investment may not begin for some time The Stock Market and Nonresidential Investment As noted above one of the factors depressing business investment in was the stock market. However the link between the stock market and investment differs from that between the stock market and consumption. An individual firm s equity value is linked to its investment not because of wealth effects but rather because stock prices and investment are both forward-looking variables. Technically the stock price represents the value of the future stream of dividends to be paid by the firm discounted by a required rate of return that is appropriate for risky assets. A firm with strong future investment prospects will attract investors hoping to share in the profits generated by the firm. As these investors bid up the stocks of companies with the best investment prospects these firms will come to have the highest stock values. Indeed in the simplest model of business finance stock prices and investment potential are so closely correlated that no other information besides a firm s stock price is needed to predict its investment activity | Economic Report of the President In such a world a firm with a high stock price can easily fund its investment projects by issuing more equity which investors willingly absorb if they believe that the firm s investment prospects are good. In what amounts to the same thing firms may also borrow in the capital markets to finance investment because lenders will be able to recognize firms with favorable prospects as good credit risks. In fact in this textbook case the choice between equity financing and debt financing does not matter to the value of the firm. It is true that equity financing is more flexible than debt financing because the payment of dividends is under the control of the firm whereas the schedule of interest payments on debt is fixed at the time of the borrowing. But if individual stockholders as well as firms can borrow and lend freely in credit markets a firm will be unable to increase its overall value simply by changing its mix of debt and equity financing. For example a firm can raise its expected earnings per share by repurchasing some of its outstanding shares with borrowed money But increasing the firm s exposure to credit markets in this way makes ownership in the firm riskier which reduces the willingness of investors to hold equity in the firm. The net result is that the overall value of the firm does not increase. The firm s debt-for-equity switch affects only the fraction of its cash flows allocated toward creditors rather than shareholders. The firm s ability to carry out real investment projects is the same as before Although the U.S. stock market does provide useful signals for overall investment the real world diverges from the textbook model in important ways. One set of complications arises because managers of the firm are typically better informed about the firm s prospects than outside investors. The resulting informational asymmetry prevents investors from attaching values to firms that perfectly reflect the firms investment prospects so that the close correlation between stock market values and investment found in the textbook model is lost. Another consequence of informational differences is that firms must often fund investment from internal sources ( such as retained earnings or cash flow ) rather than external sources ( such as issuing equity or borrowing in credit markets ) A second set of complications in the financing of investment is due to the income tax. Firms are allowed to deduct interest payments as part of the cost of doing business but dividends paid to stockholders are not granted equal treatment. As a consequence dividend income is taxed twice once at the corporate level and again at the level of the individual dividend recipient This double taxation of dividends makes new equity financing less attractive to firms than debt financing. Moreover if investors and managers do not share the same information the resulting reliance on debt financing can have damaging consequences for investment during economic downturns. One concern is that the inflexibility of interest payments relative to dividends means that a recession could cause widespread liquidity problems among borrowing firms. A second problem is that when aggregate conditions Chapter | worsen lenders with incomplete information about firms may reduce credit to firms that are good credit risks as well as those that are bad risks. The resulting credit crunch may depress business investment by more than the economic fundamentals would warrant These general principles of investment and corporate finance help to illuminate recent movements in both the stock market and business investment. To start with the correlation between the change in stock prices and growth in business fixed investment was quite close after ( Chart ) Although the stock market has typically been imperfectly correlated with investment over the past two decades both variables rose markedly from to and fell sharply thereafter. One interpretation of this pattern is that although informational asymmetries and other complications can generally obscure the relationship between stock prices and investment the rise in both reflected a widely perceived increase in the value of physical capital installed in firms after As many observers have noted investors may have overestimated the value of installed capital in many industries driving the stock prices of some firms to unsustainable levels and thereby encouraging these firms to invest too much. Even so capital markets worked well in the late 1990s in the sense that the signals sent by market participants and manifested in stock prices were received clearly by investing firms | Economic Report of the President The boom in the stock market might have been expected to encourage firms to finance investment by issuing equity but it turns out that net issuance of equity was actually negative in the late 1990s ( Chart ) To be sure many firms did issue equity in order to finance new investments through initial public offerings as well as the private venture capital market both of which surged through Yet these gross equity issues were more than offset by share repurchases and merger-based stock retirements at other firms so that debt not equity served as the major source of business financing during the investment boom. Business debt rose steadily throughout this period with net issuance of long-term corporate bonds and short-term commercial paper playing especially important roles ( Chart ) Of course a major reason for this pattern of rising debt alongside a booming stock market was that discussed above : the bias toward debt financing built into the tax code In a general sense the decline in the stock market after early can be traced to both of the factors that determine equity prices : expectations of future corporate earnings and the risk premium that investors require in order to hold equities. Evidence that expectations of earnings growth were adjusted downward as the stock market fell comes from surveys of Wall Street analysts who track individual firms. According to one such survey Chapter | 5-year-ahead earnings growth forecasts for the firms in the Standard & Poor s index fell from a peak of more than percent in mid-2000 to slightly more than percent by September Other data provide evidence of an increase in market aversion to risk which lowers the price that investors are willing to pay for a stream of uncertain corporate earnings. A common measure of the market s aversion to risk is the interest rate spread between corporate bonds and U.S. Treasury bonds because corporate bonds are subject to default risk whereas Treasuries are not. The widening gap between yields for corporate and Treasury securities after coincided closely with the decline in the stock market during this period ( Chart ) Spreads continued to widen sharply in reaching near-record levels indicating that risk aversion played a key role in markets in the months following September In addition to reductions in both earnings expectations and risk tolerance corporate governance was an often-cited factor in the stock market s behavior in Well-publicized allegations of corporate wrongdoing and questionable accounting practices may have caused investors to doubt the reported earnings of some firms. One way to gauge the seriousness of corporate governance concerns in is to examine the interest rate spreads within the investment-grade corporate bond market and specifically the difference between interest rates paid by the highest-rated corporate borrowers and those paid by firms with somewhat lower credit ratings. As Chart shows | Economic Report of the President Chapter | this spread widened sharply in the closing months of Although this period was one of heightened uncertainty over the pace of near-term economic growth it also featured a number of important allegations of corporate misbehavior and the widening bond spread suggests that investors became less willing to tolerate relatively high levels of risk at less-thanpremium-grade firms as began Although the effect of these revelations on interest rates and bond prices appears pronounced their effect on broad equity price indexes in is less clear. To be sure the revelations of questionable practices had important consequences for the stock prices of many firms. Regarding the U.S. stock market as a whole however it is important to recall as noted above that all of the world s major stock markets lost ground in The precise determinants of these movements are difficult to identify but the uniformity of stock market movements around the world suggests that a key driver of U.S stock prices in was a worldwide decrease in tolerance for risky assets combined with lower projected earnings growth and not necessarily the corporate governance concerns specific to the United States As discussed in Chapter government plays an important role in the regulation of corporate behavior complementing the monitoring mechanisms for invested funds that arise naturally in well-developed financial markets. In March the President offered a 10-point reform plan addressing a wide range of corporate governance issues and in July he signed the landmark Sarbanes-Oxley Act. The quick response to the accounting scandals signaled by passage of this act underscored both the seriousness of corporate responsibility issues and the importance of maintaining confidence in markets Given the link between investment and stock prices discussed above it should not be surprising that investment softened considerably after early A key question was whether the temporary slowing of economic growth would combine with the business sector s reliance on debt financing to engender a liquidity crisis or a credit crunch either of which would depress investment even further. By and large however credit markets in and continued to function without the sharp increase in the nonprice rationing of credit that is typical of a credit crunch. Short-term business lending did decline in and as both commercial paper and commercial and industrial ( C&I ) bank loans fell. ( See Chart above. ) By itself however a decline in lending is not evidence of a credit crunch in which loans are no longer allocated by price and creditworthy firms are denied loans at posted interest rates. Although nonfinancial business debt as a percentage of GDP has declined somewhat over the past year this decline has been less severe than during many other business cycles. It is true that C&I loans and short-term commercial paper outstanding have fallen sharply | Economic Report of the President but many firms have simply substituted long-term bonds for commercial paper in order to reduce rollover risk and lock in favorable long-term interest rates. Corporate bond issuance was especially strong in before the increase in borrowing spreads within the corporate sector ( portrayed in Chart ) raised borrowing costs for firms that lacked the highest credit ratings. Another factor leading to reduced bank lending was the general decline in business loan demand that typically accompanies economic downturns. Specific evidence for a decline in loan demand comes from an October Federal Reserve survey which found that senior loan officers at most domestic banks put a decline in loan demand not restrictions in loan supply at the heart of the decline in bank lending to businesses The relative stability of the business debt-to-GDP ratio in the aftermath of the recession contrasts sharply with the decline in debt that followed the recession when many feared that a credit crunch had taken hold. As can be seen from Chart the earlier debt decline was strongly influenced by a sharp decline in commercial mortgages. This drop in mortgage credit was in turn prompted by an earlier change in the tax code that made commercial real estate investments less attractive on a purely tax basis as well as by continuing weakness in the savings and loan industry. Because these headwinds to debt accumulation are not relevant for the current period it is much less likely that a sustained deleveraging of the corporate sector like that observed in the early 1990s now lies ahead for the U.S. economy In summary the link between stock prices and business investment has proved especially strong since Both the stock market and business investment reflected the optimism of investors in the late 1990s and both reflected the subsequent scaling back of expected profits as well as reduced tolerance for risk. Yet even though the investment boom of the late 1990s was funded primarily with debt and not equity the drop in equity values did not degenerate into a full-blown credit crunch that hindered investment unnecessarily. As a result rationing of credit is not expected to hinder the investment recovery that private forecasters predict for the coming year Residential Investment In contrast to the softness in nonresidential investment residential investment grew briskly in sparked by the lowest mortgage interest rates in more than a generation. After hitting a recent peak of percent in May interest rates for conventional fixed-rate 30-year loans fell to percent by the end of December their lowest level since Low mortgage rates contributed to the percent increase in single-family housing starts over their already high level of while boosting sales of new homes to record levels near the end of the year. The strength of housing construction during Chapter | the past years stands in contrast to past business cycles when housing starts were not nearly as robust ( Chart ) Strong housing construction is also a natural consequence of rising housing prices although that rise moderated to an annual rate of percent in the third quarter of from an annual rate of about percent in the first half of the year. The continued appreciation of housing during the last several years has led some observers to contend that the housing market is caught in a bubble in which buyers pay high prices for assets simply because they hope to sell those assets to other investors at even higher prices a scheme that collapses quickly when no further purchasers can be found Proponents of the housing bubble theory noted that houses were particularly expensive relative to rents which indicated that high shelter costs alone did not explain the entire rise in housing prices. Housing prices also rose much more quickly than the median household income in which left the price-to-income ratio at its highest level in more than two decades Because it is difficult to know the precise motivations of the millions of persons who buy homes ( or any other assets ) it is impossible to know for sure whether any sharp increase in home prices is a bubble. Yet the high transactions costs involved in selling houses make a bubble in the housing market unlikely. Moreover new sources of housing demand have emerged in the past two decades to support the fundamental value of owner-occupied | Economic Report of the President houses. One is the growth in purchases of second homes by baby-boomers many of whom are now in their prime earning years. Perhaps more important is the recent surge in immigration into the United States. In the years preceding the Census the number of foreign-born residents in the United States rose by million or percent compared with an increase of only million in the previous 10-year period. As a result the share of foreign-born individuals in the total U.S. resident population reached percent in the Census. This is well above their percent share in and comparable to the to percent shares recorded during the golden age of immigration from to By itself a surge in immigration would be expected to raise shelter costs in general but not necessarily the price of homes relative to rents. Yet there is evidence that the timing of the immigration wave along with recent developments in mortgage finance has raised demand for owner-occupied homes separately from the demand for rental housing. Some recent research has pointed out that immigrants who arrived in the 1980s have only recently been able to make the transition to home ownership because it takes time to save for a down payment. Also developments in mortgage finance over the 1990s have made home purchases more affordable by narrowing the spread between mortgage interest rates and benchmark U.S. Treasury yields. The liberalization of mortgage finance would be expected to exert a strong independent effect on home demand by enlarging the pool of potential buyers of any nationality. This liberalization could well have combined with improvements in the financial positions of previous immigrants to result in a strong source of housing demand in the past several years. According to the American Housing Survey sponsored by the Department of Housing and Urban Development foreign-born residents have accounted for a sizable share of first-time home purchases since when the increase in house prices began in earnest. The survey shows that there were more than million foreign-born homeowners in the United States in and more than percent of them had purchased their first house since Although many of these new homeowners were members of minority groups the rate of homeownership among minorities still lags behind that of whites. To redress this imbalance in June the Administration announced an initiative to add million minority homeowners by the end of the decade Net Exports Although the output of the U.S. economy remained below potential in its growth rate still outpaced those of many other industrialized countries. Slow growth among many of the United States major trading partners in turn contributed to slow growth in U.S. exports compared with that of Chapter | imports. Exports rose at an annual rate of percent during the first three quarters of the year while imports grew percent. This discrepancy between the rates of growth in exports and imports led to an increase in the U.S. trade deficit so that net exports exerted a drag on GDP growth in the first half of the year. ( Net exports were essentially unchanged in the third quarter. ) Because changes in the trade deficit are often quantitatively important for year-to-year changes in GDP growth U.S. trade performance is an important concern. Imports and exports both provide benefits to consumers and firms. Imports provide U.S. firms with a wider variety of low-cost inputs and consumers with wider variety and lower prices for goods. Moreover competition from international producers induces domestic firms to raise their productivity which raises incomes in the long run. Trade therefore boosts consumer satisfaction at home and ensures that American producers remain competitive by increasing the size of the market in which they operate. In light of the benefits of trade to both Americans and foreigners the Administration has made the expansion of trade a central policy objective. Two important trade-related developments in were the Congress granting of Trade Promotion Authority to the President ( after an 8-year hiatus ) and the launching of an ambitious initiative to reduce barriers to agricultural trade announced at the ongoing Doha round of trade negotiations within the World Trade Organization. These developments and others are described in more detail in Chapter which discusses the importance of free trade measures in promoting economic growth around the world Government Purchases The war on terrorism continued to exert upward pressure on Federal Government purchases in In late March the President requested that the Congress provide an additional appropriation of $ billion primarily to fund this effort. More than half of this amount was allocated to activities of the Department of Defense and various intelligence agencies. Most of the rest was needed for homeland security ( mainly for the new Transportation Security Administration ) and for the emergency response and recovery efforts in New York City. Although most of this spending was required for one-time outlays only it nevertheless contributed to the percent annual rate of increase in real Federal Government purchases in the first three quarters of State and local government purchases rose at a more moderate percent annual rate during the same period | Economic Report of the President The Labor Market Productivity and Real Wages Although the labor market improved in after weakness in the wake of the September attacks most major labor market indicators showed little progress over the course of the year. The unemployment rate hovered between and percent throughout the year after rising percentage points in Nonfarm payroll employment in was similarly weak with jobs lost during the year compared with million jobs lost the previous year As in past business cycles the decline in manufacturing employment has been especially pronounced. Factory employment fell by in following a decline of million in and about in Another feature of previous business cycles that has recurred in the past years is the increase in the number of workers who report a long unemployment spell. Like the overall unemployment rate the number of workers unemployed for weeks or more rose in and remained high in ( Chart ) The rise in long-term unemployment is one of the most troublesome features of recessions because long-term joblessness is costly to those unable to find work. Indeed the difficulties endured by the long-term unemployed were a key reason for the passage of the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act in March which extended unemployment benefits for many of these workers. Yet as Chart shows the pattern of long-term unemployment observed in and was similar to patterns traced out in previous postwar fluctuations In other ways however the recent behavior of the labor market has been different from that in past business cycles. One difference is the high fraction of job losers who reported a permanent rather than temporary separation in In the government s monthly Current Population Survey each respondent who reports a job loss is asked whether he or she expects to return to work with the same employer. ( Those who expect to return are typically on an explicitly temporary layoff although this need not be the case. ) Research from the Bureau of Labor Statistics found that in the initial quarters of the four recessions before slightly more than half of job losers were permanently separated from their previous employers with the rest on temporary layoff. In the three quarters after the business cycle peak of however the share of permanent job losers rose to almost three quarters and the comparable proportion for the March peak is nearly percent The rising proportion of job losers facing a permanent separation in recessions may reflect structural changes in the labor market during the past two decades including the rise in temporary help employment. A firm facing a transitory increase in demand may use a temporary worker ( formally employed by a temporary help firm ) rather than add staff to its regular work Chapter | force. When demand falls the firm would then permanently sever the relationship with this worker ; in the past the firm might have placed one of its own workers on temporary layoff. This explanation is consistent with the sharp rise in temporary help employment over the past years as well as the sharp drop in Yet it is important to keep in mind that the fraction of workers losing their jobs in remained well below that in recent recessions because of the mildness of the contraction Although year-to-year fluctuations in the labor market are of immediate concern sustained improvements in the living standards of American workers depend on more structural long-term factors. As discussed in Chapter these factors include the flexibility and dynamism of the American labor market which matches millions of workers with new jobs each month and provides incentives for investments that make workers more productive Indeed pro-growth labor market policies in the United States have helped the economy achieve a sizable increase in labor productivity growth since When this increase began many economists were skeptical that it was permanent because productivity growth in a given quarter or year can be strongly influenced by the business cycle. Indeed macroeconomic research has long established the procyclicality of productivity as a stylized fact with output per worker rising faster in expansions than in recessions. This productivity pattern can be explained by the reluctance of firms to hire early in a recovery before | Economic Report of the President they are sure that a robust recovery has taken hold. This reluctance means that existing employees must work harder to fill the higher number of orders when demand first begins to rise. The resulting increase in worker effort causes output to rise faster than hours worked so that the data indicate an increase in productivity even without any improvement in the underlying technology of production. Economists therefore prefer to observe improved productivity performance over an extended period before pronouncing that a change in productivity growth has taken place As productivity growth has stayed high since the productivity improvement has increasingly come to be seen as lasting. Data from and only strengthen this conclusion. During the seven quarters ending in the third quarter of a period that includes a recession and a recovery labor productivity grew at an annual rate of percent somewhat higher than the annual rate of percent from to and much higher than the percent trend from to ( A formal analysis of recent productivity data is presented later in the chapter. ) An improvement of only about percentage points in productivity growth may not sound impressive but over time even a small increase in productivity growth brings about a large improvement in living standards. For example growth in productivity of percent a year implies that productivity doubles every years but growth of percent implies a doubling every years Strong productivity growth also helps to keep inflation down by allowing real wages to grow without an increase in unit labor costs which would drive up firms costs of production and therefore push output prices upward Indeed another bright spot in was the behavior of inflation and real wages. The consumer price index ( CPI ) rose percent in ( December to December ) close to its percent rate of increase in The core CPI which does not include the volatile food and energy components rose percent Inflation is difficult to measure because of the dynamic nature of consumers choices ( Box ) and it is not directly linked to long-run living standards. Nonetheless low inflation is fundamental to a healthy economy High and variable inflation not only can cloud the relative price signals needed to allocate resources efficiently but also can introduce other distortions through the income tax. Additionally bringing inflation down from high levels typically requires sustained ( and costly ) increases in unemployment. The low inflation observed in gave policymakers the flexibility to support the fledgling recovery without being overly concerned that they would increase price pressures in doing so Taken together rapid productivity growth and low inflation meant that real wages continued to grow in As measured by the employment cost index real compensation for private industry workers grew percent over the four quarters ending in the third quarter of This compares with Chapter | Box New Measures of Consumer Price Inflation Following through on a request from the Congress the Bureau of Labor Statistics has developed a new measure of consumer price inflation. Unlike the current official Consumer Price Index for Urban Consumers the new measure not only adjusts for consumer substitution between goods in response to movements in relative prices but also uses current expenditure weights rather than weights that are several years out of date. The fact that weights from different adjoining years are chained together gives the new measure of inflation its name : the chained CPI or C-CPI. The chained CPI is a supplemental series and is not intended to replace the official CPI versions of which are used to index Social Security benefits pensions Federal tax brackets and many private contracts Any consumer price index must somehow aggregate the many prices faced by consumers into a single number. The official CPI aggregates prices by using a fixed market basket. ( Currently the basket reflects consumption shares in for major categories of goods and services. ) The disadvantage of using a fixed-weight basket is that the resulting price index is unable to reflect the reallocations that consumers make when relative prices change. For example if the price of chicken were to rise while that of steak held steady consumers might well buy more steak ; then the use of fixed weights would overstate the increase in the cost of meat generally caused by the increase in the cost of chicken. The new chained index reflects this substitution but at some cost. Specifically the new index requires data on consumer expenditure before and after these substitutions have occurred. But whereas prices are relatively easy to measure on a realtime basis expenditure shares are not which means that current expenditure shares must be estimated for the most recent periods Because it reflects substitution by consumers the new measure uses expenditure weights that are constantly changing as consumption patterns change. As a result the expenditure weights do not get out of date as they do with a fixed-weight index. The difference that this use of up-to-date weights makes is particularly important to the contribution of computers to the cost of living because the relative price of computers has fallen during the past two decades even as the expenditure share of computers has risen. A fixed-weight basket would tend to understate the weight of computers in current consumption because its expenditure weights are typically years out of date. As the price of computers has fallen over time the underweighting of computers in a fixed-weight index causes this index to overstate the increase in the cost of living The chained CPI does not suffer from this problem because its weights are constantly being updated | Economic Report of the President real compensation growth of only percent during the same period a year earlier. Although increases in benefits ( such as employer payments for health insurance ) accounted for much of the acceleration in total compensation growth annualized real growth in wages and salaries also accelerated from percent to percent across the same two periods In short the sluggish performance of the labor market in was an unwelcome development for many workers and their families as well as a matter of concern for policymakers. But rapid productivity growth low inflation and healthy real wage gains set the stage for future improvements in both unemployment and job growth in the years ahead Macroeconomic Policy and the Budget Outlook The U.S. economy has suffered a number of serious setbacks in the past years including the terrorist attacks of September the significant loss of stock market wealth since and the recent corporate accounting scandals Yet the contraction of was one of the mildest on record with recovery proceeding steadily if modestly in One reason for the economy s stability in the face of these adverse developments was the stance of macroeconomic policy both monetary ( set by the Federal Reserve ) and fiscal ( set by the President and the Congress ) This section analyzes the effects of monetary and fiscal policy in detail illustrating their likely impact on macroeconomic performance in as well as the fiscal outlook for the years ahead Monetary Policy In faced with signs of a slowing of economic activity the Federal Reserve reduced its policy interest rate the Federal funds rate times during the year from percent to percent. The Federal Reserve then held the funds rate steady through most of until a further halfpercentage-point cut on November brought it down to percent Although the Federal funds rate thus remained constant for most of earlier rate reductions continued to stimulate the economy throughout the year. Understanding the reasons for this lag requires an understanding of the channels through which monetary policy affects the economy. A lowering of interest rates stimulates demand through four main channels : encouraging consumption ( particularly of durables ) stimulating business investment ( by lowering the cost of capital ) promoting residential investment ( as seen from the booming housing sector ) and lowering the foreign exchange value of the dollar ( which tends to raise exports and lower imports ) All of these effects take time to be felt. Consumers must plan how best to take advantage of Chapter | lower borrowing costs firms must plan new investments and importers and exporters must determine how any change in the dollar s exchange value will affect their prices and costs Measuring the size of these effects as well as the time needed for them to be fully expressed is an active area of macroeconomic research. One method for measuring the effect of monetary policy uses formal models of the economy in which the behavioral relationships governing consumption investment imports and exports are fully specified. After the researcher specifies a time path for the Federal funds rate the model supplies the likely path for each component of aggregate demand based on the behavioral relationships embedded in the model s equations. In contrast to this model-based method a more data-based method for measuring the effects of monetary policy omits any formal modeling of behavioral relationships instead using statistical techniques to measure the past effect of funds rate changes on a few key variables such as output and the price level. An important goal of this method is to take account of other factors such as changes in fiscal policy and temporary shocks to aggregate demand and prices which may also have affected the economy when a given change in monetary policy was taking place. Although the precise channels of monetary policy are not specified in the data-based method it is hoped that the answers are less sensitive to particular assumptions which can differ across large behavioral models Results from both model-based and data-based methods suggest that monetary policy changes take effect only after a lag of several months but that these effects are long-lasting so that the rate reductions in are likely to have stimulated the economy throughout To gain a sense of the magnitudes involved one well-known model of the economy predicts that holding other factors constant a 1-percentage-point decrease in the Federal funds rate raises real GDP by percent above its baseline level after year. This effect of monetary stimulus on real GDP rises to percent after years. Databased methods broadly concur with this assessment : one study shows that the typical decrease in the funds rate raises output steadily in subsequent quarters reaching a maximum effect on output after about months. Both methods therefore imply that interest rate cuts in continued to exert considerable economic stimulus in Fiscal Policy An important goal of fiscal policy is to promote growth by limiting the share of output commanded by the government. In the Congress and the Administration made major progress along these lines with passage of the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act which featured a broad-based cut in marginal tax rates. The long-term benefits of such a policy | Economic Report of the President are clear as high marginal tax rates discourage the entrepreneurship and risk taking on which the strength of the U.S. economic system depends. Yet although the goal of EGTRRA was to improve long-term living standards and limit the size of the government the legislation conferred important short-term benefits as well thanks to the way in which the tax rate reductions were set in place and the timing of the act s passage. A new lower tax rate of percent was introduced at the bottom range of the previous percent bracket and taxpayers in were given an advance rebate on their likely savings due to this reduction Rebate checks ( $ for most single taxpayers $ for most married couples filing jointly ) arrived in mailboxes in the summer of The timing of the resulting $ billion infusion of spendable income into the economy could not have been more favorable. Although the depth of the recession would not be known until revised GDP figures were announced the next year GDP had already declined by percent at an annual rate in the first quarter of and by percent in the second quarter. As estimated from the traditional relationship between overall GDP and current income the tax plan added about percentage points of growth at an annual rate in the third quarter. As a result without the checks third-quarter GDP would have declined at an annual rate of percent rather than the percent rate actually observed. In the fourth quarter tax relief continued to add percentage points to the annual rate of real GDP growth so that instead of rising at an annual rate of percent GDP would have risen by only percent in the absence of the rebates The rebate checks mailed in represented only a small fraction of the tax relief from the EGTRRA package. In addition to lowering marginal tax rates EGTRRA increases the incentives for saving for making bequests to heirs and for investment. As a result tax relief from EGTRRA probably helped the private sector create jobs by the end of relative to the baseline level without tax relief while raising GDP growth by about percentage point over the course of that year In March the President signed the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act which implemented a tax policy especially appropriate for the fledgling recovery. The act promoted investment by allowing firms to immediately write off ( that is expense ) percent of the value of qualified investments in the year of purchase for investments made through September As discussed in Chapter government policies can significantly improve growth by removing tax distortions that penalize investment or other productive activities For example introducing expensing lowers the cost of capital thereby making more investment opportunities profitable on an after-tax basis. The act stimulates investment by allowing partial expensing through most of In addition to reducing the tax-adjusted cost of investment the act extended Chapter | unemployment benefits to workers who have exhausted their regular benefits This enhanced the role of unemployment insurance as one of the economy s most important automatic stabilizers The Federal Budget After years of surpluses the unified Federal budget recorded a deficit of $ billion in fiscal or about percent of GDP. The return of the deficit was primarily due to four factors : the lingering effects of the recession of the stock market plunge increased Federal expenditure necessitated by the war on terrorism and the costs of homeland security. Recessions tend to increase budget deficits because they lead to higher outlays ( for unemployment insurance for example ) at the same time that they reduce tax receipts ( because taxable income falls ) The decline in receipts during the most recent downturn in the business cycle has been especially pronounced. Total receipts in fiscal were $ billion having fallen $ billion or about percent from their level in fiscal This represented a much larger percentage decrease in receipts than in previous far more severe recessions. One of the most important reasons for the dramatic decline in receipts given the mildness of the contraction was the coincident decline in the stock market. The stock market s decline reduced capital gains receipts in addition to reducing taxes on wage and salary income for workers whose jobs are closely tied to equity markets. More detailed information on the precise sources of the decline in receipts will not be available until the Treasury completes its regular annual examination of individual tax returns. Even with the decline in receipts however the budget deficit was relatively small as a fraction of GDP compared with those seen in previous periods of war and recession The President s Jobs and Growth Initiative On January the President proposed a plan to enhance the longterm growth of the economy while supporting the emerging recovery. At the start of the consensus of private forecasters predicted accelerating growth in real GDP over the course of the year which would raise investment reduce unemployment and increase job growth. This consensus view is reflected in the Administration s outlook discussed below. Yet the recovery in investment could be delayed by weaker-than-expected profit growth higher required rates of return arising from geopolitical and other risks or a prolonged period during which companies focus on repairing their balance sheets. More general risks to recovery in include an increased sense of caution which could lead households to pull back on their spending plans and the potential for further terrorist attacks. To insure against these | Economic Report of the President near-term risks while boosting long-term growth the President has proposed a focused set of initiatives. Specifically the President s plan would : Accelerate to January many features of the tax cut that are currently scheduled to be phased in over several years. These include the reductions in marginal income tax rates additional marriage penalty relief a larger child credit and a wider percent income tax bracket Eliminate the double taxation of corporate income by excluding dividends from individual taxable income Increase expensing limits for small business investment raising to $ the amount that small businesses may deduct from their taxable income in the year the investment takes place Provide $ billion to the States to fund Personal Reemployment Accounts for unemployed workers. These accounts would allow eligible workers to spend up to $ to defray the costs of finding or training for a new job. Workers could keep any unspent balance in their account if they find work within weeks of going on unemployment Accelerating the marginal tax rate reductions would insure against a softening of consumption by putting more money in consumers pockets through long-term tax cuts which have been shown to be more effective than temporary cuts in boosting near-term spending. Ending the double tax on corporate income would increase the ability of corporations to raise equity capital providing near-term support to investment while improving the long-term efficiency of capital markets. ( For more on how eliminating the double tax on corporate income would help the economy see Chapter ) The provisions also support investment by small firms. Higher expensing limits would make it easier for small firms to expand by reducing the taxadjusted cost of capital ; lower marginal tax rates would increase growth incentives for small business owners whose business income is taxed at individual rates. Finally Personal Reemployment Accounts discussed in more detail in Chapter would provide unemployed workers with a new set of incentives as they look for work. Accounts of this type which reward unemployed workers for finding jobs quickly have been shown in experiments in several States to increase the speed with which unemployed workers find new jobs. Moreover by allowing workers a choice between using the funds to support their job search and using them for job training expenses the accounts are well suited for the dynamic U.S. labor market The Effect of Tax Relief on Interest Rates One of the most widely discussed issues in fiscal policy concerns the effect of tax relief on interest rates. It is widely agreed that in the immediate Chapter | aftermath of a permanent tax cut consumption increases because consumers have more disposable income. This increase in consumption raises GDP in the near term especially if the economy is operating below its potential with large amounts of unused labor and capital. In the long run lower tax rates have somewhat complicated offsetting effects on GDP. On the negative side if the reduction in tax rates is not accompanied by spending reductions it will increase the budget deficit and may reduce national saving. Lower national saving in turn will shrink the pool of loanable funds available in capital markets which increases interest rates and reduces investment Ultimately lower investment leads to a smaller stock of productive capital resulting in lower wages lower productivity and lower output. Offsetting this however is the positive effect of tax relief that operates through improved incentives to work and take risks for example by creating a new firm or by making a new investment. Incentives to undertake these activities improve after a cut in marginal tax rates because the tax reduction allows more of the rewards to be captured by workers entrepreneurs and investors and not by the government. When tax relief extends to capital income ( such as dividends ) as proposed in the President s most recent jobs and growth initiative an additional positive effect arises through stronger incentives to save. These positive effects on GDP operating through improved incentives also have an impact on future budget deficits and investment because deficits will be less onerous if the economy grows in response to the improved investment climate Assessing the ultimate effect of tax relief on GDP and future government debt thus requires gauging both the negative effects that arise through higher interest rates and the positive effects that come from improved incentives. Unfortunately measuring the effect through incentive channels is difficult because there have been few episodes of large broadbased tax relief during the last several decades. Moreover even these historical episodes occurred amid a host of other economic developments making it difficult to isolate the direct effect of lower taxes on working and saving Obtaining a rough estimate of the interest rate effect is less difficult because widely accepted economic theory allows precise predictions of how much an increase in the stock of debt should affect interest rates. The first step in making this calculation is to note that an additional dollar of government debt does not reduce the capital stock by a full dollar. About cents of the additional debt will be offset by larger capital inflows from abroad so that the U.S. capital stock would fall by only about cents. The next step is to translate this 60-cent-per-dollar decrease in the capital stock into an ultimate change in long-term interest rates. This is done by noting that the interest rate on a bond should be closely related to the marginal product that physical capital earns in the marketplace. This is so because the two should converge to | Economic Report of the President the point where investors are indifferent between holding financial securities or holding physical capital in their portfolios. Reducing the physical capital stock will increase the marginal return to capital in the marketplace by making capital scarce relative to other factors of production ; the key question is by how much this marginal return rises. Some calculations ( shown in Box ) imply that interest rates rise by about basis points for every $ billion in additional government debt Given this relationship between government debt and interest rates concerns that higher interest rates would choke off the stimulative effects of recent tax reductions seem unwarranted. For example this relationship implies that the $ trillion in tax relief included in EGTRRA would raise interest rates by only about basis points a modest cost to be set against the longterm incentive-based benefits expected from lower marginal tax rates The modest effect of government debt on interest rates does not mean that tax cuts pay for themselves with higher output. Although the economy grows in response to tax reductions ( because of higher consumption in the Box Calculating the Effect of Higher Government Debt on Interest Rates The effect of government debt on interest rates depends on the productivity of capital in the economy because additional government debt crowds out capital increasing its scarcity relative to labor and thereby raising its return in the marketplace. The higher return to capital also increases the required return on other assets such as bonds which drives up interest rates. One can get some idea of the productivity of capital in the United States by measuring how much of total U.S. output is paid to suppliers of capital as opposed to suppliers of labor. Gross capital income is usually about one-third of total U.S output with the rest going to labor. Mathematically the constancy of the capital share implies that the marginal return on each unit of capital is proportional to the output-to-capital ratio ( Y/K ) This proportionality implies that the percentage change in the marginal return to capital induced by a change in the capital stock is the same as the percentage change in Y/K which is simply the percentage change in Y minus the percentage change in K. Some additional calculations show that the constant one-third capital share implies that output should fall by onethird of percent for every percent decline in capital. This allows us to write the ultimate percentage change in the marginal return to capital as ( percent change in Y ) ( percent change in K ) = ( percent ) ( percent ) = percent. In other words the marginal product of capital rises by percent when the capital stock falls by percent Chapter | Box continued Government data show that the U.S. capital stock was about $ trillion in so that percent of the capital stock is $ billion. Because one dollar of debt reduces the capital stock by about cents an increase in government debt of about $ billion is required to crowd out percent of the capital stock ( $ billion x = $ billion ) Government data also imply that the gross marginal product of capital is about percent which implies that a percent decline in the capital stock would raise interest rates by about basis points. A conservative rule of thumb based on this relationship is that interest rates rise by about basis points for every additional $ billion in government debt short run and improved incentives in the long run ) it is unlikely to grow so much that lost tax revenue is completely recovered by the higher level of economic activity. The small effect of debt on interest rates does show however that attempts to stimulate the economy by raising taxes in order to lower interest rates are likely to be unsuccessful especially if the taxes raised are those that discourage private saving and investment. The resulting reduction in interest rates will probably be too small to outweigh the negative effects of tax increases that work through distorted incentives. Further the modest effect of increased debt on interest rates suggests that policymakers should not be afraid to use fiscal policy when doing so improves the long-run health of the economy. As long as the change in fiscal policy does not bring about large systemic imbalances in the economy such as a high debt-toGDP ratio or rapidly rising interest costs as a share of Federal outlays policymakers should not be paralyzed by the fear that any benefits from tax reductions are likely to be undone by the increase in interest rates they bring about | Economic Report of the President Developments in the Rest of the World Growth in many of the United States major trading partners was even more disappointing in than was growth at home. Although growth in Canada America s largest trading partner was a surprisingly robust percent during the four quarters ending in the third quarter of growth elsewhere lagged far behind. The economy of the United Kingdom grew only percent over the same period ; growth rates in Germany ( percent ) Italy ( percent ) France ( percent ) Japan ( percent ) and Mexico ( percent ) were even lower. Low demand for U.S. exports combined with the emerging recovery in the United States ( which increased U.S. demand for imports ) sent the U.S. trade deficit to a record high in Discussion of the U.S. position in international markets is often framed in terms of the current account a broader measure of international transactions In addition to the trade balance in goods and services the current account includes net investment income net compensation of resident alien workers and net unilateral transfers. Because the trade component is by far the largest in the current account balance the widening in the trade deficit in contributed strongly to the widening in the current account deficit. The latter reached a record percent of GDP in the second quarter of before falling slightly to percent in the third quarter One advantage of framing international finance discussions in terms of the current account is that as a matter of national accounting the current account balance equals the difference between net national saving and net national investment. For example if U.S. saving were smaller than U.S investment in a given period the difference the excess of investment over saving must have been financed by foreigners. In the process of financing U.S. investment foreign investors obtain U.S. assets either in portfolio form ( that is as stocks bonds or other financial securities ) or though direct controlling ownership of physical capital. These assets then generate investment income in the form of dividends interest payments and profits that can be repatriated to the investors abroad. Balance of payments data therefore resemble a sources and uses of funds statement for the Nation as a whole providing useful information on the amounts of internal and external investment financing. High levels of investment in the late 1990s meant that the U.S. capital stock grew quickly in the late 1990s but the accumulation of past current account deficits requires an increasing portion of the income earned by this capital to flow abroad. Over the past year the U.S. current account deficit has widened because net investment has been essentially flat while net saving has fallen ( Chart ) The relationship between the current account deficit and net investment by foreigners in U.S. assets also makes clear how changes in international Chapter | demand for U.S. assets can affect the trade balance and vice versa. Consider an increase in foreigners demand for U.S. assets. Their resulting accumulation of U.S. assets can affect international trade flows through an appreciation of the dollar because foreigners must obtain dollars in order to purchase U.S. assets. Appreciation of the dollar tends to make imports cheaper for U.S. residents and U.S. exports more expensive to consumers abroad ; both these effects move the trade balance ( and the current account ) toward deficit In light of the large number of trade-related and financial forces operating on the current account it is impossible to label a current account deficit of a given magnitude either good or bad. As noted above recent current account deficits result from U.S. investment outpacing domestic saving. One factor contributing to high U.S. investment relative to saving is the rapid increase in U.S. productivity relative to that in many other major countries which makes the United States a good place to invest. Because productivity growth is ultimately responsible for rising living standards the current account deficit reflects at least in part some very good news about the American economy Even so a current account deficit indicates that the United States is consuming and investing more than it is producing. As Chart shows | Economic Report of the President the U.S. current account has typically been in deficit for the past two decades. As a result the net international investment position in the United States ( the value of U.S. investment holdings abroad less that of foreign holdings in the United States ) has moved from an accumulated surplus of slightly less than percent of GDP in the late 1970s to a deficit of almost percent of GDP in ( Chart ) Recent increases in the current account deficit have led to some concerns that continued current account deficits ( and the increase in the United States international debt that would result ) might not be sustainable. Clearly debt can not increase without limit Because debt has to be serviced by the repatriation of capital income abroad the ratio of a country s debt to its income has to stabilize at some point Yet the United States today is far from the point at which servicing its international debt becomes an onerous burden. In fact until last year more investment income was generated by U.S. investment in foreign countries than by foreign investments inside the United States even though the net international investment position of the United States moved into deficit almost two decades ago ( Chart ) Given the United States negative international investment position the fact that until more investment income flowed into the United States than flowed out of it implies that the Chapter | rates of return on U.S. investment abroad were higher than the returns enjoyed by foreign investors in the United States. ( Further analysis of international investment data indicates that these differences in rates of return are especially pronounced for direct investment and less so for portfolio investment. ) Although debt service became a net transfer from the United States to the rest of the world in this debt service is unlikely to amount to a significant portion of U.S. output in the foreseeable future Near-term developments in the U.S. current account depend on a number of factors. One of the most important is the rate of economic growth in the rest of the world. Faster growth abroad raises the demand for U.S. exports which reduces the trade and current account deficits. A second factor affecting the U.S. current account is the propensity of U.S. residents to save As Chart showed saving rates fell sharply in the 1990s ; as noted above this may have stemmed from the strong appreciation in the stock market which allowed wealth to grow quickly without any increase in active saving out of disposable income. The retrenchment in asset prices that began in early may encourage some consumers to increase their active saving to pre-1995 levels. For any given level of domestic investment an increase in the saving rate lessens the need to borrow from abroad and thereby reduces the current account deficit. In any event it is far preferable to reduce the current account deficit by saving more than by reducing investment because lower investment results in slower growth in the capital stock a lower growth rate of labor productivity and slower growth in living standards A third factor affecting the evolution of the current account is the future demand by foreign investors for U.S. assets. To the extent that foreign investors reduce their demand for U.S. assets and substitute holdings in other countries for those assets the real exchange value of the dollar will fall holding other factors constant. Conversely the real value of the dollar will rise with an increase in the demand for U.S. assets. Such an increase in demand might result from continued productivity growth in the United States or from an increase in the perceived safety of U.S. assets relative to the rest of the world Moderate changes in foreign demand for dollar-denominated assets need not have large disruptive effects on the U.S. economy. Gradual shifts in the terms of trade would engender offsetting increases or decreases in the growth of consumption and imports leaving real GDP little affected. In fact if productivity growth remains relatively high in the United States while inflation remains low a moderate shift in global demand away from U.S. assets and the subsequent decline in the real value of the dollar may not even require a change in the nominal exchange rate because the real value of the dollar falls with a constant nominal exchange rate when inflation at home is lower than inflation abroad | Economic Report of the President Moreover history has shown that even a substantial decline in the value of the dollar need not result in sharply lower prices for U.S. stocks bonds or other assets. From the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of the real trade-weighted exchange value of the dollar fell by nearly percent while the current account deficit shrank from more than percent of GDP to less than percent. At the same time however stock prices rose by about percent while long-term interest rates ( which move inversely to bond prices ) fell by more than percentage point In the end the key determinant of the sustainability of the U.S international debt position is continued confidence in the economic policies of the United States. As long as the United States pursues its current marketoriented pro-growth policies there is no reason to believe that the current account deficit represents a problem for continued economic growth The Economic Outlook The economy continues to display supply-side characteristics favorable to long-term growth. Productivity growth remains strong and inflation remains low and stable. Real GDP is expected to grow faster than its percent potential rate during the next years and then to grow at a percent annual rate during the balance of the budget window. The Administration s projections are shown in Table TABLE Administration Forecast Year Nominal GDP Real GDP ( chaintype ) GDP price index ( chaintype ) Consumer price index ( CPI-U ) Unemployment rate ( percent ) Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Interest rate 91-day Treasury bills ( percent ) Interest rate 10-year Treasury notes ( percent ) Nonfarm payroll employment ( millions ) Level calendar year ( actual ) Based on data available as of November Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Chapter | Near-Term Outlook The Administration expects that aggregate economic activity will have weathered a quarter of weakness at the end of following which it will gather strength during with real GDP growing percent during the four quarters of the year. The unemployment rate which was percent in the fourth quarter of is projected to edge down about percentage point by the fourth quarter of As discussed earlier real GDP growth in was accounted for by solid growth in consumption a modest pickup in exports and an increase in inventory investment. Although investment in equipment and software was slow it stabilized during the first quarter of and began to grow in the second and third quarters foreshadowing one way in which the composition of growth is projected to differ next year : the growth rate of equipment and software investment is projected to pick up in ( Another difference is that the contribution of inventory investment is projected to wane. ) Several factors are expected to lead to a rebound in equipment and software investment. Any capital overhang that might have arisen during the late-1990s investment boom has been reduced because the level of investment fell in ; expectations of future GDP growth have stabilized after falling during ; and the replacement cycle is approaching for the short-lived capital goods put in place during the investment boom of and At the same time the financial foundations for investment remain positive : real short-term interest rates are low and prices of computers are falling more rapidly than they did in ( Computer investment accounted for a third of all nonresidential investment growth from to ) Less bright is the outlook for nonresidential structures which still appears weak even after years of decline. Even so structures investment is projected to stabilize around the second half of as the maturing recovery generates higher occupancy rates for office buildings and greater demand for commercial properties. The recent passage of legislation for terrorism risk insurance may unblock some planned investments in structures that were held up because of lack of insurance Real exports which turned up in are projected to improve further during reflecting the widely held expectation of stronger growth among the United States trading partners and the lagged effects of the past year s decline in the dollar. Although real imports and exports are expected to grow at similar rates during the four quarters of the United States imports more than it exports and therefore the dollar value of imports is expected to increase more than the dollar value of exports. As a result net exports are likely to become more negative during the course of Less change is expected for the largest component of aggregate demand consumption which is expected to remain robust in The negative influence of the stock market decline on household wealth and thus on | Economic Report of the President consumption is expected to wane as this decline recedes into history Consumption growth will also be supported by fiscal stimulus and the lagged effects of recent interest rate cuts. Finally low interest rates will continue to support the purchase of consumer durables just as they did for much of Inflation Forecast As measured by the GDP price index inflation fell to percent during the four quarters ending in the third quarter of down from percent during the same period a year earlier. This broad-based index of prices of goods and services produced in the United States is expected to rise somewhat faster at percent during as the restraining effects of falling energy prices and low food price inflation subside and the economy strengthens. Inflation is expected to remain low however as the unemployment rate is now above the level that the Administration considers to be the center of the range consistent with stable inflation and capacity utilization in the industrial sector is substantially below its historical average. Inflation by the GDP measure is projected to edge up to percent by and to stay there for the remainder of the budget window As measured by the CPI inflation during the months ended in December was percent ; core inflation was percent. The CPI which differs from the GDP price index both in its methodology and in that it includes only consumer goods and services is projected to rise percent in close to last year s core rate The difference between the CPI and the GDP measure of inflation has an important effect on Federal budget projections. A larger difference increases the Federal budget deficit because cost-of-living adjustments for Social Security and other programs that are indexed for inflation increase with the CPI whereas Federal revenue tends to increase with the slower growing GDP price index. For a given level of nominal income increases in the CPI also cut Federal revenue because they raise the thresholds of income tax brackets and affect other inflation-indexed features of the tax code. Of the two indexes the CPI tends to increase faster in part because it measures the price of a fixed market basket. ( See Box above on the new chainweighted CPI. ) In contrast the GDP price index increases less rapidly than the CPI because it reflects the choices of economic agents to shift their purchases away from those items with increasing relative prices and toward items with decreasing relative prices. In addition the GDP price index includes investment goods such as computers whose relative prices have been falling rapidly. Computers in particular receive a much larger weight in the GDP price index ( percent ) than in the CPI ( percent ) During the years from through the difference between inflation in the CPI-U-RS ( a version of the CPI designed to be consistent Chapter | with current methods ) and the rate of change in the GDP price index averaged percentage point a year and it was percentage point during the four quarters ending in the third quarter of The difference is expected to shrink to percentage point in and to revert to its recent mean of percentage point in and beyond Long-Term Outlook The Administration forecasts real annual GDP growth to average percent during the first years of the projection. As this is somewhat above the expected rate of increase in productive capacity the unemployment rate is projected to decline as a consequence. In and real GDP growth is projected to continue at its long-run potential rate of percent. The growth rate of the economy over the long run is determined by the growth rates of its supply-side components which include population labor force participation productivity and the workweek. The Administration s forecast is shown in Table TABLE Accounting for Growth in Real GDP [ Average annual percent change ] Q2 to Q4 Q4 to Q3 Q3 to Q3 Q3 to Q4 ) Civilian noninstitutional population aged or over ) Plus : Civilian labor force participation rate ) Equals : Civilian labor force ) Plus : Civilian employment rate ) Equals : Civilian employment ) Plus : Nonfarm business employment as a share of civilian employment ) Equals : Nonfarm business employment ) Plus : Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business ) ) Equals : Hours of all persons ( nonfarm business ) ) Plus : Output per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) ) Equals : Nonfarm business output ) Plus : Ratio of real GDP to nonfarm business output ) Equals : Real GDP Item Adjusted for revision of the Current Population Survey Line translates the civilian employment growth rate into the nonfarm business employment growth rate Line translates nonfarm business output back into output for all sectors ( GDP ) which includes the output of farms and general government Note. The periods Q2 Q4 and Q3 are business cycle peaks Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) | Economic Report of the President The Administration expects nonfarm labor productivity to grow at a percent annual average pace over the forecast period virtually the same as that recorded from the business cycle peak in through the third quarter of This projection is notably more conservative than the nearly percent average rate actually recorded since The cautious projection of productivity growth guards against several downside risks : Nonresidential fixed investment has fallen about percent since its peak in mid-2000. The slower pace of investment means that the near-term growth of capital services is likely to be reduced from its average pace from to leading to a lesser contribution to productivity growth from the use of these capital services As discussed in Box about half of the post-1995 structural productivity acceleration is attributable to growth in total factor productivity ( TFP ) outside of the computer sector. This growth is due to technological progress better business organization and other factors that are hard to identify. Although there is no reason to expect this process to slow the Administration forecast adopts a cautious view of the pace of TFP growth setting it near its longer term average rather than at the higher post-1995 pace Box Accounting for the Recent Strength in Productivity Growth The most important macroeconomic characteristic of the late-1990s boom rapid productivity growth remains intact. Annual productivity growth has averaged almost percent during the past years a period that includes a recession ( when productivity usually slows ) and the early stages of a recovery ( when productivity usually rises rapidly ) This growth moreover has occurred despite a roughly percent decline in nonresidential investment spending since Table presents the results of an analysis of some of the factors that influence productivity growth and compares their influence in two periods : and According to a model constructed by the Council of Economic Advisers that is designed to capture the cyclical behavior of productivity growth the productivity acceleration after would have been percentage point a year stronger but for the delayed hiring needed to accommodate increases in aggregate demand that occurred before and during ( second line of Table ) Productivity adjusted for this cyclical effect or structural productivity has accelerated by percentage points since ( third line of Table ) Cyclical factors held down productivity growth by percentage points in as the economy entered a shallow recession and then boosted Chapter | Box continued productivity growth by about percentage points in the early stages of a recovery in ( These figures average to percentage point as shown in the table. ) Thus during and structural productivity is estimated to have grown percent and percent respectively. This estimated pace is similar to that for the period as a whole and well in excess of the percent annual pace during the period In the accounting system adopted here productivity increases can arise from any of four sources : growth in the amount of capital services per worker-hour throughout the economy ( capital deepening ) improvements in the skills of the work force ( labor quality ) total factor productivity ( TFP ) growth in computer-producing industries and TFP in other industries. TFP growth is the increase in aggregate output over and above that due to increases in capital or labor inputs. For example TFP growth may result from a firm redesigning its production process in a way that increases output while keeping the same number of machines materials and workers as before As can be seen in the fourth line of the table capital services per hour contributed percentage point more to productivity growth after than before with information technology accounting for most of this acceleration. But in the wake of the drop in investment during the past years one might think that this growing contribution of capital deepening could not be sustained. Growth in capital services which had averaged percent annually from to dropped to about 1/2 percent during the past years. The drop in information capital services growth has been more pronounced : from a percent annual pace before to 3/4 percent annually in and This slowdown has been completely offset however by the decline in hours in and with the result that capital services per hour has grown even faster than in the late 1990s The Bureau of Labor Statistics measures labor quality in terms of the education and experience of the work force. The agency uses differences in earnings paid to workers with different characteristics to infer relative differences in productivity. Measured in this way labor quality has risen as the education and skills of the work force have increased. However the increase occurred at about the same rate both before and after so that labor quality does not account for any of the post-1995 acceleration of productivity The rate of growth of TFP in computer-producing industries has been rising as evidenced by the rapid decline in computer prices relative to prices in the rest of the business sector. Relative computer prices fell at a percent annual rate during Although this rate of decline has slowed a bit in the past years to percent it remains impressive Calculations using relative computer prices as an indirect measure of productivity growth in the computer-producing industries indicate that the | Economic Report of the President annual contribution of computer manufacturing to productivity growth in the private nonfarm business sector accelerated percentage point to percent during on average. However that contribution has edged back down during the past years to percentage point a year The final contribution comes from accelerating TFP in the economy outside the computer-producing industries. This contribution is calculated as a residual ; it captures the extent to which technological change and other business and workplace improvements outside the computer-producing industries have boosted productivity growth since This factor accounts for about percentage points of the post-1995 acceleration in structural productivity or about percent of the total. Taken at face value it implies that improvements in the ways capital and labor are used throughout the economy are central to the post-1995 acceleration in productivity but because it is calculated indirectly as a residual it is equally an illustration of the limits on our ability to account for the acceleration In summary structural productivity growth remained almost as strong in and as in the years immediately preceding. Growth in TFP likewise continued strong with industries outside the computer sector making substantial contributions TABLE Accounting for the Productivity Acceleration Since [ Private nonfarm business sector ; average annual rates ] Item Labor productivity growth rate ( percent ) to to Acceleration ( percentage points ) to Percentage point contributions : Less : Business cycle effect Equals : Structural labor productivity Less : Capital services per hour........................................... Information capital services Other capital services Labor quality............................................................... Equals : Structural TFP............................................................ Less : Computer sector TFP.................................................. Equals : Structural TFP excluding computer sector TFP Note. Labor productivity is the average of income- and product-side measures of output per hour worked Total factor productivity ( TFP ) is labor productivity less the contributions of capital services per hour ( capital deepening ) and labor quality Data are adjusted for the July annual revision to the national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) Productivity for is inferred from data for the first three quarters Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) for output and computer prices ; Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics-BLS ) for hours and for capital services and labor quality through but the BLS figures have been adjusted by the Council of Economic Advisers for the effects of the July NIPA revision ; and Council of Economic Advisers for the business cycle effect and for capital services and labor quality for Chapter | In addition to productivity growth of the labor force ( also shown in Table ) is projected to contribute percentage point a year to growth of potential output on average through Labor force growth results from growth in the working-age population and changes in the labor force participation rate. The Bureau of the Census projects that the working-age population will grow at an average annual rate of percent through The labor force participation rate is expected to be roughly flat through although it may begin to decline around that year which is the year that the oldest baby-boomers ( those born in ) reach the early-retirement age of In sum potential real GDP is projected to grow at about a percent annual pace slightly above the average pace since Actual real GDP growth during the 6-year forecast period is projected to be slightly higher at percent because the civilian employment rate ( line of Table ) makes a small ( percentage point ) and transitory contribution to growth through This contribution then ends as the unemployment rate stabilizes at percent Interest Rate Outlook Following a large decline in the interest rate on 91-day Treasury bills fell an additional basis points in and ended the year at percent These reductions reflected the Federal Reserve s efforts to stimulate the economy which left real short-term rates ( that is nominal rates less expected inflation ) close to zero. Real rates are not expected to remain this low once the recovery becomes firmly established and nominal rates are projected to increase gradually to percent by which would leave the real interest rate on Treasury bills close to its historical average The Administration projects that the yield on 10-year Treasury notes which was percent when the projection was finalized at the end of November will stay at that level for and then rise very slowly reaching percent by At that time their yield will be percentage points above expected CPI inflation a relationship that is consistent with the historical average since From onward the projected term premium ( the premium of the 10-year rate over the 91-day rate ) of percentage points is in line with its historical average Income Forecast One important purpose of the Administration s forecast is to estimate future government revenue which requires a forecast of the components of taxable income. The Administration s income-side projection is based on the historical stability of the long-run labor and capital shares of gross domestic income ( GDI ) During the first three quarters of the labor share of GDI was on the low side of its historical average of percent. From this | Economic Report of the President starting point it is projected to rise to its long-run average and then remain at this level over the forecast period. The labor share consists of wages and salaries which are taxable other labor income ( that is fringe benefits ) which is not taxable and employers contributions for social insurance. The Administration forecasts that the wage and salary share will decline while other labor income grows faster than wages. This pattern has generally been in evidence since except for a few years in the late 1990s The capital share ( the complement of the labor share ) of GDI is expected to fall slightly before leveling off at its historical average. Within the capital share a near-term decline in depreciation ( a consequence of the decline in shortlived investment during the past years ) is offset by a rise in economic profits which averaged percent of GDI during the first three quarters of a bit below the post-1973 average of percent. Economic profits are expected to rise to roughly percent of GDI and to remain flat at that level for the duration of the projection period. The pattern of book profits ( known in the national income and product accounts as profits before tax ) reflects the percent expensing provisions of the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act. These expensing provisions reduce taxable profits from the third quarter of through the third quarter of The expiration of the expensing provisions increases book profits thereafter however because the fraction of investment goods expensed during the 3-year window will not be eligible for depreciation thereafter. Other taxable income ( the sum of rent dividends proprietors income and personal interest income ) is projected to fall mainly because of the delayed effects of past declines in long-term interest rates which reduce personal interest income during the projection period Conclusion The Administration believes that the economy is likely to grow somewhat faster than in the projection presented here as the long-run benefits from the full reductions in marginal tax rates and the dividend exclusion are felt These should lead to increases in labor force participation and increased entrepreneurial activity. The Administration however chooses to adopt conservative economic assumptions that are close to the consensus of professional forecasters. As such the assumptions provide a prudent cautious basis for the budget projections. Yet the Administration s policies are designed to enhance U.S. economic growth not just maintain it. The remaining chapters of this Report illustrate ways in which pro-growth economic policies can improve economic performance at home and abroad by striking the right balance between the encouragement and regulation of firms by promoting flexibility and dynamism in labor markets and by reducing tax-based disincentives to economic activity Chapter | C H A P T E R Corporate Governance and Its Reform C orporate governance is the system of checks and balances that guides the decisions of corporate managers. As such it affects the strategy operations and performance of business firms over a large segment of the economy : corporations during accounted for percent of U.S. gross domestic product ( GDP ) Corporate governance also affects the ability of those outside the corporation including investors to monitor the quality of management and its decisions and to influence and even control some of those decisions. This observability or transparency can greatly enhance a corporation s ability to raise funds from outside investors. It can also make it easier for other outsiders including suppliers and customers to transact with the corporation by making the incentives and abilities of its managers and other employees more clear Households increasingly participated in the ownership of corporate stock during the 1990s. Fewer than one-third of U.S. households percent owned corporate stock directly or indirectly in By that number had grown to percent. More than half percent of households owned stock as of the latest year for which comparable survey statistics are available. The greatest percentage-point increases in household stock ownership appear to have occurred in groups where it was lowest at the start of the decade for example among households with moderate rather than high levels of income Access to well-developed financial markets accounts for some of the success that U.S. corporations and their managers have enjoyed in attracting capital from outside investors. U.S. securities markets are among the best in the world. Their relative depth and liquidity make it easier for investors to buy and sell common stock and other corporate securities and this makes investments in U.S. corporations more attractive. The relative efficiency of U.S. securities markets is not the only reason for households willingness to invest in corporations however To compete successfully in well-developed financial markets corporations must win and maintain investors confidence. To do this managers must provide sufficient information about their firms prospects to persuade investors that they can realistically expect a competitive return on their investments. This is not always easy even for a seasoned corporation whose investment prospects are strong. Part of the difficulty is that managers as insiders generally know more than outside investors know about the corporation the managers competence and their likely diligence in managing the investors funds. Facing this information disadvantage investors demand reliable information about the corporation and its management. Specifically they seek assurance that the corporation s investment prospects and its managers competence are as good as the managers might claim Investors also demand assurance that managers will work diligently in their interest. It is not generally realistic for investors to expect managers to exercise the same diligence with funds provided by others that they would if only their own funds were at stake. Thus some costs of delegating decisions to management inevitably arise when managers go outside the corporation for funds. These costs of separating ownership from control what economists sometimes call agency costs are not the same for all corporations because the importance of managerial discretion in decision making tends to vary across industries and among firms in the same industry. Diligent managers with good investment prospects may thus run the risk of being overlooked by investors or receiving funds on less favorable terms if they do not adequately meet investors demand for information. For their part investors who lack reliable information can miss out on good investment prospects The value to managers investors and other participants in corporations of finding efficient ways to meet this demand for assurance about the quality of corporate investment opportunities can be high. One solution is for managers to create systems of checks and balances that shape the conduct of their corporations and that outsiders can readily observe. Checks and balances governing the choice of managers and projects for example can commit the corporation through rules and incentives to employ more talented managers and to pursue more promising investment prospects Transparent systems for setting management compensation and procedural safeguards on managers actions can reduce the agency costs of delegating decisions to management. By creating strong systems of corporate governance managers can thus improve both the efficiency of their firms and the terms on which financing is available to them Strong corporate governance generally involves some form of publicly revealed commitment to whatever checks and balances have been instituted This can be critical to meeting investor demand for assurance. Typically it is not enough for managers simply to claim that they have instituted certain systems and procedures and promise to maintain them ; investors must be able to verify that those systems and procedures are actually in place and that the commitment to maintain them is real. This assures investors that these arrangements are not likely to unravel when they are not looking The standards for strong corporate governance are thus high. Fortunately managers of U.S. corporations have a solid foundation on which to build Nationwide markets for capital and for management talent together | Economic Report of the President with a strong legal system and a long tradition of sound internal corporate governance provide managers with incentives to innovate and powerful tools for communicating credibly with outsiders One might think that laws and regulations by themselves could provide investors the assurances they seek. Some researchers have indeed attributed the comparative success of U.S. corporations in attracting small investors to the relative strength of the U.S. legal system. The capacity of the U.S. court system to provide impartial adjudication stands in contrast with what researchers have found in some other countries. The lack of a court system that can resolve disputes fairly can limit the willingness of investors especially small or unsophisticated investors to provide corporations with funds. This may partly explain why in some other countries large institutions such as banks play a bigger role in supplying financing to corporations than they do in the United States where households play a greater role. The impartial adjudication of disputes by U.S. courts is something many U.S investors may take for granted Yet some effective corporate governance solutions have evolved in the United States without express legal or regulatory guidance. Some contemporary institutions whose existence is usually attributed to certain laws appear in fact to predate those laws. The presence relatively early in the Nation s history of strong financial markets such as major stock exchanges made it easier for managers to create strong transparent systems of checks and balances that did not rely on the courts. Those conditions appear to have allowed managers and corporations to develop reputations for quality or to efficiently rely on the reputations of well-known intermediaries as means of providing assurance to outside investors. Finally legal solutions are sometimes limited by the fact that contracts are often left incomplete in the sense that they do not specify what should happen under all possible contingencies. This reflects the potentially prohibitive costs of writing agreements down so that a judge can later verify their existence in the event of a dispute. It is costly not just to anticipate possible future sources of disagreement but also to involve attorneys and other legal experts in drafting provisions to deal with those eventualities not to mention any time that might be spent in court The existence of both strong markets and a strong legal system can thus explain U.S. corporations comparative effectiveness in meeting investor demand for assurance. Market solutions and legal solutions can be substitutes or complements for one another. Their comparative strengths can change over time as market conditions change. It would thus be a mistake to view the advantage of one over the other as absolute. As markets evolve the effectiveness of legal solutions can change and with it the comparative advantage of markets in helping managers more closely align their actions with the shareholders interest and communicate this alignment credibly to investors Chapter | Accordingly effective corporate governance in the United States rests on a foundation with three parts : legal institutions external market forces and internal governance systems that respond to both. The next section of this chapter explains how these parts work together to enable corporations to develop systems of corporate governance that are responsive to investors. It discusses how this foundation permits corporations to make adjustments to their corporate governance systems over time to respond to changing market conditions This adaptive capacity of U.S. corporate governance has indeed been critical to the ability of corporations and the government to respond to recent changes in market conditions. During corporate managers faced heightened demand for assurance from investors. At the same time allegations of misconduct by some managers and external auditors underscored the value of updating some of the laws and regulations that govern corporate conduct. The alleged misconduct in part involved failure to provide accurate information about corporate financial and operating performance. These difficulties and related potentially severe harms to investors and employees underscored concerns about possible weaknesses in U.S corporate governance that had emerged over the past decade. Many corporations have instituted changes accordingly. It was in this setting and in light of the important role that U.S. corporations and thus U.S. corporate governance play in the global economy that the President in March called for meaningful reform In calling for reform the President set forth a plan that applies three core principles of effective corporate governance : accuracy and accessibility of information accountability of management and independence of auditors The plan recognizes the complexity of modern corporate governance systems and their inherent flexibility. The call for careful reexamination of private customs and legal rules led to further changes in private sector institutions and the creation in July of the Corporate Fraud Task Force comprising law enforcement officials from the Department of Justice the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) and other government agencies. ( Table illustrates the stepped-up enforcement efforts of the SEC during this period and some of the results achieved during the same period. ) It also led that same month to the President signing new legislation the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of which the SEC is now implementing through a series of new regulations being issued in phases during and These changes constitute one of the most significant reforms of U.S. corporate governance since the establishment of the SEC itself in The President s plan targeted the underlying causes of concern about investor confidence. The suggestion of a crisis in investor confidence which captured the attention of policymakers during followed a substantial increase in the number of earnings and other financial restatements corrections to previously | Economic Report of the President TABLE SEC Enforcement Efforts and Outcomes SEC activity Financial fraud and issuer reporting actions filed FY FY FY Officer and director bars sought Temporary restraining orders filed Asset freezes.............................................................................. Trading suspensions Subpoena enforcement actions.................................................. Disgorgement ordered ( millions ) $ $ $ Penalties ordered ( millions ) $ $ $ Source : Securities and Exchange Commission issued statements by U.S. public corporations dating back to the mid-1990s There are sometimes good reasons for corporations to restate earnings. Yet a Federal agency report noted that financial restatements by large well-known public companies have erased billions of dollars of previously reported earnings and raised questions about the credibility of accounting practices and the quality of corporate financial disclosure and oversight in the United States. The occurrence of so many restatements in combination with high-profile allegations of misconduct created an impression that abuses in financial reporting had become widespread Restatements of financial reports raise concern because they can leave investors doubting the quality of the restated reports or worse those of other companies that have not issued restatements. Similarly although relatively few restatements appear to be linked to management misconduct innocent managers can suffer from the perception that a few managers create about the quality of management generally. The appearance of widespread restatements or misconduct can thus create a misimpression about the conduct of corporations nationwide. In fact most large U.S. corporations have shown no signs of having to restate their earnings or otherwise warranting scrutiny from the SEC the entity charged with enforcing U.S. financial disclosure rules. This remains true even after investors enforcement officials and managers not implicated in any offenses stepped up their efforts to expose misconduct following the President s call for reform in March During the late 1990s the number of companies that filed earnings restatements grew dramatically. After averaging a year from to the number of restatements increased to in in in and in according to one study of certain types of Chapter | restatements compiled through a keyword search of news databases. About percent of companies listed on major stock exchanges issued restatements from January through June according to another study using a similar method. The implication is that about percent of public corporations which have been the focus of concern stuck with their original financial reports during that period. Moreover signs of error or misconduct in financial reporting have not been randomly distributed among U.S corporations but rather have tended to concentrate in certain industries Earnings restatements have occurred with greater frequency among technology companies than among other companies for example The more frequent occurrence of restatements in some industries may reflect the unusual challenges those industries faced during the second half of the 1990s. Those circumstances may have created valid reasons for restating earnings but may also have created new opportunities for misconduct which the markets and legislators have moved quickly to correct. Governance structures themselves also tend to vary across corporations. The different experiences of corporations in different industries under different market conditions and at different times underscore the importance of exercising caution before applying any one governance solution to all corporations or unduly locking corporations into inflexible regulatory solutions The rest of this chapter is in two main parts. The first part surveys the economic foundation of corporate governance and its reform. Corporate governance was once solely the province of law : legal scholars and practitioners generated much of what was written on the subject not to mention most of the governance advice that corporations received. However advances in economic research over the past few decades primarily in corporate finance have shed light on the critical role that corporate governance can and does play in enhancing corporate efficiency and in increasing the depth and liquidity of financial markets. The second part of the chapter provides an overview of recent reforms and their anticipated contribution to the quality of corporate governance with special attention to new Federal legislation passed during This is followed by a brief discussion of the relation between corporate governance in the United States and that in other countries an issue that is receiving greater attention as markets become more global As empirical research has evolved its focus has shifted to add richness and depth to the understanding that economists now possess of how good corporate governance can promote investors interests corporate efficiency and economic efficiency more generally. Two decades ago empirical economic research into corporate governance focused on how and whether the entrenchment of managers might lead corporations to change their internal governance practices and structures in ways that might benefit the managers at undue expense to shareholders. More recently as markets have become more global research has | Economic Report of the President turned to the differences between countries systems of corporate governance and whether those differences have grown or diminished in recent years These shifts in focus reflect the evolution of markets and the demands they place on researchers to provide practical insights and in some instances guidance. The result has been an increase in the scope and depth of economists understanding of how corporate governance systems build on the foundation that markets and the law provide as indicated by the discussion below of some legal rules that appear to undermine the effectiveness of U.S corporate governance. Specifically regulations that may once have had a beneficial effect now appear to place undue restrictions on investors in their ownership of stock and their exercise of the rights attached to ownership. As a related matter some rules that seek to influence the ability of small investors to obtain information appear to rest on an incomplete understanding of the production and distribution of information particularly as it affects small investors. The emergence of economic research on the role of information and on the economic foundations of corporate governance has complemented the development of corporate governance policy both in the private sector and in government Foundations of Corporate Governance Businesses that organize themselves as corporations are better able than other kinds of businesses to raise capital from outside investors. This advantage is supported by corporate law which allows individuals and organizations to invest in a corporation without incurring unlimited liability for the corporation s actions or bearing the costs of participating directly in its management in order to share in the business s profits. Limited liability also accounts for the ease with which stock can be traded. When stock is bought and sold voting rights typically change hands and this causes market forces to affect the outcomes of shareholder votes in ways that do not apply to other kinds of elections. This transferability of rights distinguishes the voting rights of stockholders from those of citizens Yet strong legal institutions can not alone account for the success that the corporation has enjoyed as an organizational form in the United States. When investors supply external financing they delegate key decisions about the use of those funds to managers. The cost of this separation of ownership from control can be high to the point of limiting a corporation s profitable access to outside financing. Even very detailed provisions in laws and contracts can not realistically eliminate this cost : closing all the relevant loopholes in those provisions updating them to keep up with changes in market conditions and technology and enforcing them against violation would be prohibitively costly Chapter | Accordingly managers and investors can have powerful incentives to discover or invent other ways to reduce these remaining costs of separating ownership from control for if they succeed the corporation can grow and investors can participate in the resulting higher profits. However these costs can vary markedly across corporations and industries and over time. This creates incentives for managers and investors to monitor existing solutions and continue to seek new means of reducing the costs of separating ownership from control It is here that the three-part foundation of corporate governance in the United States becomes important. The first part comprises the external markets that put pressure on managers to perform bringing their incentives more closely into alignment with the shareholders interest and creating incentives for them to develop new strategic or institutional means of reducing the costs of separating ownership from control. The second is the internal governance structure of the corporation which adds a complementary set of rules and incentives to align management s actions with the shareholders interests. Finally the legal system provides investors and other participants in the corporation s affairs with a means of impartial dispute resolution. Related to this is the role that regulation plays in shaping corporate governance solutions. Some features of contemporary corporate governance may indeed be built upon preexisting regulations or other legal rules. The opposite may also be true however : some contemporary features of U.S. corporate governance predate modern securities regulation. Market legal and regulatory solutions interact and can complement one another in aligning the incentives of managers and the interests of shareholders Market-Imposed Discipline : External Governance Mechanisms The market institutions that have emerged in the United States to align managers and investors interests tend to complement the legal discipline that the courts provide. They do this by overlaying a more flexible yet fairly standardized system of checks and balances onto the more rigid system of court-enforced rules and laws As U.S. corporate governance has evolved since the mid-20th century experts in economics finance and law initiated extensive study of how the sometimes-hidden forces of the marketplace operate on the corporation. The result is that competition in at least three distinct external markets is now recognized as shaping the governance structures of corporations : Competition in the market for corporate control Labor market competition Product market competition | Economic Report of the President Box Do Bad Bidders Make Good Targets ? During the 1980s interest grew in the use of hostile and friendly takeovers as means of disciplining bad management and of helping to reallocate management and other resources among competing uses Research on this topic indicated that takeovers have favorable or at worst neutral consequences for shareholders on average. Yet some bidders paid higher prices than others. This raised questions about whether the disciplinary reach of the market for corporate control might extend to corporations whose managers bid for other firms too aggressively. The evidence is that corporations whose shareholders appear most likely to have been harmed by their managers overly aggressive acquisitions are indeed more likely to become acquisition targets themselves. After a completed acquisition managers appear to face a greater chance of being replaced. Moreover managers of targeted corporations often face market discipline whether or not the takeover bid succeeds. Takeover targets are often poor performers and management turnover appears to occur more frequently after the defeat of a takeover bid if the target is a poorly performing corporation Merger and acquisition activity can in some instances strengthen corporate governance by committing the corporation to the issuance of more debt ensuring the payout of free cash flow and closer monitoring by debtholders. Although research from other countries such as Japan indicates that there too the threat of takeover can strengthen managers incentives to act in the shareholders interest evidence of a well-functioning market for corporate control has been more visible in the United States. For all these reasons economists view the market for corporate control as an important source of management discipline complementing the beneficial effects of other market forces and regulatory oversight. Mergers and acquisitions have a useful role to play in corporate governance. In the market for corporate control bad bidders make good targets Each of these sources of market discipline contributes to managers incentives to act in the interests of shareholders. This market discipline in each instance can take the form of reputational sanctions : managers will bear losses in their own expected future income if market participants decide to revise downward their beliefs about the quality of the corporation or its managers in response to unfavorable news about their conduct The pressures of these distinct markets are most readily apparent at different times in different industries and corporations ( Box ) Striking evidence on the role of external markets in disciplining managers and in Chapter | reallocating assets among competing uses emerged in the 1980s for example. During this period changes in technology and in regulation led many corporations to substitute external financing for internal financing This also exposed the managers of some of these corporations to the real chance of being removed as outside investors acquired significant amounts of equity and debt. Helping in this transition was the emergence of individual investors who specialized in acquiring companies even against the express wishes of incumbent management. Many of the so-called hostile takeovers of the 1980s occurred in a few specific industries such as oil and gas. The opportunity to improve corporate performance through restructuring made many of these transactions profitable Mergers and other corporate control transactions play a valuable role in redistributing assets among alternative uses. By facilitating competition between management teams and between organizational forms the market for corporate control continuously affects the structure of corporations and the way managers do their jobs. Transactions in this market tend to occur in waves and to concentrate in specific industries however largely because the gains from corporate control transactions often derive from industry-specific technological and regulatory change as Chart illustrates Although managers continued to face pressure from the market for corporate control during the early 1990s relatively few transactions occurred as data on tender offers in Chart illustrate. Economic research at that time documented some of the other external market forces and internal governance mechanisms that help align managers incentives with the shareholders interest. Evidence on CEO turnover illustrates the contribution of the labor market toward this alignment Managers face the threat that poor performance will cost them their jobs independent of the level of activity in the market for corporate control Research from the late 1980s and early 1990s indicates that CEOs were significantly more likely to lose their jobs following poor performance of their firms than at other times a reflection of market discipline in this case labor market discipline. Board members of companies that violated financial reporting rules also appear to suffer losses. The number of other directorships held by its directors appears to decline significantly after a firm is charged with accounting fraud. Indeed evidence from a recent study suggests that individual employees often lose their jobs after their contributions to corporate misconduct become known. All of this illustrates the practical importance of the labor market as a source of discipline on management s performance apart from the market for corporate control Finally product markets are an important source of discipline for managers with a lasting and pervasive effect on the conduct of business of all sizes. If corporations fail to deliver goods and services of suitable quality at a competitive | Economic Report of the President price consumers will not buy from them. This gives managers powerful incentives to put their efforts into marketing good-quality products at reasonable prices. Product market competition is so critical to the performance of corporations that laws have been passed and remain vigorously enforced to prevent it from being extinguished by collusion or merger. In fact product markets can in some instances provide discipline against abuses by corporations against consumers in addition to the discipline that the courts provide Chapter | Internal Governance Mechanisms External market forces shape not just management conduct but also the design of mechanisms internal to the firm. For example to avoid being subjected to a hostile takeover or to the threat of a proxy fight managers have integrated outside observers into their internal decision processes and have taken other steps to improve the quality of their firms internal governance. They have also divested assets that have higher value in applications outside the corporation Internal features of corporate governance can be difficult to discern from outside the corporation. Were it not so managers would not exercise as much discretion as they often do over the corporation s choices and the agency costs of separating ownership from control would not be as high as they are. Yet a few features of internal corporate governance are strikingly visible from without. Examples include the distribution of voting rights attached to stock ownership the relation between debt and equity in the firm s financial structure the composition of the board of directors and to some extent the compensation of managers All features of internal corporate governance have the potential to affect corporate efficiency. Only those features that outsiders can readily observe and that managers can not easily alter directly affect outside investors beliefs about their likely returns from investing in the corporation. Debt finance provides one example. By taking on a significant amount of debt | Economic Report of the President such as bank debt managers can publicly commit to having a reputable lender monitor the conduct of their business more closely and more often than might otherwise occur The attachment of voting rights to stock provides a means of influencing the actions of management that is independent of any debt that may exist The distribution of voting rights among shareholders is indeed important to internal governance as are the rules governing how and on what issues shares may be voted. By exercising their voting rights shareholders ratify managers choices about some of the more transparent features of internal corporate governance such as the composition of the board. Shareholders exercise of their voting power became a focus of economic research during the 1990s following changes in State laws that appeared to make it more difficult for individual large shareholders to unseat ineffective managers This period saw growing demand from institutional investors for guidance on how best to exercise voting rights held as fiduciaries Shareholders : Ownership and Control When a corporation decides to go public its current investors must decide what ownership and control rights to retain for themselves and what to offer for sale to new investors. Going public can of course generate substantial agency costs related to separating ownership from control. Prospective new investors anticipate these potentially high costs. Their willingness to acquire stock as part of a new issue accordingly reflects the quality of the steps taken by the incumbent owner-managers to commit the corporation to a strong system of internal governance. Research suggests that the value of such a system is far greater in those industries and under those market conditions where the costs to outsiders of monitoring the actions of management are relatively high One way for the incumbent owner-managers to make a commitment to good governance is to retain a large fraction of the corporation s stock. The effect is to increase the sensitivity of the managers own wealth to changes in the wealth of shareholders. Because the incumbent management has greater control over the firm s decisions than do other shareholders the effect of increased managerial ownership is to bring the incentives of management and thus the actions of the corporation more closely into alignment with the shareholders interest ( Box ) Observed differences in the concentration of management s stock ownership across companies indeed appear traceable to differences in the costs of eliminating barriers to external influence and the value of doing so Managers possess relatively large ownership stakes on average in corporations that operate in volatile markets or in industries where management s discretionary actions affect shareholder wealth yet are difficult for outsiders to observe and evaluate. They tend to possess relatively small ownership Chapter | Box 2-2.Who Owns Corporations ? In the United States a corporation s stockholders are its ultimate owners. Possession of common stock and related equity securities confers two fundamental rights of ownership : the right to participate in the corporation s future profits and the right to vote on certain decisions of the corporation such as the appointment of directors. Stockholders learn what issues are up for a vote by reading the proxy statement that they receive by mail before each shareholders meeting. Meetings usually occur annually. These rights are established by State law and reinforced by Federal laws and regulations such as disclosure laws that obligate corporations to keep current and prospective future shareholders informed Well-developed financial markets have allowed U.S. public corporations to distribute their stock widely. Already in the 1930s concern arose that the diffuse ownership of U.S. public corporations might undermine their efficiency. One study famously expressed the view that professional managers lacked adequate incentives to serve the shareholders interest and that shareholders with small ownership stakes had little incentive or ability to monitor and when necessary intervene to correct the situation. Fifty years later research into the market forces and other mechanisms that guide managers actions intensified. This work revealed that top-level managers of large public corporations owned significant blocks of stock in their firms Indeed management ownership of stock in U.S. public corporations appears to have increased since the 1930s. One study reports that the proportion of shares owned by managers of public corporations actually grew between and from an average of percent to an average of percent. This increase appears to have occurred between the 1930s and 1970s : little change occurred between and according to recent research Consistent with the incentive-aligning value of stock ownership management s ownership stake is typically smaller in companies where management discretion plays a less critical role and where external oversight is less costly or easier to achieve this is the case in static or low-volatility market environments and in heavily regulated industries. Managers ownership of stock in companies in the utilities industry and other regulated industries is less concentrated than it is in other industries on average and this pattern was present in both and This evidence is consistent with the views of many economists that an important function of management ownership of stock is to reduce the cost of separating ownership from control by aligning management s incentives more closely with the investors interest in ways that outsider investors can readily observe | Economic Report of the President stakes in corporations that operate in less volatile markets and in regulated industries where managerial discretion matters less to shareholder wealth This suggests that management s stock ownership responds at least in part to the market s demand for an appropriate alignment between managers incentives and shareholders interests One alternative to concentrated managerial stock ownership is for one or more investors who are not managers to accumulate a significant block of shares. Corporations that have such outside blockholders can be easier to acquire because some of the transactions costs of concentrating ownership in the hands of one or a few investors have already been borne. The presence of a large blockholder can thus increase management s risk of ouster due to poor performance. This can in turn deter shirking and other bad management practices even if the blockholder does not directly exercise his or her rights of influence or control Blockholders who own voting stock in the corporation can of course influence the strategy or management of the corporation directly by exercising their voting rights. Blockholders have greater abilities and incentives to exercise these rights than do smaller shareholders for two reasons. First ownership of more voting rights in the corporation gives each blockholder a greater chance of influencing the outcome of any shareholder vote or related decision. Second the entitlement to a greater share of the corporation s future cash flows that comes with block ownership can make it significantly more profitable for an outside blockholder to incur the upfront costs of seeking to influence the outcome of a vote or other corporate decision. These features indicate that the presence of outside blockholders can significantly affect the quality of discipline that managers receive from the market and the quality of corporate governance generally Research on corporate blockholders has considered the possibility that they like managers might have idiosyncratic interests that conflict with the interests of shareholders generally. Concerns that large investors might treat themselves preferentially have arisen in the context of research into the source of the premium at which voting stock tends to trade over other nonvoting stock for example. The many different kinds of outside investors that appear to exist and the nature of their incentives remain to be fully explored by economic research Suppliers of Venture Capital Venture capitalists differ from some other stockholders in that they tend to follow a dual strategy acquiring large ownership stakes while also participating actively in the governance of the corporation. Their large stakes can allow them to capture enough of whatever gains accrue from their intervention to cover the high cost of the effort that successful intervention can Chapter | require. Venture capital investors play a greater role in corporate governance in countries such as the United States where stock markets are relatively well developed. The presence of such markets makes it easier for venture capitalists eventually to sell their stakes to other investors who wish to own smaller stakes and be less involved in the strategic or the day-to-day decisions of the corporation. The emerging corporations that make the best use of venture capital firms resources tend to be relatively risky with high rates of failure Thus when venture capital investments succeed the returns can be very high even though the expected return on any individual investment may be relatively low. Chart illustrates changes in the level of venture capital activity that have occurred over time in response to shifts in the demand for the financing and expertise they bring to emerging businesses Recent studies indeed call attention to venture capital as a good source of financing for corporations that face especially great difficulty in credibly communicating their businesses future prospects to potential investors. Such corporations include those whose value derives primarily from future growth opportunities and those that have difficulty obtaining loans because they can not readily meet the collateral and other requirements of banks or other lenders. Rather than try to satisfy a prospective lender such firms often concentrate equity ownership with the entrepreneur and a venture capitalist This may pave the way for some dispersed outside equity ownership | Economic Report of the President Institutional Investors The ability of shareholders other than managers to exercise their voting rights in the firm can also play an effective role in aligning management s actions with the shareholders interest. During the 1970s and 1980s institutional investors accumulated equity stakes in U.S. corporations of a size not seen in the last half-century as Chart illustrates. As their ownership has grown so has the visible role of institutional investors in corporations. In the 1980s these institutions which include pension funds mutual funds and insurance companies were often seen as passive participants in corporate governance and evidence supports this view. This changed during the 1990s Yet constraints on the role of institutional ownership have remained For example the Investment Company Act of substantially restricts the ability of institutions to discipline corporate management on behalf of households and other investors. These restrictions appear to have arisen from a desire to promote the diversification of institutional holdings and to limit institutions influence over corporate management. Modern economic research however has clarified the conditions that must prevail for diversification to be adequate. It appears that the Investment Company Act s notion of diversification would not stand up to modern economic theory : the act requires excessive diffusion of funds across firms without ensuring true diversification. For example a mutual fund that invests all its assets across a large Chapter | number of software companies would conform to the letter of the act but would not actually be diversified. The act may thus impose costs on investors and on modern corporate governance without providing countervailing benefits to investors or to the functioning of the market generally Research has also brought to light the critical role that the prospect of shareholder intervention in the corporation s affairs can play in disciplining management. This valuable discipline can often be achieved without actual intervention the necessary condition being that managers recognize the threat of intervention. The Investment Company Act assures managers that the ability of institutions to step in and take direct disciplinary action against any misconduct will be limited. It thereby limits both the direct and the indirect roles of institutions in aligning the actions of corporate managers with the shareholders interest. ( Table reviews other legal constraints on the role of institutional investors. ) Boards of Directors : Insiders and Outsiders One way for managers to commit to a closer alignment between their incentives and the interests of their shareholders is to publicly surround themselves with reputable advisers. They can accomplish this by appointing to their boards of directors persons known for speaking out in the boardroom and if necessary taking action to prevent or remedy managerial misconduct. Boards serve two important roles. First they constitute a panel of knowledgeable people who can offer the CEO timely advice in response to unforeseen developments in the marketplace that the CEO or other managers may be ill equipped to address on their own. Second they can review the quality of recommendations that the CEO receives from other members of the corporation s management. An important challenge in the ongoing evolution of U.S. corporate governance is to find ways of improving the quality of the commitment that directors themselves make to act diligently in the shareholders interest This challenge had already attracted the attention of researchers even before the events of last year put the issue on the front pages. Because boards of different companies differ in their composition researchers have been able to evaluate statistically whether corporations with certain kinds of boards tend to perform better or worse than others. The evidence from this research is instructive although not as consistent in its findings as the evidence on the incentive-aligning role of insider ownership One finding of this research is that directors who are not employees of the corporation may be less susceptible to the internal pressures that can undermine managers incentives to act in the shareholders interest. Research into what drives CEO turnover for example shows that outsider-dominated boards more frequently terminate CEOs following poor corporate performance than do insider-dominated boards ( Box ) Other research tells a | Economic Report of the President TABLE Legal Rules That Shape the Roles of Institutional Investors Institution Restriction Insurers Life insurers No more than percent of assets may be in the common stock of a single company ; no more than percent of assets may be in equity interests Property and casualty insurers No more than percent of assets may be in a single company s preferred or guaranteed stock ; at most percent of assets may be in common stock Source State law ( New York example ) NY Insurance Law ( for insurers doing business in NY ) Same Mutual funds For half of portfolio : no more than percent of fund s Subchapter M of the Internal assets may go into stock of any one issuer and fund Revenue Code may not purchase more than percent of voting stock of any company ; otherwise tax penalties apply Must get SEC approval prior to joint action with Investment Company Act affiliate ; e.g. a fund needs SEC approval before of acting jointly to control a company of which it and its partner own more than percent Pensions Must manage assets prudently and generally assets ERISA : must be diversified. ( The prudence rule has been U.S.C. ( a ) ( ) ( B ) interpreted to require that a person responsible for a U.S.C. ( a ) ( ) ( C ) plan retain experts when appropriate and is a significantly higher standard than the business judgment rule ) Must act for the exclusive purpose of providing U.S.C. ( a ) ( ) ( A ) benefits to participants and beneficiaries Traditional pension plans may not acquire any stock U.S.C. ( a ) ( ) or bonds issued by the company that sponsors the plan if such acquisition would cause the plan to hold more than percent of its assets in such securities Must also comply with supplemental rules that U.S.C. ( a ) ; specifically prohibit potentially abusive transactions ( b ) with the plan Bank holding companies ( BHC ) Generally can not acquire direct or indirect ownership or Bank Holding Company Act control of any voting shares of any company that is not a of bank. Several important exceptions exist which for example permit a BHC to hold shares of a company : That do not exceed percent of the company s U.S.C. ( c ) ( ) outstanding shares if the ownership does not constitute control Engaged in activities closely related to banking U.S.C. ( c ) ( ) Bank trust funds For pension accounts no more than percent of ERISA : assets may be in employer securities U.S.C. ( a ) ( ) Active bank control could trigger liability to controlled Bankruptcy case law company Sources : United States Code Department of Labor Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Securities and Exchange Commission and National Association of Insurance Commissioners Chapter | similar story. Firms facing SEC enforcement actions tend to have fewer outsiders on their boards according to another study. The appointment of outside directors also has been associated with stock price increases even among companies whose boards are already outsider-dominated although companies with more outsiders on their boards appear not to perform significantly better than other companies on average. Evidence that outside directors affect corporate conduct includes one study s finding that banks with more outside directors during the 1920s provided higher quality underwriting services and that investors recognized this : banks with more outside directors were found to obtain higher prices than other banks for the securities they underwrote. These findings are consistent with the view that insider-dominated boards face some of the same incentive conflicts that can diminish the incentives of the CEO and other managers to act in the shareholders interest It would be premature however to conclude that shareholders always benefit from adding outside directors or that maintaining an outsiderdominated board is good for shareholders in all corporations. Studies of the benefits to shareholders of having outside directors sit on corporate boards have not consistently demonstrated that their presence improves shareholder wealth. These mixed results may occur because the effects vary from one Box What Incentives Do CEOs Face ? Two important incentives for CEOs to act in shareholders interests come from the labor market and from the provision of incentive-based compensation. The role of the labor market is apparent in the fact that CEOs often lose their jobs after their corporations perform poorly : one study found that departure rates for CEOs at firms with poor performance relative to their industry exceeded those at firms with good performance in all but of years studied. Actual CEO firings can be difficult to identify given that underperforming firms tend to quietly encourage their CEO to leave rather than make a public spectacle of the event. Nevertheless proxies for dismissal such as measures of departure rates that exclude departures that were likely due to retirement indicate that job loss is a powerful disciplinary mechanism for CEOs in poorly performing companies. For example one group of researchers found that executives in poorly performing companies tend to depart at younger ages : percent of CEOs at such companies left before age compared with only percent of CEOs at better performing companies. Finally one would expect underperforming firms to be more likely to look outside the company in order to break with the poor management practices of the past. Consistent with this research that used press reports to qualify departures as either forced | Economic Report of the President Box continued or voluntary found that outsiders replaced percent of CEOs who had been forced from their positions but only percent of those who had departed voluntarily This practice of terminating CEOs following poor corporate performance appears to have stronger incentive effects on young CEOs than on older CEOs who are nearer retirement. This is not surprising : young CEOs have more future compensation to lose. Corporations appear to compensate for this. Older CEOs receive pay that is more sensitive to corporate performance than do younger CEOs on average. One study associates a percent change in shareholder wealth with a percent change in compensation for CEOs within years of retirement but only a percent change for those more than years from retirement for example. The threat of job loss and the provision of performance-based pay thus appear to be substitute means of providing CEOs with incentives to act in the shareholders interest Stock ownership also helps align CEO incentives with the shareholders interest. It enables the CEO to participate in any improvement in shareholder wealth that may arise from his or her performance and it compels him or her to share in any losses. Options similarly allow the shareholder to participate in the gain yet with limited exposure to downside risk. Options became an important part of executive pay during the 1990s and thus have received special attention during recent efforts at corporate governance reform. As a form of long-term compensation options have some attractive features. Unlike traditional bonus packages which depend on accounting-based measures of profits and corporate performance the compensation that a CEO or other manager receives from options depends on the market s appraisal of the corporation s performance. This is reflected in the price of the corporation s stock. Specifically stock options give the holder the right to buy stock at a set price. When the market price of the stock rises above that price the option s value to the holder also rises Option-based compensation like restricted stock grants can thus allow CEOs and other officers to participate in the growth in shareholder value that occurs during their tenure In addition to helping to align the CEO s incentives with the shareholders interest incentive-based compensation can be a good way to attract high-quality managers because it rewards talent and effort Research on compensation by U.S. banks for example reveals that compensation of bank CEOs tends to be both higher and more sensitive to changes in profits in States where deregulation has occurred ; managerial discretion is arguably more important in such States which appears to explain the difference in compensation patterns Chapter | corporation to the next for example because market conditions are different for different corporations. Moreover it can be difficult for shareholders to identify the incentives that each outside director brings to the corporation To summarize corporations have sought in several ways to improve the quality of their board s commitment to serving the shareholders interest They have added members to their boards who neither are employees nor have other business dealings with the corporation such relationships can create conflicts of interest and otherwise undermine directors incentives to oppose an entrenched or ineffective management team. The supply of qualified independent directors is limited however and their quality may vary ; therefore this strategy is not likely to come without a cost. One way to avoid unduly trading off quality for independence is to change the procedures that the board follows rather than its membership. Boards have tried various procedural solutions in an effort to improve the quality of their commitment to shareholders. One is to appoint someone other than the CEO to be the chairman of the board. Another is to change directors committee assignments so that more outside directors are appointed to committees that make such critical decisions as the setting of CEO compensation and the selection of the corporation s outside auditor An alternative strategy would be to enlist an outside organization ( for example a stock exchange or a government regulator ) to monitor certain specific aspects of the firm s internal governance. This shifts some of the burden of monitoring from the board and from shareholders generally onto the outside organization. Yet this strategy too has its limitations. Many of the challenges of designing effective internal governance systems arise from the fact that it is costly to monitor managers actions in a timely manner from outside the corporation. Outside organizations can face many of the same obstacles that boards can face in making and enforcing rules to ensure good management Legal and Regulatory Institutions Strong legal institutions are widely recognized as providing a solid foundation for economic growth including the emergence of a strong corporate sector Their contribution is seen as twofold. First solid legal institutions provide a reliable impartial means of resolving disputes. Although parties sometimes rely on private means of dispute resolution such as arbitration the reliable supply of dispute resolution through the courts remains a valuable if not critical input to effective corporate governance. Courts have indeed been called upon to enforce shareholders voting rights including the right of individual large shareholders to obtain internal governance reforms such as changes in board composition that may benefit shareholders generally at the expense of incumbent management | Economic Report of the President The second contribution of legal institutions is regulation. Securities regulation in the United States predates the 1930s. Its evolution accelerated rapidly however after the passage of the Securities Act of and the Securities Exchange Act of which created the SEC and delegated to it the task of writing and enforcing securities regulations. The Congress similarly authorized the SEC to delegate some but not all of this task to specialized institutions. Stock exchanges such as the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) operate under SEC oversight as self-regulatory organizations. The SEC has also delegated certain responsibilities for setting and maintaining accounting standards to the Financial Accounting Standards Board. Under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act the SEC is overseeing the creation of a new organization the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board whose task will be to develop maintain and enforce the standards that guide auditors in their monitoring and certification of corporate financial reports An extensive set of laws and regulations has thus arisen to supplement and complement the role of the market in shaping corporate conduct. Like private contracts these rules are enforceable through the courts ( Box ) Information and Disclosure The central feature of modern U.S. securities regulation is the series of SEC-enforced rules under which market participants must disclose information to the public. Reflecting this fact the Securities Act of is sometimes known as the truth in securities law. To the extent that investors have good information they can fine-tune their investment decisions shifting capital to those corporations that offer more or less risky investment opportunities depending on their risk preferences. Better availability of information allows corporations whose managers do a good job or that offer low-risk investment opportunities to gain access to capital at a lower price than other lower quality corporations or those whose offerings are relatively more risky In requiring disclosure securities regulations supplement both the law and the market forces that create incentives for corporations to keep investors informed. Corporate managers have incentives to supply favorable information because in doing so they can distinguish themselves from other managers who lack favorable information to report. Enforcement of anti-fraud laws can beneficially strengthen this signal. Managers and corporations that commit fraud also risk costly market sanctions and loss of reputation in addition to any court-imposed sanctions Examples : Does it Matter How Investors Get Information ? Controversy often surrounds regulations that seek to control the production and distribution of information. Regulation of information in securities markets is no exception. For example the question of whether SEC-enforced Chapter | Box Markets Accountability and the Enforcement of Rules The announcement of a court-imposed sanction can be a dramatic event particularly when it is for commission of a white-collar crime such as the intentional and harmful dumping of toxic substances or fraud against a customer or investor. Yet the most important effects of the court system are hidden. Court-enforced sanctions shape management conduct by creating a credible threat to impose punishment much as the threat of being pulled over for violating the traffic laws shapes the conduct of drivers on the road. Good managers like good drivers follow certain principles of conduct not only because they are good people but also because they know that if they do otherwise they risk being detected by enforcement authorities and subjected to sanctions. There are indeed two different ways to discourage or deter people from committing offenses according to economists One is to step up detection efforts so that offenders face higher probabilities of sanction. The other is to increase the total sanction that offenders receive upon detection. The level of deterrence depends on the would-be offender s expected sanction the product of the probability of detection and the size of the total sanction The total sanction that corporations and managers receive for detected misconduct depends not just on the courts but also on the market s reaction to the news of misconduct. For example corporations can bear significant market or reputational sanctions for fraud against customers or suppliers as when news of fraud against one or a few customers leads other customers to take their business elsewhere possibly driving the offending corporation into insolvency. The size of the court sanction necessary to generate a given total sanction and thus the level of deterrence is of course higher for offenders and offenses where no market sanction is present. Two types of offenses for which market sanctions on the corporation appear not to be good substitutes for court sanctions are environmental offenses that harm third parties and frauds committed by managers against shareholders Whatever the source and size of the total sanction deterrence depends on managers or employees who are in a position to influence corporate conduct believing that they will be held accountable for any harms that arise from misconduct should it occur with a high enough probability to deter the offense. Accordingly recent reforms highlight the importance of clarifying management accountability and putting more resources into enforcement. Accountability and diligent enforcement are necessary for laws and regulations to do their work of promoting good corporate governance. Economic research has drawn attention to the fact that the effectiveness of rules generally depends on the effort put into their enforcement in addition to the size of the penalty | Economic Report of the President disclosure rules actually improve the quality of information that investors receive remains a subject of debate among researchers almost years after the SEC s creation. One study of the effects of disclosure regulations made use of the fact that although access to information was not as good in as it is now investors did have better access in those days to information about corporations whose stock had been traded for many years or was traded over the NYSE than about other firms. If the new disclosure regulations implemented under the act had any effect one would expect that effect to be greater for new unseasoned securities and for securities of corporations that were traded over the smaller regional exchanges which lacked the strong listing standards and the following of brokers and investment advisers that the NYSE had by then accumulated. That study which examined the effects of initial disclosure requirements under the act concluded that there was such an effect : the act s passage contributed to a significant decline in the dispersion of securities prices particularly among unseasoned non-NYSE securities A growing number of federally mandated disclosure rules have been issued over the decades since passage of the act. During the 1970s and 1980s economists intensively examined the role of information in financial markets. They came to understand that information is a kind of commodity : it is costly to produce and has value to those who possess it. Modern economic research on the effects of disclosure regulation accordingly considers not just the effect of requiring disclosure on whatever information is produced but also how the requirement to disclose information affects the incentive to produce information. Contemporary research on the effects of disclosure regulations thus focuses on how those rules affect the net quality or value of information produced The Williams Act of Evidence on the effect of the Williams Act amendments to the Securities Exchange Act of provides a good illustration of how disclosure regulations can have unintended adverse consequences that offset and potentially cancel out the benefit they are designed to confer. During the 1960s concerns arose that in corporate takeover attempts shareholders were being pressured to sell or tender their shares without being given enough time or information to make an informed decision. To address these concerns the Williams Act introduced regulations under which acquirers today must disclose certain information such as their intention with regard to the target company within days of obtaining percent of any class of a company s voting securities. This can enable investors to do a better job of selecting the acquirer from among the alternatives conditional on any acquirer making an offer Yet research into the consequences of the Williams Act uncovered a more subtle effect through which the act makes investors worse off. By requiring disclosure and delay the Williams Act reduces the value of searching for Chapter | socially valuable acquisition prospects. It does this by enabling others to free-ride on an innovative acquisition bid tendering their own offers and thereby raising the price that the innovator must pay and reducing its share of the total value of the acquisition. This is reflected in the increased premium that acquirers paid to the shareholders of target firms after passage of the act : from to percent of the pre-offer stock price on average over the ensuing decade. ( Related State laws accounted for an additional increase : from to percent of the pre-bid price. ) Moreover these increased premiums appear to have come at the cost of a reduced supply of takeover bids as some ( but clearly not all ) prospective bidders shifted their resources to other pursuits. Some shareholders thus appear to have benefited at the expense of others : those who still received bids after the act was passed got larger gains than they would have otherwise yet those who did not receive bids that would have been offered had the act not been passed got nothing and a valuable source of market discipline was lost Financial Analysts Reports. Most recently regulators have confronted the fact that some investors including small investors receive information about corporations from financial analysts reports. Given the extensive disclosure requirements that corporations already face it might seem surprising that analysts reports could have anything new and informative to offer. Research into how stock prices respond to the release of those reports however suggests that they are informative. Stock prices tend to increase when analysts issue new buy recommendations or raise their ratings of corporations and decline when analysts issue new sell recommendations or lower their ratings Concerns have been raised that some analysts may face conflicts of interest that could lead to biases in their reports. Conflicts can arise when an analyst is writing a report on a firm that has done a significant amount of business with the analyst s employer or that faces the strong prospect of doing so in the future. Research suggests that investors tend to take analysts affiliations into account when deciding how to use the information in their reports : investors appear to place less weight on reports of analysts whose employers may present them with these conflicts. How and to what extent investors take into account the potential for conflicts when evaluating analysts reports and the corporate governance context in which analysts prepare their reports is an important area of ongoing research. The findings are expected to shed light on the appropriate direction for corporate governance reform as it affects the supply of information to investors | Economic Report of the President Corporate Governance Reform One of the perennial challenges of running a business is adapting to change As businesses have grown in size and complexity this challenge has grown as well. To keep up with changes in the marketplace corporate participants including both managers and investors must confront the demands associated with new technology changing consumer preferences and the requirements of the public sector. As technology and changes in the structure of markets in Europe and elsewhere have made it easier to trade across international boundaries new challenges have emerged. Some of these developments have placed U.S. corporations and the laws and regulations governing them under relatively close scrutiny over the past decade as other governments have turned to the successful U.S. corporate governance system as a possible template for creating new systems or modifying old ones. The ability of U.S corporations to adapt readily to change is critical to their profitability and accordingly their ability to continue operating as independent enterprises The recent reforms of the U.S. corporate governance system are indeed the latest in a history of dramatic changes going back over a century. These include changes arising from five distinct merger waves ( including those of the 1980s and 1990s ) from the introduction of the SEC in from the imposition of constraints on institutional stock ownership through the Investment Company Act of and other legislation and from the continuing modification of regulations under the securities laws The recent reforms were marked by a speech by the President on March The President announced a Ten-Point Plan to Improve Corporate Responsibility and Protect America s Shareholders calling for a concerted response to the emerging news that some of the Nation s largest corporations had not truthfully reported their earnings and that this would harm investors including employees whose pensions were invested in the company s stock. This plan applies three core principles of effective governance : accuracy and accessibility of information management accountability and auditor independence The private sector s response was almost immediate. Individual managers and investors undertook a careful reexamination of the governance practices of their corporations ; the resulting changes received widespread public attention in many cases. The most visible private sector initiatives were undertaken by the self-regulatory organizations whose rules public corporations must follow as a condition for the public trading of their securities Table shows how some of the specific initiatives undertaken by two such organizations the NYSE and the Nasdaq implement the core principles underlying the President s plan for reform. The table reflects proposals that were announced between April and June of and then updated during Chapter | late and early to account for SEC-initiated regulatory changes under new Federal legislation passed during July As regulators self-regulatory organizations corporations investors and others responded to this call for action the President in July signed into law the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of This legislation provides the courts and Federal agencies with new tools to strengthen the ability of outside investors to verify the quality of managerial decision making. The act applies the core principles underlying the President s plan. It addresses each of the points of TABLE Some Corporate Governance Initiatives of NYSE and Nasdaq Initiative Principle Information accuracy and accessibility NYSE and Nasdaq proposals require that listed companies publish codes of business conduct and ethics and guidelines for corporate governance. NYSE proposal further requires disclosure of board-approved exemptions Nasdaq proposal requires that a press release immediately disclose a going-concern qualification in an audit opinion NYSE and Nasdaq proposals require disclosure of any permissible exemptions to their corporate governance requirements by non-U.S. issuers Management accountability NYSE and Nasdaq proposals require independent director approval of director nominations and of CEO compensation NYSE and Nasdaq proposals require shareholder approval of all equity-based compensation programs. NYSE further disallows a broker from voting on such plans without customer instruction NYSE and Nasdaq proposals require that a majority of directors be independent ( except at control companies ) and set a more stringent definition of independence which excludes persons with any financial or personal relationship with the company NYSE proposal requires CEOs of all companies to certify annually that they know of no violation of NYSE governance standards NYSE has ability to issue public reprimand letter for companies in violation of its governance requirements Nasdaq proposal requires independent director approval of all related-party transactions NYSE and Nasdaq proposals require that nonmanagement directors meet regularly without management Auditor independence NYSE and Nasdaq proposals require that the audit committee have responsibility to hire and fire the auditor NYSE and Nasdaq proposals require audit committee approval of all nonaudit services of auditors NYSE and Nasdaq proposals entail heightened standards of independence for audit committee members in that compensation is allowed only for board or committee service NYSE and Nasdaq proposals require financial literacy of all audit committee members and accounting or financial management expertise of at least one Sources : New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) and Nasdaq Stock Market ( Nasdaq ) | Economic Report of the President that plan as Table illustrates. In doing so it accompanies the actions that many others have begun to take and continue to take to strengthen each of the key elements of a strong U.S. corporate governance system TABLE The President s Ten-Point Plan and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act Principle Ten-Point Plan Sarbanes-Oxley Filing deadlines are accelerated CEOs should personally vouch for the veracity timeliness and fairness of their companies public disclosures including their financial statements CEOs and CFOs must verify fairness and accuracy of company reports. Individuals committing " knowing and willful " violations of this requirement are subject to years in prison Following a restatement of earnings executives must forfeit bonuses incentive-based compensation and profits from stock sales for the previous year CEOs or other officers who clearly abuse their power should lose their right to serve in any corporate leadership position The SEC may bar individuals from serving as officers and directors Corporate leaders should be required to tell the public promptly whenever they buy or sell company stock for personal gain Auditor independence Pro forma accounting statements must be reconciled with generally accepted accounting principles ( GAAP ) in company reports. Material off-balance-sheet transactions must be disclosed in company reports CEOs and other officers should not be allowed to profit from erroneous financial statements Management accountability Each investor should have quarterly access to information needed to judge a firm 's financial performance condition and risk Each investor should have prompt access to critical information Information accuracy and accessibility Management and principal stockholders must report transactions by end of second business day Investors should have complete confidence in the independence and integrity of companies ' auditors The audit committee hires and oversees accounting firms. Companies must disclose whether one member of the audit committee is a " financial expert. " Auditors disclose all critical accounting practices to audit committee Auditors may not provide any of at least eight specified services for audit clients and must obtain prior approval from the audit committee for any services provided An independent regulatory board should ensure that the accounting profession is held to the highest ethical standards The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board ( " the Board " ) is funded by accounting support fees assessed on public companies The SEC will appoint five full-time members in consultation with the Federal Reserve Chairman and the Treasury Secretary Only two members may be or have been certified public accounts ( CPAs ) The Chair may not have been a CPA for years prior to service The Board may compel information from registered accounting firms and their clients in some circumstances The authors of accounting standards must be responsive to the needs of investors The Board shall include in its auditing standards the requirement that firms employ GAAP Firms accounting systems should be compared with best practices not simply against minimum standards The auditor 's report to audit committee must compare company 's audit practices with the auditor 's preferred treatment Sources : The White House and the Congress Chapter | Information Accuracy and Accessibility Virtually all aspects of recent corporate governance reform seek to promote investors timely access to information about the financial performance and operations of public corporations. Better informed investors can more readily limit their exposure to losses stemming from the agency costs of separating ownership from control and can more quickly act to remove underperforming managers as warranted The Sarbanes-Oxley Act promotes the accuracy and timeliness of financial information in several ways. First the act introduces new disclosure requirements. It requires that directors officers and principal investors disclose their transactions in company stock more quickly than before : by the end of the second day after the transaction rather than days after the close of the calendar month as previously required. This enables investors to react more quickly to the information contained in such disclosures. Indeed more rapid disclosure strengthens the capacity of outsiders generally to act on news of insider trading. The act also requires that corporations make more information available about the quality of their internal control structures including whether they have special ethics rules in place to guide the actions of senior financial officers and whether their board of directors audit committee includes any financial experts ( and if not why not ) Financial analysts and auditors are also expressly required to make certain disclosures under the act. Each must publicly disclose to investors whether any conflicts of interest might exist to limit their independence from influences other than the desire to serve the interests of shareholders. This provides an additional check against any conflicts that might remain even after the other provisions of the act and the other reforms accompanying the act are taken into account Second the act seeks to improve the effectiveness of the many existing U.S. securities disclosure regulations by dramatically increasing some of the sanctions for violating them. In promoting deterrence these sanctions complement the higher probability of detection that violators face from stepped-up Federal enforcement under the Corporate Fraud Task Force. The act provides for a fourfold increase in the maximum prison term for criminal fraud to years rather than years and an even higher maximum term of years for securities fraud. Both of these increases in prison terms are in addition to fines and other nonmonetary sanctions. Recognizing that penalties can not be imposed without evidence that a violation has occurred the act also increases the maximum sanction for destroying documents allowing courts to impose fines and terms of imprisonment of up to years for this offense. The most severe penalties such as imprisonment tend to apply only to violations found to have occurred knowingly with the stiffest sentences reserved for violations that are both knowing and willful | Economic Report of the President Finally the act creates new rules and institutions that are designed to shape managers and auditors choices concerning the accuracy and timeliness of corporate financial reporting. In doing so the act promotes compliance with existing disclosure rules in addition to strengthening managers and auditors incentives generally to act in the interests of investors. ( These provisions apply the principles of management accountability and auditor independence and will be discussed in greater detail under those headings. ) Management Accountability The second core principle of the President s plan is the promotion of management accountability. The managers of public corporations initially oversee the preparation of the financial reports that their companies file periodically under existing securities regulations. Holding them accountable for the quality of those reports can thus serve as a further check on their accuracy and completeness. Management accountability has implications beyond the quality of financial reporting however. Managers who expect the quality of their companies performance to become known to investors face more powerful incentives to serve the investors interest The Sarbanes-Oxley Act promotes management accountability by clarifying the roles and responsibilities of various corporate officers by introducing new sanctions for managers who fail to live up to those responsibilities and by requiring that corporations adjust their internal governance structures so that outside investors can more readily verify the strength of management s incentive to serve the shareholders interest. For example the act requires that CEOs and chief financial officers ( CFOs ) certify the accuracy and completeness of the financial reports that their companies file periodically under existing securities regulations. The act makes it a Federal criminal offense subject to fines of up to $ million to knowingly engage in false certification of these reports. In the extreme case where a CEO or CFO knowingly and intentionally provides false certification the maximum sanction climbs to $ million. In case this is not enough to deter false certification CEOs and CFOs who falsely certify financial reports are also required to forfeit any bonuses incentive compensation or other gains that they might have received from the company during the year after the issuance of a false report The act also clarifies the roles and responsibilities of other corporate officers besides CEOs and CFOs. It expressly charges corporations audit committees with responsibility for overseeing the selection and compensation of the company s outside audit firm. As already mentioned audit committees must reveal whether any of their members are financial experts and if not why not A corporation s attorneys are expressly held responsible for reporting any evidence they might receive of a violation of the act a breach of duty or other Chapter | violation to the chief legal counsel to the CEO or to the audit committee or other independent directors ( if other parties appear not to respond to the information in a timely manner ) This increased accountability is supported by substantial sanctions for violations of rules under the act Auditor Independence The creation of a special national board to oversee the auditing of public companies financial reports is perhaps the most visible corporate governance reform under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. In creating this new board the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board the act introduces a new check on the quality of audit services supplied to public corporations whose securities are listed on U.S. exchanges. The economic role that the board will play in overseeing public accounting companies is to strengthen the auditors incentives to do their jobs properly and with integrity even in the face of pressure from managers who might in some instances prefer not to accurately report their companies performance Under the act the oversight board will promote the independence of auditors in several ways. To increase the chance of detecting any future misconduct by auditors each public accounting firm must register with the board and submit to periodic reviews of its performance. The board is given the authority to act upon any evidence of auditor misconduct by undertaking investigations. Upon registering with the board each registered public accounting firm agrees to cooperate with the board s investigations. Such cooperation includes retaining audit work papers and other documents for a minimum of years and providing those records to the board on request When the oversight board discovers evidence of misconduct it has the power under the act to impose sanctions. It can impose fines on individual auditors and the auditing firms that employ them. It can also bar auditors from supplying their services to any U.S.-listed corporation temporarily or permanently. The combined effect of this new monitoring effort and these newly instituted sanctions is to increase the expected cost of misconduct to any registered accounting firm or employee The act goes beyond direct oversight of auditing firms however to address the conditions under which external auditors are chosen and employed. First a corporation s choice of auditor must be made by a committee of independent directors who are not employees of the company and have no relationship with it other than as directors. This provision is designed to limit the influence that managers who prepare financial reports exercise over the choice of auditor Second for each of its clients the accounting firm that does the audit must periodically assign a new person as the lead audit partner on each client s account. Both of these provisions limit the opportunities for collusion between auditor and client. Finally registered public accounting firms are no longer | Economic Report of the President permitted to sell certain services other than auditing to their audit customers This addresses the concern that an auditor might choose to overlook problems in a company s financial reports if it believes that the company might reward it with nonaudit business. Any exceptions to these basic rules must be disclosed to investors for example through the filing of reports by the audit committee with the SEC To summarize the Sarbanes-Oxley Act applies the principle of auditor independence in two basic ways. It increases the sanctions that auditors can expect to face if they engage in misconduct thus encouraging them to comply with certain professional standards to be set forth by the new oversight board The act also recognizes that some forms of compliance rely on the strength of the auditor s incentive to serve the investors interest. It strengthens this incentive by requiring that public accounting firms and their clients eliminate potential conflicts of interest by making certain fundamental and verifiable changes in their business practices The principle of independence is also relevant to the conduct of the oversight board. To serve as an effective monitor and enforcer of the supply of independent audit services the board must itself be free from conflicts between the interests of investors and those of specific auditors and audit clients. Accordingly the act requires that a majority of the board s members be drawn from outside the accounting industry : members must not have supplied audit services to any client in recent years. The requirement that exactly two of the board s five members be drawn from the accounting profession reflects a tradeoff between the value of specialized expertise and the value of independence from the possible incentive conflicts that such expertise can represent. This tradeoff is similar to that which public corporations face in selecting members for their boards of directors Corporate Governance and the Global Economy The change currently taking place in U.S. corporate governance is but one wave in a sea of change internationally. This change is shaped in part by globalization which encourages countries to adopt positive features of other systems while retaining the best features of their own. International competition fosters good corporate governance by favoring the best corporate governance systems. In many respects private and public sector institutions in other countries are moving toward corporate governance systems that look more like that of the United States a tribute to the merits of the U.S. system At the same time the U.S. Government recently lifted some of the legal rules that had previously restricted bank participation in the underwriting of equity which has been commonplace in some other countries Chapter | The growing similarity among different countries systems of corporate governance has captured the attention of researchers interested in how economic and legal systems interact. Their findings illustrate the importance of market forces in shaping the institutions of corporate governance in addition to their role in guiding the strategic and the day-to-day decisions of investors and managers. Researchers have found for example that European and Japanese corporations tend to have relatively concentrated ownership structures with a relatively few persons or institutions often controlling large blocks of shares. In contrast corporations in the United States and other common law countries such as the United Kingdom tend to have relatively dispersed ownership an outcome facilitated by strong securities markets rigorous disclosure standards transparency and relatively active markets for corporate control. One study found that in the United States only of the largest corporations have a single shareholder who possesses percent or more of the voting rights on the board ; in Germany in contrast of the largest corporations have such a shareholder. Yet these differences are shrinking. Both the value of outstanding stock as a percentage of GDP and the value of equity raised through initial public offerings as a percentage of GDP rose substantially in European countries during the 1990s. Over this period the market for corporate control became more international. One study reported that between and takeovers involving a European party went from percent to percent of the total market value of all transactions worldwide Meanwhile in the United States the enactment of the Gramm-LeachBliley Act in relaxed previous prohibitions against bank participation in the ownership of stock. Banks in other developed countries such as Germany and Japan appear to use the information they obtain as lenders to play a more effective role as stockholders in monitoring corporate management. Banks participation in U.S. corporations as both lenders and shareholders may similarly improve corporate efficiency. To the extent investors view increased bank participation in both lending and stock ownership as committing corporations to stronger performance the effect may be not just more efficient monitoring of management but better investor assurance as well Conclusion Corporate governance systems by establishing checks and balances that influence the decisions of corporate managers affect corporate efficiency and by implication economic growth. To the extent that these systems are observable that is transparent to outsiders such as households and other prospective investors they can affect their willingness to do business with the | Economic Report of the President corporation. Strong managers who seek growth for their corporations thus stand to gain by creating strong corporate governance systems. In doing so they can distinguish themselves and their corporations from others with less promising prospects Major changes in the legal institutions that support U.S. corporate governance occurred last year. These changes and many private sector reform initiatives illustrate the application of three core principles underlying a plan for corporate governance reform that the President set forth in March These principles are familiar to economists : information accuracy and accessibility management accountability and auditor independence. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of by strengthening certain legal institutions promotes greater accuracy and accessibility of information and addresses concerns about the independence of external auditors. The establishment of the Corporate Fraud Task Force in July along with new enforcement initiatives by the SEC acts on the principle of management accountability by subjecting offending managers and their organizations to a higher probability of getting caught and greater sanctions when they do get caught. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act further strengthens management accountability by allowing the courts to impose stronger sanctions on white-collar offenders and instructing the U.S. Sentencing Commission to update related sentencing guidelines to ensure their consistency with current information on the seriousness of the offense and with the new statutory increases in maximum sanctions. The act indeed implements each of the points of the plan for reform that the President articulated in his March speech Perhaps the most important reforms along the lines of the President s plan however have occurred in the private sector. Many managers and management teams have instituted improvements in the internal governance of their corporations ; their actions are apparent in numerous press releases and in disclosures to the SEC. The appropriate reform for each corporation ultimately depends on the specific market conditions that it faces. Changes specific to individual corporations include replacement of top managers and auditors and adjustments in the compensation of top management and how it is reported. More dramatic and far-ranging are the proposals by the NYSE and the Nasdaq to tighten the standards that public corporations must meet in order for their stock to be listed and traded on those markets. Some of these proposals follow early action taken by the Chairman of the SEC to request that these and other private self-regulatory organizations revisit and revise their standards in early following the President s call for reform. The SEC and other Federal agencies will implement reforms under the SarbanesOxley Act in phases over the next several years U.S. managers investors and regulators are thus embarked on making changes to U.S. corporate governance of a scope not seen since the creation of Chapter | the SEC itself. The current push for reform will make use of new knowledge gleaned from recent events and will apply this learning toward improving the quality of managers and board members commitments to act in shareholders interest. Despite their scope however these changes do not fundamentally depart from the evolutionary process that U.S. corporate governance has followed over the past century. The fundamental building blocks of corporate governance remain unchanged Competition will continue to shape the evolution of U.S corporate governance. This competition will affect different corporations differently depending on the nature of the markets in which they operate. Many of these markets have become more global in recent years and this globalization will continue to place pressure on managers investors and public officials to confront the issues that changing markets and technology can raise. The capacity of individual corporations and of the Nation s markets and public sector institutions to promote increasingly effective resource utilization will depend on their continuing success in committing corporate managers to act in the best interests of shareholders and other investors so as to limit the agency costs of separating ownership from control. In so doing they will continue to foster the efficient growth that the corporate sector of the economy has enjoyed through its ongoing access to deep and resilient financial markets | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R Policies for Dynamic Labor Markets A lthough the economy continued to grow in employment growth did not keep pace. From December through December nonfarm payroll employment fell by a small figure compared with total employment of almost million. During the same months the unemployment rate hovered between and percent. The lack of change in these statistics paints a picture of a labor market that is static and stagnant. But this picture is misleading : dynamic change remains the most fundamental characteristic of the U.S. labor market even today. The conventional misperception stems in part from the nature of most labor market statistics which by necessity show the situation at only a single point in time and which meld the often very different experiences of individual workers and households into a single aggregate measure A closer look suggests ripples even crosscurrents beneath the surface The unemployment rate may have changed little in but the names and faces of the individual workers who are unemployed do change. What makes the labor market appear stagnant is that the official payroll employment and unemployment statistics that are the most visible indicators of the health of the labor market can not capture its true dynamism. For example in December percent of unemployed workers reported being unemployed for weeks or more ; this point-in-time statistic may suggest that people who are unemployed this month will be unemployed next month. Yet a recent study of employment flows found that the majority of workers seeking work in any given month are not the same individuals who will seek work the following month. Similarly over the same period in in which payroll employment scarcely grew between million and million workers started new jobs each month and roughly the same number quit or lost their jobs. This argues that dynamism not stasis is the essence of the U.S. labor market This dynamism and its implications for the design of economic policy are central themes of this chapter. Within these broad themes the chapter discusses the rewards to skill and work generated by the U.S. labor market and how government policies can foster long-run job mobility by encouraging skill development and education. The labor market and the economy as a whole today face multiple challenges : in the short run the challenge is to move past the recent downturn in the business cycle ; in the long run it is to address the risks associated with dynamism : technological change and growth inevitably lead to the destruction of some jobs and to the decline of certain industries. If the Nation can maintain the dynamism the flexibility and mobility of its labor markets while providing all workers with meaningful insurance against unemployment and loss of income both the cyclical and the structural economic challenges can be met without impairing those features of the labor market that foster long-run growth Economic downturns are a difficult time for many workers and their families as growth in employment slows and unemployment and layoffs increase. The recent economic slowdown has been no exception. Flexible labor markets however can lessen the impact of a downturn on workers and probably have done so since the recent contraction began. Although the unemployment rate did increase sharply during the contraction of and persisted at levels near percent in unemployment remains low relative to the experience in previous recessions since World War II. Job creation and destruction continued despite the decline in nonfarm payroll employment Workers do not encounter economic difficulties only in recessions : even economic growth or more precisely the structural change that accompanies that growth makes some workers worse off. Advances in technology and the expansion of free trade provide benefits for consumers and for the vast majority of workers yet these same changes do real harm to some workers in some areas of the economy. Workers displaced by technology or trade may remain unemployed for long periods or drop out of the labor force altogether. When they again find jobs they are likely to earn less than at the jobs they lost Government has a role in assisting both those who suffer disproportionately during times of economic hardship and those who fail to benefit from or are harmed by economic progress. Among other things government can provide retraining services and relocation assistance to those who would benefit from them and it can reward reemployment through appropriate provisions in the tax code in social programs and elsewhere to encourage rapid reentry into the work force. In these and other ways effectively designed government policies can help make labor markets work better. However policies that fail to recognize the dynamics inherent in these markets can impair long-term economic mobility and the well-being of workers. Policies will support labor markets and help them work better if they recognize their dynamism and avoid undermining their ability to reward work and skill Social insurance through unemployment benefits and similar programs is an important mechanism by which government can assist those hurt or threatened by the forces of economic change. Yet policymakers face a tradeoff when seeking to provide social insurance. Such insurance is valuable in sustaining the well-being of workers and their families during periods of | Economic Report of the President unemployment but it can also distort both their incentives and their behavior undermining what the U.S. labor market does best namely reward work and skill and match workers to jobs. In a static unchanging world policies that simply transfer public resources to those who are temporarily poor would not distort their behavior or lead to dependency on welfare. But in a world of continuous change in employment and unemployment poorly designed policies can inadvertently inhibit upward mobility. Although this tradeoff can not be entirely avoided labor market policies are more effective when recognizing the dynamism of these markets they provide social insurance in a manner that least distorts workers incentives to stay employed and to improve their employment situation The objective of social insurance is to guard individuals and households against sharp fluctuations in their standard of living that threaten their wellbeing. A standard assumption in economics is that most people would prefer their consumption to be certain and steady over their lifetime rather than uncertain and variable. However because employment and earnings vary in response to events outside their control most people find that their incomes are not certain and steady. This creates a mismatch over time between their desired consumption and their actual ability to consume which they seek to remedy by smoothing their incomes over their lives. They do this in a number of ways. One way is by saving part of their income when income is relatively high and by dissaving ( that is drawing down their savings or borrowing ) when it is relatively low. Another is by purchasing private insurance policies against unexpected and costly events such as large health expenses disability or premature death. A third is by relying on informal private insurance mechanisms such as support from family members and charities when times are bad. Finally the public safety net of which social insurance is a vital part acts as a backstop in case these private insurance mechanisms prove insufficient For most people any spells of unemployment that occur during their working years are temporary. Public insurance programs would ideally therefore provide assistance only for a similarly limited duration. However a well-known problem in insurance markets is that of moral hazard. Moral hazard arises when people who have insurance against a given risk have less of an incentive to take actions to minimize that risk than they would if they lacked insurance. For example people who have generous health insurance may consume more medical services than they really need because the additional services cost them little or nothing. Similarly subsidized flood insurance may encourage building and rebuilding of homes in flood plains because the insurer or the government not the homeowner pays when the house is destroyed in the next flood Chapter | Moral hazard in social insurance can take the form of dependency on welfare. For example for decades the Aid to Families with Dependent Children ( AFDC ) program provided income support for the poor but also generated substantial work disincentives that encouraged people to stay in poverty and out of the work force. The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of ( PRWORA ) transformed this system into one that acts more like insurance against temporary poverty and less like a permanent transfer program. PRWORA the most important piece of welfare reform legislation in several decades replaced AFDC with a new program Temporary Assistance for Needy Families ( TANF ) and allowed States to implement innovative provisions in their welfare programs. ( Many States had already implemented welfare reforms before by obtaining waivers from Federal welfare requirements. ) These changes combined with time limits on welfare receipt and work requirements as a condition for benefits quickly led to a large decline in caseloads. Research has found that these reforms led to increases in work earnings and income and a reduction in poverty. Other effects included an increase in the marriage rate and a reduction in the prevalence of single motherhood among women with little education ( many of whom likely would have been welfare recipients had welfare reform not happened ) In addition States that placed a cap on welfare benefits as opposed to increasing benefits if a mother had an additional child while on welfare saw a reduction in out-of-wedlock childbirths. Welfare reform under PRWORA thus provides a striking example of how well-designed policies can meet the needs of those struggling in the face of labor market change while maintaining the incentives that underlie long-term economic growth The remainder of the chapter proceeds as follows. It first discusses the dynamics of employment and unemployment and provides examples of unemployment policies that are made with a dynamic labor market or with a static labor market in mind. Second it discusses the dynamics of participation in welfare and other social assistance programs and contrasts those programs that are designed with an understanding of dynamic labor markets with those that are not. Finally it discusses policies that support mobility and dynamism in labor markets by fostering investments in skill. For example in January the President proposed the creation of Personal Reemployment Accounts. These would provide unemployed workers with up to $ to use for training child care transportation moving costs or other expenses associated with finding a new job. Recipients who take a new job within weeks would be allowed to keep the funds remaining in the account as a reemployment bonus. This would give unemployed workers an incentive to find work faster | Economic Report of the President Employment Dynamics and Labor Market Policy Whether from the perspective of the economy as a whole or from that of the individual worker labor markets work best when they are fluid and flexible that is when workers and employers can change their mutually agreed-upon working arrangements as they see fit to meet changing needs Over the long term the U.S. labor market has indeed been full of change. A vibrant economy created over million new jobs between and Even though the population of the United States aged and over grew by more than million over the same period a greater fraction of Americans are working today than in the past : civilian employment rose from percent of the population aged and over in December to percent in December Women enjoyed a particularly large rise in their employment-to-population ratio over this period : for example in December percent of the female population were employed but percent had jobs in December ( Chart ) Meanwhile the proportion of the male population who were employed fell slightly from percent to percent Chapter | Blacks and Hispanics also experienced rapid growth in employment since ( Chart ) Indeed employment-to-population ratios for both these groups rose by more ( and percentage points respectively ) than did the ratio for whites ( percentage points ) By the ratios for Hispanics and whites were almost equal. Unfortunately although employment grew faster during this period among blacks than among Hispanics or whites the black employment-to-population ratio remains lower than for whites having started from a much lower level. ( Comparisons of employment by race and ethnicity are somewhat clouded because the categories of Hispanic black and white are not mutually exclusive : some Hispanics identify themselves as white and others as black. Available data do not allow a comparison of nonHispanic whites and non-Hispanic blacks with Hispanics. ) The growth in employment in the 1980s and 1990s opened the door to increased economic well-being for many more Americans. Workers with a great deal of education and skill benefit from the greater availability of jobs but so do workers with less education and fewer skills : one study indicates that at both low and moderate skill levels more labor market experience means higher earnings ; even entry-level jobs provide real economic opportunities. For both lower skill and higher skill workers real wages grow roughly percent a year during the worker s first years in the labor market | Economic Report of the President Why does time spent in employment even in low-skilled jobs promote wage growth ? One reason is that labor market experience fosters skill development. In a modern economy school is not the only place where skills are learned : family members and employers play a central role alongside formal education in developing skills. One study estimates that job mobility workplace education and on-the-job learning account for as much as half of all skill formation In the dynamic view of labor markets job changes are not necessarily events to be minimized at all costs but rather are often changes for the better ; for example job changes can lead to a better matching of workers to jobs. Job mobility also contributes to skill development and wage growth Young workers change jobs often : a study shows that the typical young worker holds seven jobs over his or her first years of labor market experience and one-third of the wage growth that young workers experience occurs when they change one job for another. Indeed two-thirds of lifetime wage growth occurs within the first years of labor market experience Together this evidence indicates that this job search and job tryout process playing the labor market field is a crucial component in the economic progress of young workers Job mobility is not limited to the young of course. Studies show that one-third of new full-time jobs end within months and one-half to twothirds end within years. Not surprisingly then a large fraction of the work force roughly one-fifth have been at their current job for less than a year However once a worker has found a good match a job in which the worker s skills are valued by the employer and the worker is sufficiently compensated both monetarily and in nonmonetary benefits and amenities the job often turns into a long-term employment relationship to the benefit of both worker and employer. Recent studies indicate that such relationships remain common ( Box ) The pattern seems to be that many workers switch jobs several times until they find the right one ratcheting up their wages along the way Job mobility and labor market experience especially for young workers are an important component of overall income mobility in the United States In fact studies of overall income mobility that include the benefits of job mobility and experience find much more mobility than do studies that implicitly exclude these sources of income growth. Box provides a further description of these two contrasting ways of looking at income mobility Nonwage benefits are also an important indicator of workers well-being For the majority of households health insurance coverage is linked to employment. But even many households with working members lack health insurance. Data from the Current Population Survey conducted by the Bureau of the Census and the Bureau of Labor Statistics show that out of a Chapter | Box Has There Been a Decline in Long-Term Employment ? The fraction of the work force in long-term employment relationships has been falling over time. In over percent of the work force were in employment relationships that had lasted over years and over percent had been in employment relationships that had lasted at least years. In contrast a study found that only about percent of employment relationships had lasted at least years and about percent had lasted more than years. However this decline in the fraction of long-term jobs is largely the result of the rapid expansion in employment that has occurred since rather than a decline in the number of long-term relationships. Workers who are new to the labor force have short job tenure by definition. There has been no increase in the incidence of job loss among workers with long-term employment relationships U.S. population of almost million million lacked health insurance at any given time during However just as the unemployment numbers fail to capture the dynamics of the labor market so too these commonly cited estimates of the population without health insurance fail to tell the whole story. The Census figure probably overestimates the number of people who go without insurance for a full year. Data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey ( MEPS ) conducted by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality show that million people were uninsured throughout a recent 2-year period and that million were without insurance at some time during that period. For those who lose coverage the median spell without insurance is months In the extreme the combination of a high rate of workers changing jobs short durations of many employment relationships and short average durations of unemployment could reflect either of two possible scenarios. One is that a large fraction of workers are experiencing frequent but temporary layoffs and recalls such that a re-sorting of workers is taking place among an unchanging set of existing jobs. The other is that workers are fluidly pursuing job opportunities that are continually being created to replace other jobs that are continually being destroyed. Both scenarios are likely at work but studies show that a substantial amount to percent of worker turnover is driven by the destruction and creation of jobs. Each year roughly percent of all existing jobs are destroyed and a roughly equal number of new jobs take their place Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey ( JOLTS ) document that the common notion of a static labor market does not fit the facts even during periods of slow employment | Economic Report of the President growth. The JOLTS gathers data on job openings and job turnovers from a nationally representative sample of roughly business establishments Those data reveal that in October there were million job openings that is available but unfilled positions the equivalent of percent of total employment of roughly million. Moreover in that same month million workers percent of total employment were hired into new positions ( from other positions or from nonemployment ) and a nearly equal number quit or lost their jobs. The majority of these separations were not layoffs however ; million of those million workers left their jobs voluntarily. Thus although nonfarm payrolls increased by only between September and October and unemployment increased slightly ( from percent to percent ) there was a large amount of movement both into and out of jobs What kinds of policies work best to support workers in need of assistance while maintaining the dynamism of a constantly changing labor market ? The Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) is an example of a policy that works Box 3-2.Two Ways to Look at Income Mobility Some studies find substantial income mobility among Americans whereas others find much less. The differences between these studies depend in large part on whether the income mobility that comes with increased labor market experience is included in the analysis. Studies that include all sources of income mobility are sometimes referred to as absolute measures of mobility whereas those that compare incomes over time of cohorts of individuals of the same age and approximately the same level of experience are sometimes called relative measures of mobility Studies of absolute mobility find that percent of individuals in the bottom quintile of the income distribution were in a different quintile years later. This finding suggests that most people at the bottom of the income distribution move up as they gain labor market experience. Even studies that examine the absolute mobility of men in their prime working years ( ages to ) after many job changes and after much wage growth has already occurred find a substantial amount of mobility Studies of relative mobility find less movement out of the bottom quintile : only about half of workers in that group are no longer there after years. These studies show that much of an individual s upward mobility is shared among all members of the cohort. Changes in the relative ranking of incomes among members of a cohort are a good measure of social mobility whereas changes in the absolute level of incomes are a good measure of mobility in economic well-being. Taken together these studies show a substantial amount of both concepts of mobility Chapter | because it encourages rather than discourages mobility in the labor market ( Box ) It does so because its implicit subsidy to earnings which can be as large as percent increases the rewards associated with work for the lowincome individuals to whom it is targeted. The credit thus provides an incentive for those without jobs ( including those on public assistance ) to enter or reenter the labor force. Indeed several studies have found that the EITC increases labor force participation among those eligible. The effect is particularly strong for single parents. One study found that between and the EITC accounted for roughly two-thirds of the 4.7-percentagepoint rise in labor force participation among single mothers with children By the labor force participation rate of these women had risen an additional percentage points ( Chart ) In addition studies have found the EITC to be more than twice as effective as the minimum wage at lifting families with children out of poverty partly because of the program s positive employment incentives Box 3-3.The Earned Income Tax Credit The EITC is a tax credit for the working poor. Benefits are paid only to those who work and these benefits rise as earnings increase Because the tax credit is refundable ( that is it can exceed the amount of income tax otherwise due ) families who pay little or no income tax can benefit fully from the program The program works as follows. Families are eligible for the credit if a member of the family works. The benefit amount depends on the family s labor market earnings the number of children in the family and the marital status of the tax filer. In a family with two or more children receives a subsidy of cents for each dollar of earned income up to $ From that level the credit remains stable at $ until earnings reach $ ( $ for a married couple ) Single individuals and families without children are also eligible but typically receive less. The credit phases out over a range of income from $ through $ ( $ to $ for a married couple ) Over this range there is a relatively high implicit marginal tax rate on earnings. For example for each dollar earned between $ and $ a family with two or more children sees its EITC benefit reduced by roughly cents ( Chart ) According to the latest estimate from the Bureau of the Census the EITC lifted million people out of poverty in | Economic Report of the President Chapter | Unfortunately the EITC can also provide an earnings disincentive for some low-income families who are already working. This disincentive comes about because over the income range in which the EITC is phased out recipients face a relatively high implicit marginal tax rate on earnings as the subsidy is withdrawn. For example for families with two or more children each additional dollar earned between $ and $ of income reduces the credit by roughly cents. In effect this places an additional percent tax on these families work efforts over that range of income. Of course if the phaseout were steeper and the implicit marginal tax rate higher fewer families would be affected by the disincentive. A further concern is that a substantial amount of noncompliance or error occurs within the program The Internal Revenue Service has estimated that of the roughly $ billion in EITC claims filed in for tax year between $ billion and $ billion ( to percent ) was improperly claimed and should have been disallowed. This raises questions as to whether the resources devoted to the EITC are being targeted in the most effective and efficient way possible In stark contrast to the EITC which recognizes the dynamics of labor market mobility and fosters labor force participation the quintessential static labor market policy is the minimum wage or the closely related variant known as the living wage. Policies such as these which mandate that employers pay their workers higher wages than they might pay voluntarily could be justified by the view that most labor market entrants will be stuck in low-wage jobs and will not experience substantial wage growth over their careers. Both the minimum wage and the EITC increase the earnings of those low-income individuals who work. But whereas the EITC increases employment the minimum wage likely reduces it : the most recent studies have found that significant employment losses are associated with minimum wage policies What accounts for this difference in effects on employment ? The EITC effectively lowers the wage at which potential low-income workers are willing to work but does not affect the demand of employers for their labor services A minimum wage on the other hand increases the cost to an employer of hiring a low-wage worker and consequently reduces that employer s demand for labor services. Even when the minimum wage does not lead firms to reduce employment it has been found to reduce the amount of employerbased training young workers receive. Another reason why the EITC is a more effective policy is that it is targeted to those workers who need it most : workers especially workers with children from low-income families. The minimum wage on the other hand applies to all workers whose wages would otherwise be below the minimum ; this includes low-wage workers from families whose other working members earn high wages | Economic Report of the President Unemployment Assistance Policy As noted at the outset percent of the labor force were unemployed in December ; many more Americans face the risk of becoming unemployed. On December the President called on the Congress to extend unemployment benefits for the unemployed workers whose benefits would have otherwise expired. He further asked that this benefit extension be retroactive so that no one who is unemployed would fail to receive any portion of benefits to which he or she is entitled. The Congress responded to the President s call and on January the President signed this extension into law Unemployment and the risk of unemployment are a reality in a flexible labor market like that of the United States. But this same flexibility also results in higher overall employment than would prevail in an inflexible static labor market. Recognizing the job uncertainty inherent in a dynamic flexible labor market government has long undertaken to provide social insurance against the risk of lower income resulting from job loss. However the government s unemployment policies should always take into account the substantial and continual movement of workers into and between jobs and into and out of unemployment The Federal-State Unemployment Insurance ( UI ) program provides unemployment benefits to eligible workers who are unemployed through no fault of their own ( with fault being determined under each State s law ) and who meet other eligibility requirements set by each State individually. Workers who are unemployed because they are new labor market entrants have recently reentered the labor market have quit a job or were fired for cause are not eligible for UI benefits. Although the formula used to determine benefits varies from State to State the dollar amount always depends on the worker s previous earnings up to a specified maximum. There is also a minimum UI benefit for workers with especially low earnings. Because of this truncated benefit structure the UI replacement rate ( the ratio of the benefit to the recipient s previous earnings ) is higher for low-paid than for high-paid workers making UI relatively more attractive to those who earned low wages while working. In most States workers can receive up to weeks of UI benefits ; States with unusually high unemployment may offer an additional weeks of extended UI benefits Statistics on the duration of unemployment show that although most unemployment spells are short their average duration is longer in the period immediately following a recession. ( These statistics cover all unemployed workers not just those receiving UI benefits. ) On average over all recessions and expansions since the median duration of unemployment has been weeks in the year following a recession and weeks at other times Chapter | Similarly percent of unemployment spells are of weeks or less immediately after a recession compared with percent at other times However the surveys used to generate most labor market statistics may overstate the duration of the typical unemployment spell. In one study that examined completed spells of UI recipients after the unemployed worker had found another job it was estimated that percent had returned to work within weeks of their job loss The most recent recession has followed the pattern of previous recessions : the median duration of unemployment spells rose from weeks in March to weeks in December In March the President responded to this need by signing the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act ( JCWAA ) which provided an additional weeks of temporary extended unemployment benefits to all eligible unemployed workers and in January as noted above the President again extended unemployment benefits Any time that policymakers consider offering or extending UI benefits they face a difficult tradeoff. UI can provide valuable assistance to unemployed workers but it may also create a disincentive for benefit recipients to return to work. Unemployed workers who rationally evaluate their options may postpone accepting new work until their UI benefits are exhausted or nearly exhausted. The result is higher unemployment and longer average spells of unemployment. In the study cited above for example percent of those who had not received UI benefits but only percent of those who had returned to employment within weeks of their job loss. This 5-percentage-point difference hints at the disincentives built into UI since fewer of those receiving it returned to employment quickly. Another study found more direct evidence : each additional week of UI benefits was estimated to increase the duration of the average unemployment spell by about a day. Many other studies have also found an association between the level of weekly UI benefits and the duration of unemployment. Still more evidence comes from Europe where most countries have more expansive UI policies than the United States and have higher rates of unemployment and longer average unemployment spells. Although these differences in unemployment outcomes may not be due to differences in UI policies alone the totality of the evidence suggests that they contribute Chart illustrates another aspect of the relationship between the availability of UI benefits and incentives to find a new job. Unemployed workers who receive UI benefits are more than twice as likely to find a job in the week before their regular benefits expire than in the several weeks immediately preceding. As noted above UI benefits expire after weeks unless extended in which case they expire at weeks ( for workers receiving either extended UI benefits or temporary extended UI benefits ) Perhaps not coincidentally peaks in the fraction of unemployed workers finding work also | Economic Report of the President occur around these expiration dates. Among unemployed workers who do not receive benefits in contrast there is no substantial difference in the likelihood of finding a job at these points in their unemployment spell Moreover although in theory workers should benefit from the longer time that UI allows them to search for a new job evidence of such a benefit is hard to come by. Some States have experimented with giving UI recipients a cash bonus if they start a new job before exhausting their benefits. These reemployment bonuses have been found to reduce the number of weeks of UI receipt as was hoped. But researchers also found that those unemployed workers who received bonuses and consequently returned to work sooner did not on average end up taking lower paying jobs upon reemployment than those who did not receive bonuses. These findings suggest that the longer period of time that traditional UI recipients remain unemployed does not necessarily lead them to find jobs better matched to their skills. One possible downside to the reemployment bonuses is that the prospect of the bonus may induce more unemployed workers to claim UI in the first place especially if they believe they will find work quickly and therefore might not bother to claim UI were it not for the bonus The President s Personal Reemployment Accounts proposal announced on January builds on the demonstrated potential of reemployment bonuses to speed unemployed workers reentry into the work force. The Chapter | proposed accounts would also add flexibility to the provision of training for unemployed workers while avoiding penalizing those who quickly return to work. Under the proposal qualifying unemployed workers would each be given an account with a value of $ which the recipient could use for reemployment services training or supportive services such as transportation or child care. Recipients who become reemployed within weeks of receiving their first UI payment would be able to retain any balance remaining in the account as a cash reemployment bonus. Those who do not find work within that period would not be able to cash out their account but could continue to use it for services while receiving UI benefits The President has proposed that States be granted a total of $ billion to create the new accounts enough to provide immediate assistance for up to million unemployed workers. The accounts would be targeted at those unemployed workers who are very likely to exhaust unemployment benefits before finding a new job. In some circumstances States would be able to provide the accounts to those unemployed workers who have already exhausted their UI benefits within the last months The flexibility that the new accounts would provide in accessing unemployment services and benefits is important because research has shown that the economic impact of unemployment differs greatly from worker to worker reflecting differences in their underlying skills and in their circumstances. For those unemployed workers whose skills are no longer valued in the marketplace extensive retraining may be appropriate. Other unemployed workers may need help relocating or weathering a spell of unemployment but have marketable skills and require little or no retraining. The President s proposal recognizes that the people best suited to evaluate their current skills and match them with market opportunities are the displaced workers themselves Personal Reemployment Accounts are not intended as a replacement for UI but rather would be structured as a new component of the UI system They would be offered as an additional option to those UI recipients who under current UI rules are referred to reemployment services. Eligibility for an account would be a one-time event Who would be eligible to receive Personal Reemployment Accounts ? In October there were million unemployed workers and in that same month roughly workers received first payments from the UI system Current law requires that States identify those UI applicants who are likely to exhaust their benefits and refer these individuals to reemployment services Although each State applies different criteria the factors used to identify these workers include local unemployment rates level of education recent job tenure and prior employment in an industry or occupation in decline or particularly hard hit by economic downturn. From July through June million individuals began to receive UI benefits and million | Economic Report of the President or about percent were judged to be very likely to exhaust weeks worth of regular UI benefits and were referred to reemployment services. Personal Reemployment Accounts are targeted to those workers In more specific terms Personal Reemployment Accounts would work in the following way. UI recipients identified by their State as being very likely to exhaust UI benefits under current law already must register with the State s Workforce Investment Act program to become clients of the alreadyestablished network of one-stop career centers. These recipients would be given the option of receiving in addition a Personal Reemployment Account as part of the intensive services they receive. The career centers would administer the accounts on the recipients behalf. The worker would continue to be eligible for and receive UI benefits and would be free to use the core services provided by the one-stop career center. Personal Reemployment Accounts thus represent additional dollars available to the unemployed recipient Funds from the accounts could be used for other training and support services ( such as transportation and child care ) at the recipient s discretion. The career center would use an advanceable process such as smart cards or an allowable billing process to permit recipients to make payouts from the account If the recipient is reemployed within weeks of starting UI benefits the career center would pay him or her in cash any balance remaining in the account. The account would then be closed. States would have the option of providing the cash balance as a single lump sum or in two installments of percent and percent the latter after the recipient has been on the new job for months. The one-stop career center would distribute these bonus payouts according to the policy of the State in which it is located. After the cash payout is completed the recipient could continue to use all of the nocost automated and staff-assisted basic reemployment services available at the career centers. He or she would not however be eligible for intensive services such as counseling case management or training under the Workforce Investment Act for a period of year after the cash payout. Recipients who do not find employment within weeks of starting UI benefits would be able to continue to use the resources in the account for intensive training or supportive services The potential to receive a reemployment bonus would provide eligible workers a greater incentive to find new employment. At various times from to four States Illinois New Jersey Pennsylvania and Washington conducted controlled social experiments to determine the effectiveness of providing reemployment bonuses to unemployed workers. In these experiments a random sample of new UI claimants were told they would receive a cash bonus if they became reemployed quickly. The advantage of these experiments is that the effect of offering a reemployment bonus on the duration of unemployment and on earnings upon reemployment can be directly evaluated by comparing the experiences of UI claimants randomly Chapter | chosen to be offered a reemployment bonus with those of UI claimants not chosen for the bonus ( who received the regular State UI benefit ) An evaluation by the Department of Labor of the reemployment bonus experiments conducted in the States of Washington New Jersey and Pennsylvania showed that a bonus of $ to $ motivated the recipients to become reemployed reduced the duration of UI by almost a week and resulted in new jobs that were comparable in earnings to those obtained by workers who were not eligible for the bonus and remained unemployed longer. Similarly a study of the experiment conducted in Illinois found that a reemployment bonus of $ reduced the duration of unemployment by more than a week and did not lead to lower earnings at the worker s next job Therefore it is likely that giving unemployed workers the option of receiving the unspent balance in their Personal Reemployment Accounts will provide them an incentive to find a new job quickly reducing the time spent unemployed but will not result in workers taking lower paying jobs than they would get if they searched longer A potential problem with Personal Reemployment Accounts is that like other reemployment bonuses they may make UI benefits more attractive for unemployed workers who expect to find new employment quickly and thus would be unlikely to apply for traditional benefits. However the fact that Personal Reemployment Accounts would be targeted to those workers whose characteristics are highly correlated with long-term unemployment makes it much less likely that the accounts would induce entry into the UI system Workers adversely affected by international trade are eligible for support from another Federal program separate from the UI program : the Trade Adjustment Assistance program. To further assist these dislocated workers the President and the Congress extended benefits under the program as part of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act of The main features of this part of the legislation include an extension of eligibility and an expansion of benefits. To be eligible for these benefits laid-off workers must have been working in an industry in which either sales or output has declined and increased imports must have contributed importantly to their being laid off ( Workers subjected to partial rather than full layoff are also eligible. ) Benefits include both cash and training benefits a tax credit for health care expenses and eligibility to participate in State-run high-risk insurance pools and other State-based efforts to extend health care coverage. A pilot program for wage insurance has also been launched for these workers. The program offers a wage subsidy for eligible workers over who take a new job at a lower salary. The subsidy pays half of the difference in wages between the old and the new job up to $ This program is particularly noteworthy because it provides a direct incentive for seeking reemployment quickly | Economic Report of the President Dynamics of Program Participation and Social Policy Government social support is of course not limited to the unemployed Disability and spells of low income resulting from any cause are additional risks against which the government may have a role in providing social insurance. In approximately million families received TANF cash assistance in any given month ; another million individuals received Supplemental Security Income ( SSI ) payments million received Social Security Disability Insurance ( SSDI ) payments and some received both Most spells of welfare benefit receipt are of short duration : studies of AFDC typically show that half of such spells ended within or years However a significant fraction of welfare spells last a long time. In a study conducted before the passage of welfare reform in percent of spellswere found to last years or longer and one-quarter of recipients had spent years or more on welfare although not necessarily all in one spell. Since substantial progress has been made : welfare caseloads have fallen by percent and is it likely although no studies are yet available that the duration of welfare spells has shortened as well SSDI provides benefits to disabled and blind individuals who are insured through workers payroll tax contributions. The worker must have worked and paid Social Security taxes for a sufficient number of years and must have worked recently to qualify for benefits. SSI in contrast is a means-tested program for persons who are or older or of any age if the recipient is blind or disabled. ( A means-tested program is one in which eligibility is determined by income or some other measure of the applicant s means of self-support as opposed for example to a record of past contributions to an insurance fund. ) SSI is a program of last resort ; its benefit formula takes into account income received from other sources ( including other Federal State and local programs as well as private efforts ) It does not duplicate these sources but rather fills the gap between them and a specified minimum level of income. Both SSDI and SSI define adult disability as the inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity because of a mental or physical impairment that is expected to result in death or that lasts for a continuous period of at least months. As of substantial gainful activity was defined as work paying over $ a month when the impairment is other than blindness and over $ a month for blindness. The average monthly SSDI benefit in was $ and the maximum monthly SSI benefit was $ In contrast to TANF participation in the SSDI and SSI programs has not decreased in recent years ( Box ) Of course unlike with TANF individuals Chapter | Box 3-4.The Growth in SSDI and SSI Disability Caseloads The number of people receiving disability payments through either the SSDI or the SSI program has increased dramatically. From to the number of SSDI recipients rose by million and from to the number of SSI recipients rose by million. The President supports a program that would address this rise in disability caseloads by helping people with disabilities reenter the work force In Congress passed the Ticket-to-Work and Work Incentives Improvement Act which addresses the disincentives to return to work that many individuals with disabilities face. The act allows recipients of SSDI and SSI to choose their own vocational rehabilitation and support systems and it extends the Medicare benefits of SSDI recipients so that they do not lose health benefits on returning to work. The act also expands Medicaid eligibility for persons with severe disabilities. The President has promised swift implementation of this initiative to be completed by the end of apply to receive disability payments both because they require income support and because health impairment limits their ability to work and perhaps increases their demand for medical services. Thus one would expect a lower rate of exit from SSDI and SSI than from TANF even if their incentive structures were identical. Indeed a low rate of exit has been the norm for these programs : each year only about percent of those who receive SSDI or SSI leave the rolls to go to work How should welfare programs be designed for a dynamic labor market ? If labor markets were static the design of social insurance to provide welfare like the design of UI would be straightforward : the government would simply provide cash assistance to needy families. In a dynamic labor market however needy families typically require welfare benefits only for brief spells This very dynamism makes the design of welfare programs more difficult because policymakers again face a tradeoff. Welfare programs that provide cash benefits without work requirements or time limits such as the former AFDC program provide eligible families with needed assistance but they also create a disincentive for the adult members of those families to acquire skills to enter or reenter the work force and to escape poverty. ( They also create a modest incentive to remain unmarried and to have children out of wedlock because the presence of a working husband reduces the benefit whereas that of an additional child increases it. ) The work disincentives that | Economic Report of the President were part of AFDC ( which in part remain under TANF ) arose because benefits were phased out as family income increased imposing a high implicit marginal tax rate on income earned by families receiving AFDC Although any well-designed means-tested public assistance program would include an income phaseout and thus face this problem of high marginal tax rates the AFDC program unintentionally promoted dependency on welfare and induced some families to have longer spells of welfare receipt The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of was motivated by the recognition that a better policy for families requiring welfare assistance was needed. The reform granted greater program authority to State governments and replaced the AFDC program which was based on Federal provision of matching funds to the States with TANF which is a block grant program. These reforms essentially abolished Federal eligibility and payment rules giving States much greater discretion in designing their own cash public assistance programs and eliminated the Federal entitlement to cash assistance. TANF not only gave States the freedom to set their own eligibility criteria and benefit levels but also created work requirements for recipients set a lifetime limit of months of TANF assistance and rewarded States for strong performance in terms of reduced caseloads As noted previously caseloads have fallen by percent since PRWORA s enactment. However because the unemployment rate was falling during much of this period an important question is whether the decline in caseloads was due to welfare reform itself or to the strength of the labor market A number of studies based on experiences during the period of extensive State experimentation with welfare program waivers have found that economic growth and the consequent decline in unemployment rates likely had a secondary role in the decline in caseloads. As Chart shows the correlation between unemployment and the number of AFDC/TANF recipients that is evident in the 1990s and particularly after welfare reform was not evident in earlier periods of declining unemployment rates The era of innovation in welfare policy began with the granting of AFDC waivers in the late 1980s : certain restrictions under the AFDC program were waived for States wishing to experiment with alternative welfare program designs. PRWORA continued this process with the result that the particulars of State programs now vary widely. One important dimension on which they differ is the rate at which welfare benefits are reduced as the recipient s income rises. This benefit reduction rate had been set by Federal law under AFDC. Under PRWORA many States have chosen a lower implicit rate in an effort to increase the incentive to work and to provide more assistance to low-wage workers. Lower benefit reduction rates in conjunction with increased work mandates time limits and work support programs do appear to have increased work incentives. By States reported that in Chapter | the aggregate percent of the welfare caseload were engaged in work or job-related activities up from percent in Although States remain subject to a Federal 60-month maximum time limit for individuals receiving TANF funds they can set shorter time limits or use State funds to extend benefits. PRWORA has also increased expenditure on work support programs such as subsidies for child care ; between and annual Federal child care subsidies almost doubled from $ billion to $ billion With the recent economic slowdown and continued weakness in job growth a critical question is whether the number of TANF recipients will increase to their pre-1996 levels. Analysis based on the relationship between unemployment rates and recipients combined with current forecasts for unemployment in and beyond suggests that the number of recipients will increase only slightly and will not approach prereform levels ( Chart ) Although it is still too soon to reach a final conclusion welfare reform both TANF and the innovative policies implemented by States before and since the enactment of PRWORA seems to have had a remarkable impact on public assistance caseloads. The reductions in caseloads moreover have not been concentrated geographically but have been seen across the Nation | Economic Report of the President PRWORA has also shown positive although still preliminary effects on employment earnings marriage rates and the prevalence of single femaleheaded families At the same time that caseloads began to fall employment increased dramatically among the population most affected by the caseload declines Among those who reported receiving public assistance income in the previous year the share reporting being employed in March of the following year rose from percent in to percent in Even among those who remained on welfare work effort greatly increased possibly reflecting both the work requirements and the rates at which benefits were reduced with income. Among women on welfare those who reported labor earnings rose from percent in to percent in The research literature suggests that approximately two-thirds of welfare leavers are employed at any future point in time. In addition employers have often rated welfare recipients as performing as well as or better than other employees. One study finds that former welfare recipients have higher rates of wage growth than do other workers Poverty and income levels are directly tied to employment and wages Studies suggest that just as it has raised employment welfare reform has also reduced poverty and increased income. For example poverty among all families headed by a single mother declined from percent in to percent in This finding is consistent with research showing that States that adopted innovative welfare programs under AFDC waivers before recorded an average 2.4-percentage-point decline in the poverty rate of the entire population of less skilled women. PRWORA itself was associated with a to 2.2-percentage-point decline in the poverty rate Research shows that although many lost government assistance single mothers saw their incomes increase on average during the 1990s. Studies of those who have left welfare reveal that around half remain in poverty but evidence also points to increases in family income over time. Data on consumer expenditure meanwhile reveal increases in spending by lowincome single mothers in the 1990s Why has welfare reform been so successful ? Studies of the States experiments with work requirements under AFDC waivers suggest that these requirements led to increases in employment and reductions in welfare payments. The effect of time limits is less well established because few recipients have yet exhausted their eligibility under PRWORA and evidence from those States that implemented time limits as part of their AFDC waiver programs is mixed Chapter | Fostering Skill Development Labor market experience fosters the development of valuable skills. As noted earlier in addition to formal educational institutions family members and firms play a central role in skill development in the modern economy Job mobility workplace education and on-the-job learning by doing account for as much as percent of all skill formation. Training on the job together with simply the experience of being in the labor market has been found to be more effective at increasing the earnings of young workers than are government training programs. Indeed evidence from evaluations of formal publicly provided job training programs for youth demonstrates that they have little or no impact on earnings When younger workers change jobs the switch is usually accompanied by an increase in wages possibly because they have both increased their skills and moved to jobs that use those accumulated skills more effectively. In contrast job changes for more experienced workers often result from job loss and may result in lower earnings. Experienced workers who lose their jobs at a given time are more than three times as likely to experience one or more additional spells of unemployment in the following years than similar workers who did not lose their jobs at that time. In addition more than onequarter of experienced workers who lose their jobs suffer substantial wage reductions when they do return to work. The reductions in employment are short-lived : within years of the job loss workers who lost their jobs have a virtually identical likelihood of being employed as workers who did not lose their jobs. But the wage losses are long lasting : years after a job loss the average weekly earnings of job losers are to percent below those of workers who did not lose their jobs. These permanent declines in wages likely reflect a deterioration in the value of the skills these older workers had previously acquired. This makes fostering the reacquisition of skills among experienced workers who have lost their jobs a policy priority Some types of worker retraining have been effective at increasing the earnings of displaced workers. One evaluation of a training program that subsidized community college attendance by displaced workers found that academic year of community college raised these workers earnings by about percent Technically oriented vocational skills and science and math skills are particularly important for displaced workers because investments in these skills result in much higher returns in the labor market than does non-technically oriented training. One study found that the expected return on earnings from a curriculum that provides an academic year of more technical and applied coursework ranges from to percent | Economic Report of the President The labor market rewards skill accumulation and investment in human capital. In particular it rewards with higher wages those who obtain more schooling. Studies estimate that each additional year of education increases a worker s wages by to percent on average. The Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that in the fourth quarter of bachelor s degree holders over the age of had an unemployment rate of percent and those working fulltime earned a median weekly income of $ whereas workers with only a high school degree earned a median weekly income of $ and had an unemployment rate of percent. Americans have responded to the benefits of human capital investment : in only in jobholders had some college education ; today roughly in are college educated The benefits of education not only are large but have increased. The difference between the average earnings of college-educated workers and those of high school-educated workers has increased by almost percent since the early 1980s. Education may also generate gains for society at large : it is correlated with better public health better parenting lower crime a better environment wider political and community participation and greater social cohesion all of which may contribute to economic growth Earnings increase with age with increased tenure on a job and with the accumulation of both general and job-specific human capital. Between and men with years of job experience earned to percent more on average than men in their first years out of school. Furthermore one study finds that the past three decades have witnessed an increase in this premium : whereas in high school-educated men with years of work experience earned percent more than new entrants with the same education by they were earning percent more. In addition workers who have been at the same job a long time tend to stay there : accumulated tenure is negatively related to turnover rates. The rising importance of experience points to the value of employer-provided training. One study finds that onthe-job training accounts for at least two-thirds of the growth in wages in any given year The President recognizing the individual and economy-wide benefits of an educated society has vowed to make educating every child in America a top priority. On January he signed into law the No Child Left Behind Act designed to improve elementary and secondary education. The act requires stronger accountability and high standards of achievement to be measured through annual testing of third through eighth graders and publicly released report cards of school performance. It gives students who attend low-performing schools and their parents greater scope to seek better options. The act gives State and local governments greater control over Federal education funding which was increased by percent from its level to $ billion in It creates a highly qualified teacher initiative Chapter | supported by investment research and training and it increases Federal money devoted to the teaching of reading. The Administration s commitment to education highlights the importance of investing in the Nation s human capital benefiting both individuals and the economy as a whole Conclusion Policymakers can help labor markets work better but they need to remember that labor markets are dynamic and that the policies that work best for a dynamic labor market are very different from those that work best for a static labor market. Static labor market policies may unintentionally induce workers to accept longer spells of poverty and unemployment and to remain in lower paying jobs. The policies described in this chapter should encourage mobility and help workers smooth over the difficulties they encounter during labor market transitions | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R Regulation in a Dynamic Economy C ompetition is essential to the vitality of the American economy. Both government and the private sector play important parts in creating markets that are competitive and thus efficient and equitable. The private sector is the primary source of competition and innovation whereas the government often through its regulatory activities enforces property rights and contracts the necessary foundations for competitive private enterprise In addition the government provides those goods and services that the private sector can not profitably produce such as national defense public safety a more healthful environment and social programs to benefit the underprivileged. Together government and the private sector can work to produce a vibrant dynamic economy that offers its people the greatest possible opportunity to satisfy their wants and needs. To realize these benefits the government must work to foster flexibility and dynamism in the economy by promoting sound monetary fiscal tax and regulatory policies This chapter focuses on the role of Federal regulation in fostering or hindering economic dynamism. By its nature regulation can be a doubleedged sword. Although some demands for regulation reflect a desire to improve the efficiency of intrinsically imperfect markets other demands for regulation seek to change market outcomes for reasons that range from the compassionate to the opportunistic. Well-designed regulation can provide society with improved market outcomes and other benefits ; poorly designed regulation stifles economic efficiency and dynamism. Regardless of their underlying motivation many regulations are not well designed and impose both short-run efficiency costs and long-run dynamic costs on the economy that far exceed their benefits to individuals or society. This Administration supports the development of Federal regulation based on sound science economics and law all important facets of a viable regulatory policy The definition of regulation encompasses both any authoritative rule dealing with details or procedure and any rule or order issued by an executive authority or regulatory agency of a government and having the force of law. Regulation can thus be promulgated by government at all levels or by the private sector or by private authorities working in conjunction with government agencies. This chapter largely focuses on Federal regulation and the potential of private sector regulatory efforts but the principles discussed can apply to regulation at all levels of government. Also important to recognize is that regulatory efforts generally consume a large amount of economic resources and that the demand for regulation has been growing over time Two basic approaches to government regulation of economic activity can be identified each with very different implications for the dynamics and efficiency of the economy : command-and-control regulation and performance- or incentive-based regulation. Command-and-control regulation typically uses the coercive power of the government to intervene in market activity by setting prices quantities technological requirements or barriers to market entry or exit. Performance-based market-oriented regulation in contrast harnesses market forces to achieve the same social goals. Regulation of this type includes taxes subsidies and cap-and-trade permit or quota systems. Recent experience notably in the area of environmental regulation has demonstrated that these market-based methods of regulation which regulate results and not processes achieve dynamic and static efficiencies that command-and-control regulation does not. This Administration s regulatory policy recognizes the importance of making regulation efficient by focusing on the use of performance- and incentive-based approaches Regulatory review and regulatory reform including reductions in the amount and scope of regulation provide a safety valve when the costs and other burdens of regulation become excessive. Such a safety valve is important because some regulations even when first introduced may impose short-run and long-run costs that exceed their economic and social benefits Moreover new scientific knowledge new technologies other economic changes demographic changes and changes in the social consensus can make even well-formulated flexible regulations obsolete. For example society should not abandon health and safety regulation that protects people or the environment but regulatory reform may achieve such protection in ways that are more efficient. This greater efficiency may arise from applying new science and technology focusing on outcomes rather than processes or technologies or permitting regulated parties greater flexibility to meet specific performance requirements and providing market incentives for them to do so Recent changes from command-and-control to performance-based food safety regulation by the Department of Agriculture illustrate this potential Until recently meat and poultry processors were required to adhere to strict regulations that prescribed in detailed fashion how food safety objectives were to be achieved. Inspectors relied heavily on human sight smell and touch to determine the safety of raw meat and poultry products. Although the traditional approach has not been totally displaced the new regulation has supplemented this inspection process with scientific practices for identifying and reducing microbial contamination. This new approach gives the industry a greater incentive to take advantage of new technology and scientific information to identify pathogens and increased flexibility to take appropriate measures to improve food safety | Economic Report of the President Similarly in some potentially competitive industries government controls on prices or profits effectively shield certain government-favored companies from competition. Here reductions in regulation can yield benefits for consumers potential market entrants and the economy as a whole Regulatory reform in the airline railroad and trucking industries and the lifting of geographical restrictions on bank expansion are all cases in point The resulting increase in competition in these industries has caused prices to fall innovation to increase and resources to be more efficiently allocated These issues are of particular importance now a time of increased demand for regulation to restore the Nation s sense of security and economic wellbeing. The national effort to enhance homeland security has resulted in the rapid development and implementation of new regulations for a variety of industries and activities. The expected payoff to enhanced homeland security is reductions in the risk of future terrorist events and their consequences. The response to the need for greater security in economic activity whether for example in the form of Federal air marshals on commercial flights or in the form of backup computer systems raises the overall cost of transacting business. It is in the Nation s economic interest to balance the benefits of new regulations with their costs Regulatory review and regulatory reform offer mechanisms to reduce these costs particularly as more is learned about the effectiveness and efficiency of various types of regulation. Unfortunately some of the most costly recent episodes of market instability such as the California energy crisis of and the crisis in the savings and loan industry in the 1980s have been associated with poorly designed efforts at reduced regulation. The consequent fear of further instability generates resistance to regulatory reform even when it holds the promise of significant economic benefit This chapter continues with a discussion of what causes demand for regulation and how such demand can lead to regulations that may or may not be economically beneficial. The chapter then considers several principles that produce smarter regulation and illustrates those principles with a number of recent case studies. Of course no matter how beneficial a regulation is when first introduced some regulations may outlive their usefulness Thus the discussion also addresses issues of regulatory reform. Because reform can be a complex process the discussion specifically focuses on some of the potential pitfalls of regulatory reform. The chapter concludes by showcasing how the Administration s regulatory policies regarding the environment embody the principles of sound regulation Chapter | The Demand for Regulation As already mentioned some regulations arise from the recognition of market imperfections that hinder economic efficiency or harm public health or safety. Other regulations stem from the desire of individuals interest groups or society at large to modify market outcomes because of dissatisfaction with the distributions of production income and wealth that can result even when markets function well. Unfortunately these sources of demand for regulation can come into conflict Regulation to correct market imperfections and market failures can enhance the productivity of an economy and the wealth and satisfaction of its people. This motivation also addresses the lack of markets for certain important goods such as environmental quality. In contrast the second motivation whether the result of altruism or economic rent seeking inherently involves a net economic cost. This cost arises because resources will be allocated to or captured in less productive uses than would have been the case absent the regulation. It is often difficult to distinguish between these motivations because the effects of a given regulatory proposal usually have aspects of both. Market-improving regulations do create winners and losers and although the winners should be able to compensate the losers in practice this is rarely required. Similarly regulations whose effects are primarily redistributive may often have aspects consistent with the public good Distinguishing between these two types of demand for regulation is an important function of economic analysis and a motivation for requiring such analysis of major Federal regulations. However even regulations that primarily seek to enhance economic efficiency and whose benefits exceed the associated costs in a static world can unduly harm economic dynamism in the real world and may have unforeseen consequences. This happens because unintended consequences may at times prove important and in the long run regulation may lead to an inferior less efficient outcome Regulation to Address Market Imperfections Imperfections in the market cause resources to be misallocated or allocated inefficiently. Unless these imperfect markets are regulated or overseen in some manner the result can be the inefficient use of resources waste and lost economic value. Generally this occurs for any of four primary reasons First external costs and benefits ( often called spillovers ) may not be taken into consideration when private production or consumption decisions are made. Second the private sector may either underproduce or fail to produce public goods. Third firms or consumers may lack information required to allocate their resources efficiently. Fourth if existing firms have market power they may underproduce and overprice their goods | Economic Report of the President Ensuring Public Health and Safety Public health and safety issues can arise because of economic spillover effects. ( Spillover effects or externalities occur when one person s actions unintentionally affect another person for good or ill and no compensation is made to the person providing the good or suffering the ill. ) Depending among other things on who holds the relevant legal rights on the costs of enforcing those rights or on the costs of negotiating other arrangements producers or consumers may have little or no incentive to consider the costs borne by or benefits enjoyed by other people as a result of their actions Markets provide an incentive for producers to maximize the profits they earn and to minimize the costs they must bear directly but not to consider the profits or costs of others. In the absence of regulation for example profitmaximizing producers may choose cheaper more polluting production processes dispose of hazardous waste with less care for health and environmental consequences or take greater risks of inadvertently harming the environment than is socially optimal. Although private negotiations may lead to full consideration of these external costs when few parties are involved this approach quickly becomes unworkable as the number of parties increases. Thus without government or private regulation public health and safety may not be adequately protected Specific examples of spillover effects on health and safety and of the associated regulatory responses abound. For example in the past chlorofluorocarbons ( CFCs ) were used as propellants in aerosol cans and as coolants in air conditioners. CFCs have been identified as a major cause of atmospheric ozone depletion which in turn is associated with adverse human health and environmental outcomes. These outcomes are external to private decisions to use CFCs as coolants or propellants. Ultimately the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) banned certain specific uses of CFCs as propellants in and an agreement in early the Montreal Protocol banned their use internationally The choices of consumers too can produce spillover effects that influence health and safety. Cigarette smokers may not fully take into account the displeasure of or the health risks to others who breathe their secondhand smoke. Drivers of automobiles that emit pollutants such as hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides may choose not to curtail their use on days when tropospheric ozone is above healthful levels especially if the unhealthful air is blown to another area. In such cases a role may exist for public policy or private collective action to improve or protect the public welfare Ensuring Economic Efficiency Spillover effects are not limited to costs such as the damage to public health and safety in the examples just given. At other times markets may not suffice to allow producers to capture the spillover benefits of their activities. For Chapter | example when an attractive real estate development increases surrounding property values or a successful tourist attraction lures customers to nearby businesses other property owners and these businesses may benefit without having to compensate their benefactor. It is easy to imagine circumstances that can lead to the underproduction of goods or services that provide these external benefits Private producers may also underproduce or fail to produce public goods These are defined as goods that are both nonrival in consumption and nonexcludable. Goods that are nonrival in consumption are those that can be enjoyed by many people without reducing their availability to others. A simple example is a piece of music : once written a song or a symphony can be performed and enjoyed over and over without ever being exhausted. For a nonrival good to be a public good however it must also be nonexcludable ; that is its use can not be limited to only those who pay for it. Examples of nonrival nonexcludable public goods include national defense police protection public health a clean environment wilderness preservation and public parks Public goods merit the name because although they are desirable to produce their nonexcludability makes it unprofitable for private businesses to produce them or at least to produce them in sufficient quantity to maximize economic efficiency. Free riders can enjoy these goods without having to pay. Similarly nonrival goods tend to be underproduced because individually consumers may be unwilling to pay a sufficiently high price to warrant their production even though collectively their willingness to pay exceeds the cost of their production. This poses the immediate question of who then will provide public goods. In certain cases it makes sense for the Federal Government to step in and provide the good or service at an efficient level because private provision will be insufficient Information is also essential to the efficient allocation of resources Consumers and producers must have sufficient knowledge of the characteristics and quality of products their prices and other information to make good economic decisions. The absence of sufficient information can dampen market activity because of distrust between potential buyers and sellers Alternatively too many transactions may occur if buyers are too trusting and make purchases they would have avoided given full information. In either case the result is a misallocation of resources and lower economic well-being Markets as diverse as those for used cars and financial services are subject to informational imperfections and regulation has often stepped in to address these imperfections. For example the Food and Drug Administration requires nutrition content labels on many foods so that potential consumers have the information they need to protect their health | Economic Report of the President The exercise of market power is a fourth reason why market outcomes may be less than optimal. Market power arises when there are too few producers in a market to ensure adequate competition and significant barriers to entry exist. Firms with market power may choose to underproduce overprice or limit consumer choices in terms of quality and service. The exercise of market power hurts consumers while allowing firms to use resources inefficiently or to make extraordinary profits. These issues are the subject of antitrust policy and regulation which last year s Report discussed in detail Regulation to Address Specific Interests A second set of demands for regulation arises from the desire of individuals interest groups or society at large to modify the distributions of output income and wealth that markets produce whether or not those markets function well. In contrast to the first set of demands for regulation which focus on improving economic efficiency this set focuses directly on distributional issues. For moral or altruistic reasons members of society might conclude that the distributions determined by the market are not entirely fair. Market economies are efficient at producing wealth but they distribute income in a way that creates a gap between the well off and the poor. For example those with rare skills that are highly sought after will by the laws of supply and demand receive high incomes while those with more common skills that are not widely demanded will receive lower incomes Through its democratic processes American society has often demanded regulatory actions that alter these distributions of income and wealth. Many of these actions seek to expand the availability of education training opportunities medical care welfare nutrition housing or other goods and services especially for lower and middle-income individuals. An example is regulation under the Americans with Disabilities Act which requires that persons with disabilities be accommodated in public work and educational facilities. Another example is the requirement of equality in support for men s and women s athletics under Title IX of the Education Amendments of which prohibits discrimination based on sex in education programs or activities that receive Federal financial support. Unfortunately fulfilling these demands often entails a tradeoff between maximizing production and achieving a more equal distribution of that production. Accepting something less than the maximum possible output may be economically desirable if members of society care about each other s well-being Sometimes however the desire to circumvent market outcomes has motivations that are far from altruistic. Rent seeking is the process by which interest groups spend resources to influence legislative and regulatory processes to receive favorable treatment for themselves. This of course is a normal and Chapter | legitimate exercise of political rights in a democratic society. However the results have economic consequences that are important to understand Regulation can foster industry interests in many ways. Many regulations set prices allocate marketing quotas or control the entry and exit of firms in an industry. Such regulations bestow market power on firms in the target industry raising their profits much as in a private cartel but with the advantage of government sanctions and enforcement. For example for years the New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets which issues licenses to sell milk in New York blocked the entry of out-of-state producers into New York City s milk market thus allowing New York milk producers to control the milk supply to the whole city. As a result New Yorkers paid more for their milk than did consumers in adjacent areas. For example when milk was imported from New Jersey to Staten Island declines in the price of milk were experienced as expected. In a Federal district court ended the regime by ruling that the denial of licenses amounted to economic protectionism and was unconstitutional Rent seeking can also result in product quality standards that restrict supply or promote the interests of a dominant established or technically advanced firm at the expense of new entrants or firms with less advanced capabilities. For example a dominant airline promoted the use of uniform size templates for carry-on luggage at airport security checkpoints. Because at least one competing airline had invested in larger overhead cargo bins to attract customers the dominant airline may have viewed the uniform restrictive templates as a means of negating this competitive threat Principles of Regulation Although the two basic motivations for regulating described above may be inherently at odds during periods of political and market volatility both types of demand for regulation increase. For example since September the terrorist attacks of that month the ongoing threat of further terrorism and the war on terrorism as well as turmoil in financial and energy markets have eroded Americans sense of security and well-being. As a result the Federal Government has received myriad proposals for new regulations or regulatory authorities and it has generated many proposals of its own. Areas of proposed regulation related to homeland security include animal and plant health trade and immigration airport security airline security port security chemical facility security nuclear security cybersecurity the maintenance of backup facilities for critical components of the financial system terrorism risk insurance airline war risk insurance and money laundering among others. Recent corporate misbehavior and the resulting volatility in | Economic Report of the President financial markets and certain energy markets have also led to a host of new regulatory proposals on issues connected to corporate governance and accounting ( see Chapter of this Report ) trading of energy derivatives safeguards for workers retirement savings the conduct of investment research by investment banking firms and various issues related to information disclosure and transparency in financial markets among others No matter how pure and public-spirited the motivations for these proposals each has the potential to impose considerable costs on the economy. Especially during a period of accelerating demand for regulation understanding and applying basic principles of good regulation will improve the chances of achieving laudable regulatory goals without paying too dearly for the benefits The following questions can serve as guides when contemplating and designing regulatory intervention to maximize public welfare : Can the market achieve the desired outcome without regulation ? Can private sector regulation achieve the desired outcome instead of government regulation ? Will government regulation impede or distort market dynamics ? Is there a less restrictive alternative to the proposed regulation ? Are the costs justified by the prospective benefits and how are both distributed ? Imposing new regulation without careful consideration of each of these questions risks inflicting an unnecessary burden on the economy slowing economic growth and reducing the well-being of Americans. The significance of each of these questions will next be examined in turn Can the Market Achieve the Desired Outcome ? Markets are powerful institutions. They allow an economy to adapt quickly to changes in technology availability of resources consumer preferences external threats or other aspects of the environment in a way that best meets the needs and desires of consumers and producers. The American economy relies heavily on private initiative mediated through the marketplace to respond to change. Through the voluntary interactions of many buyers and many sellers markets create and reveal information about the scarcity and value of goods and services and reward efficiency. By promoting competition markets induce producers to reveal the cost of producing additional goods and services and consumers to reveal their willingness and ability to pay for those goods and services. As consumers and producers respond to market prices resources are shifted among firms so as to meet consumer demands at the lowest possible prices. By rewarding with profits those firms that meet the desires of customers and imposing losses on those firms that do not the market encourages and enables the migration of resources to their most valuable uses Chapter | When markets alone can not achieve these societal goals performancebased market-oriented regulation can be used to harness some of the positive qualities of markets such as efficiency and flexibility. Such an approach is desirable because the contrasting characteristics of markets and government regulation imply that society can achieve greater flexibility and productivity with greater reliance on markets and less on government regulation In contrast to the voluntary interactions of markets government regulation relies on the potentially coercive authority of the state to achieve desired ends Since government regulation is largely motivated by displeasure with market performance or outcomes it may ignore market information and may risk directing resources away from their most productive uses. For the same reasons regulation may obstruct market signals and reduce flexibility in the economy. Interference with market dynamics can reduce the rate of technological innovation and the efficient allocation or reallocation of resources across firms or industries. Ultimately such interference can reduce the rate of economic growth. ( This line of argument as it applies to developing countries is further explored in Chapter of this Report. ) Historical evidence on the conduct of commercial and investment banking serves as an example of how markets can respond to challenges that might otherwise be addressed by regulation. The Glass-Steagall Act of separated commercial and investment banking in order to avoid conflicts of interest Researchers have shown however that market participants react in ways that discourage such conflicts on their own. Thus regulation under Glass-Steagall may have provided little additional benefit while preventing banks from achieving economies of scale and scope During the 1920s commercial banks circumvented existing rules segregating investment and commercial banking services by establishing Statechartered affiliate banks that could underwrite securities. The Glass-Steagall Act was passed in part as a response to the potential conflicts of interest that arise when bankers have superior information relative to both investors and depositors. The primary danger is that when risky investment banking activities are combined with commercial banking bankers will be tempted to use their superior information to take advantage of less well informed investors or depositors In the absence of deposit insurance depositors could be harmed if commercial banks through their investment banking affiliates held risky or poorly performing assets without appropriately increasing their equity capital to protect depositors from losses. With deposit insurance this conflict of interest arises with respect to insurers. It is generally mitigated through the imposition and enforcement of minimum capital requirements among other measures Interestingly historical evidence indicates that banks in the 1920s actually held higher capital-to-asset ratios before safety net regulations were imposed. Recent international experience suggests that banks substitute government deposit | Economic Report of the President insurance or public capital for private capital. Thus the safety net may induce bankers to exchange one form of prudent behavior for another Researchers have also found that investors in that era penalized the universal banks that offered both investment and commercial banking services : the securities underwritten by universal banks commanded lower prices and had to pay higher yields when investors perceived a conflict of interest. To avoid being thus penalized in the markets universal banks tended to create distinct investment banking affiliates with their own capitalization and boards of directors. Evidence shows that firms that organized investment banking services as a department rather than as a separate affiliate obtained lower prices for securities before Glass-Steagall s enactment. Analysis of the quality of securities sold by integrated banks shows that quality did not suffer from the joining of investment and commercial banking services and at the same time banks benefited from economies of scale and scope through the use of common resources assets and knowledge. Perhaps in recognition of this evidence the Congress passed the Financial Services Modernization Act ( also known as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act ) in which repealed many of the provisions of Glass-Steagall relating to the separation of commercial and investment banking services. Chapter of this Report further examines the importance of market forces in providing appropriate incentives for socially responsible behavior by corporate managers Can Private Regulation Suffice ? A common misconception is that government is the only source of regulation. In fact trade associations and other private organizations also administer regulation. Private regulation may arise in response to the threat of government regulation or as a spontaneous private solution to a market imperfection. For example private organizations are often effective at providing regulation to overcome informational problems through standard setting certification monitoring brand approval warranties product evaluations and arbitration. They often act in cooperation with government regulators certifying or guaranteeing compliance with government-set or government-sanctioned standards or acting as self-regulating organizations under the purview of a government regulator. Such private regulations may be effective because private regulators have their own independent reputational capital at risk and can enforce their regulations Just as markets and government regulators are imperfect however so too are private regulators. And just as government regulators may face conflicts of interest so too may private regulators. For example one form of private regulation is the regulation of professional ethics by professional associations such as those in the medical and legal professions. Members of such boards may face a conflict between the interests of consumers and the income Chapter | potential of their fellow professionals. They may also be reluctant to reveal professional misconduct for fear of reducing public regard for their profession. Private regulators like government regulators may also face incentives or pressure to provide incumbent or dominant firms with competitive advantages or barriers to competition Despite such imperfections private regulation offers a variety of benefits over government regulation in some circumstances. Because private regulatory mechanisms can not be backed up with the use of coercive force they tend to be more flexible and have lower compliance costs. Private regulators are less able to dictate command-and-control regulations and therefore the regulated businesses and individuals typically spend less time and other resources complying. To be effective private regulators need to be open to suggestions from industry members consumers and consumer groups universities and other scientific organizations and government agencies. As a result of these dynamic relationships private regulators have a market incentive to closely follow changes and technological advances so as to preserve their expert status and protect their reputation Private regulators face market pressures to control the burdens they impose on businesses and consumers. These pressures can provide an incentive to minimize their costs and facilitate flexibility. By increasing their own costeffectiveness private regulators also lower compliance costs for businesses if they operate in competitive markets. In contrast although many government regulatory agencies also rely on fees for their services their budgets are set in the political arena and may rely on general government revenue. Private regulators have an incentive to provide firms with well-formulated guidelines and firm-specific recommendations helping firms reduce compliance costs while meeting necessary standards. Private regulation may also require less paperwork which significantly reduces the time cost of regulation Although private regulators lack certain powers that governments have their regulation can nonetheless be effectively enforced through legally enforceable contracts sanctions ( including revoking approvals assessing fines and pulling products off the market ) and public announcements. Both private regulators and the companies that use their services also put their reputations often one of their most valuable assets on the line. Firms choose to comply with voluntary private regulation because they perceive it as an important marketing tool and the associated compliance costs as a necessary cost of doing business rather than as a burden One example of successful and longstanding private regulation involves the establishment by the insurance industry of an independent not-for-profit organization to test and certify product safety. This organization founded in provides voluntary certification for a variety of industries and products including electrical appliances automotive products medical appliances alarm systems and chemicals. In alone manufacturers produced | Economic Report of the President certified products and product evaluations were conducted. Beyond testing and certification this organization takes an active role in developing industry standards. To protect their reputation for quality many retailers are reluctant to purchase goods unless they have received the organization s approval even though Federal law does not mandate certification Furthermore the market for safety certification and testing is competitive with at least other private organizations providing similar services. In a competitive market all of these organizations face incentives to minimize the cost of their services. Similar organizations exist to certify the environmental soundness of products and services showing that they meet established standards for reducing pollution and waste conserving resources and habitats and minimizing global warming and ozone depletion These examples illustrate how independent private regulators can provide a market-based solution to a market failure namely imperfect information In all these cases consumers can not on their own readily verify production processes or quality characteristics that are important to them. Imperfect information is also important in financial markets and there too the answer has often been third-party verification. For example several firms specialize in providing risk ratings for firms seeking to issue stocks and bonds or enter into customized derivatives contracts. This service helps firms market their securities at more attractive prices because third-party certification from the credit rating agencies enhances the transparency of the risks associated with these securities and the credibility of those offering them Some of the benefits of private regulation can most efficiently be captured when private regulatory activity operates under government sanction. The United States has a number of self-regulating financial organizations including stock exchanges and futures markets. These organizations operate as private entities that establish rules policies and standards of conduct for their members and member organizations. However these regulatory activities are overseen and approved by a government agency : the Securities and Exchange Commission in the case of stock markets the Commodity Futures Trading Commission in the case of futures markets. Government regulators may also choose to work in cooperation with private third-party certifiers For example the Department of Agriculture recently completed the implementation of regulations governing the production and labeling of foods as organic. These new standards rely primarily on independent private sector firms to certify that producers of foods claiming to be organic meet the government-set standards. The market incentives faced by both the producing firms and the certifying firms should help reduce the cost of meeting and enforcing these standards from what it would be under pure government enforcement Private regulation or government-sanctioned self-regulation may also be an option for some aspects of homeland security. The chemical industry faces the Chapter | risk of terrorist attack due to the potential to turn common useful chemicals into weapons of mass destruction. About facilities in the United States handle large quantities of dangerous chemicals already regulated under the EPA s Risk Management Program ( RMP ) These are chemicals that if released would pose a significant threat to public health and safety Both private and public regulatory approaches could be used to improve chemical site security. As an example of the former one industry trade association imposed regulation on its members requiring them to assess and reduce their vulnerability to terrorist attack. However only about facilities or percent of those handling chemicals covered under the RMP are owned by members of this association. At least two public sector approaches have been suggested to extend this regulation more broadly. A commandand-control approach would require certain designated actions or technologies to reduce the threat. This approach focuses on reducing the use and storage of chemicals changing methods and processes employing safer technology and generally improving security all of which might reduce the threat but fail to consider marginal ( that is incremental ) risks or costs. An alternative approach is a market-based mechanism in which a chemical facility would be required to obtain insurance coverage against liability arising from an unanticipated release of chemicals subject to review by the appropriate government agency. The level of required coverage would depend on an assessment of the facility s vulnerability and the hazard to security undertaken by the facility itself or its agent which would include an estimate of the probable range of losses resulting from a terrorist attack. This insurance-based approach to chemical facility security would rely on market flexibility to attain the socially desired level of security at the least cost This market-based approach has several advantages over governmentmandated standards. First insurance prices that are adjusted for risk can provide incentives for the owners and operators of chemical facilities to invest in safety and security measures to the extent this is socially optimal. In contrast government-mandated standards may over- or underspecify investments relative to that optimum. Second reliance on the insurance market rather than the government to provide regulation gives owners and operators the flexibility to implement the most efficient and cost-effective precautionary measures given their facility s existing technology and situation. Third under a government-mandated standards regime chemical facility operators would likely slow or halt the deployment of new security measures until any uncertainty about security requirements was resolved. In contrast an insurance-based mechanism with its inherent flexibility can build on existing security measures encouraging quicker deployment. However the insurancebased approach will work only if private insurers are willing and able to provide coverage at an affordable price and if the insurance industry itself is | Economic Report of the President sufficiently competitive. If these conditions are not met the appropriate government agency could promulgate regulations mandating compliance with certain safety standards but waive those standards for facilities that obtain a sufficient level of insurance Will Government Regulation Impede or Distort Market Dynamics ? Regulating economic behavior in a dynamic economy especially through traditional command-and-control regulation is a laborious undertaking with the potential for unintended and unwanted results. Government regulation can lead to the expenditure of effort and resources inconsistent with the initial regulatory intent. This happens because regulation does not suspend or eliminate market forces but rather suppresses or redirects them When government promulgates and enforces regulations it alters the incentives of economic decisionmakers ( consumers managers and investors ) by changing costs prices information or risks. Decisionmakers respond by changing their behavior often in ways that are unintended or even contrary to the aims of the regulation. If regulation is static in design failing to anticipate these reactions the ratio of intended to unintended consequences tends to diminish over time which in turn may increase the demand for regulatory reform. Dynamic regulation in contrast seeks to anticipate the reactions of consumers and firms to regulatory changes to ensure that the regulation achieves the intended results Firms may respond to the regulatory constraints imposed on them by increasing or decreasing production entering or exiting industries changing lines of business or developing new technologies. Consumers may look to unregulated sources to obtain products or services that regulation has made more expensive or rendered unavailable. Investors may shift capital from regulated to unregulated industries or among research and development projects to technologies that are more likely to be profitable under the regulatory regime. For example when airfares were regulated and airlines competed on the quality of their service the airlines demanded that manufacturers develop faster longer range aircraft. After regulatory reform led airlines to adopt the hub-and-spoke system allowing them to serve many locations at less cost they largely switched their new purchases to shorter haul aircraft Performance-based regulation too can impede or distort market dynamics. For example corporate average fuel efficiency ( CAFE ) standards distinguish between cars and light trucks imposing less strict standards on the latter. This provided automobile manufacturers with an incentive to shift production away from cars to light trucks to meet consumer preferences for Chapter | larger vehicles as real fuel prices dropped. This regulation has also affected the relative profitability of production locations for vehicles sold in the United States CAFE standards were established under the Energy Policy and Conservation Act of in an effort to reduce oil consumption after the Arab oil embargo. At the time high gasoline prices and long lines at the pump induced a shift in consumer demand to more efficient vehicles The least expensive way to attain better fuel economy was to downsize passenger cars but this downsizing had two safety-related consequences : the smaller vehicles were less stable when a driver lost control and they offered less protection in a collision. The result was an increase in traffic fatalities Because light trucks were used mostly as commercial and agricultural work vehicles and made up a relatively small part of the market lower fuel economy standards were instituted for them than for passenger cars The effects of the 1970s oil crisis dissipated when gasoline prices declined in the 1980s and American consumers again demanded larger vehicles. Because the CAFE standard was substantially lower for light trucks than for passenger cars manufacturers designed their new larger vehicles as minivans and sport utility vehicles ( SUVs ) to qualify as light trucks rather than passenger cars Consumer acceptance of these vehicles has sharply increased U.S. sales of light trucks ( including minivans and SUVs ) raising their share of the vehicle fleet from approximately percent in to percent in and nearly percent in ( Chart ) When the CAFE standards are binding manufacturers must sell smaller more fuel-efficient vehicles for less but can sell larger less fuel-efficient vehicles for more than they would in the absence of these standards. The shift in vehicle production from passenger cars to light trucks has thus offset the intended effect of the regulation Another market-distorting characteristic of the CAFE standards is the two-fleet rule which applies to passenger cars but not light trucks. Under this provision automobile production is divided into two fleets : vehicles made in North America and those made elsewhere. This encourages the manufacture of small cars in North America to bring the domestic fleet s average fuel economy up to the CAFE standard but encourages the manufacture of large vehicles abroad because overseas manufacturers tend to produce more fuel efficient fleets than CAFE requires. Thus foreign manufacturers can produce higher profit less fuel efficient cars without facing CAFE penalties. Moreover there is some evidence that because CAFE standards induce manufacturers to raise the price of less fuel efficient vehicles and lower the price of more fuel efficient vehicles they tend to shift market shares toward imports at the expense of domestic automakers Alternative market-oriented solutions are available to boost fuel economy while reducing market distortions and regulatory burdens. One option would be to allow manufacturers to trade fuel economy credits. Such a policy | Economic Report of the President would allow manufacturers to concentrate production in their area of comparative advantage whether it be small fuel-efficient vehicles or large less fuel efficient ones. Trading CAFE credits would also equalize the cost of attaining the standards across manufacturers a precondition for economic efficiency. Thus if combined with an overall cap on credits this approach would reduce the total cost of attaining any particular level of fuel economy that policymakers choose to target. Other options would focus on policies that more directly address fuel consumption rather than vehicle design because the key to reducing fuel consumption efficiently is to focus on the desired outcome rather than specific technologies or processes Is There a Less Restrictive Alternative ? When public regulation is necessary government agencies should respond to the demand by promulgating regulations that are both statically and dynamically efficient. Measures aimed at static efficiency are those that are the most cost-effective that can be taken today to address the problem at hand. Dynamically efficient regulation in contrast gives firms an incentive in the long run to innovate and discover technologies that lower costs and avoid negative spillover effects in the future Command-and-control regulation relies on dictating prices or quantities restrictions on technologies or processes or who may enter or exit a market Agriculture in the United States for example has long been characterized by Chapter | price and quantity restrictions. Government programs effectively guarantee minimum prices to growers of major crops such as cotton rice wheat corn and soybeans. Sugar and tobacco are marketed subject to government quotas and many fruits and vegetables are subject to marketing orders that limit the quantity and quality that may be offered for sale. Entry and exit restrictions often apply to government-regulated monopolies such as cable telephone electricity and transportation services. Many early environmental regulations including the landmark clean water and clean air legislation of the 1970s include provisions that require polluters to adopt certain pollution-reducing technologies. For example the Clean Water Act effectively requires pollution sources to adopt the best practicable technology and the Clean Air Act Amendments of require such sources to adopt the best available control technology in certain regions of the country Performance-based regulations in contrast stipulate a performance goal but allow firms flexibility in determining how best to meet that goal. Vehicle emissions standards are one example. An advantage of this kind of regulation is that it uses market forces to encourage firms to find low-cost solutions to meet a given standard. Market-based approaches which include tradable permit systems emissions taxes and compliance subsidies are similar to performance-based approaches but are even more efficient. The gain in efficiency arises from the equalization of marginal compliance costs across firms If the regulatory goal is to reduce pollution for example the polluter is afforded the flexibility to discover the most efficient techniques to decrease its emission levels. Simultaneously the market ensures that innovation and creativity are rewarded Command-and-control regulations such as technology standards may induce polluters to lower their emissions and in some cases may involve lower enforcement costs for the regulator but they fail to provide the longterm dynamic incentive that induces innovative behavior. Indeed command-and-control regulation often does not even meet the criterion of static efficiency achieving the regulatory goal at lowest cost given current technology because it may fail to provide the greatest benefits per dollar spent on solving problems today. This point is highlighted in Chart which compares costs under a command-and-control regime with those under a least-cost program such as a market-based mechanism across studies of a variety of regulatory initiatives. For example one study of sulfur dioxide abatement found that command-and-control regulation imposed costs that were approximately times what they would have been under an efficiently designed market-based mechanism ; another sulfur dioxide study found that those costs were times higher. Other comparisons across a variety of antipollution programs all paint a similar picture : much the same environmental improvement could have been achieved with far fewer resources if market-based policies had been adopted | Economic Report of the President Command-and-control regulation typically provides few incentives for producers or consumers to search for more cost-effective ways to reduce pollution in the future. This happens because regulators have directed attention to the wrong target. Rather than focusing efforts on developing cheaper ways to use mandated technologies as command-and-control regulations typically do regulators should target the real problem : finding or developing the most cost-effective way to reduce emissions This fact is highlighted when one considers the incentives created under the and Clean Air Act Amendments. Before electric utilities faced command-and-control regulation centered on the adoption of certain specified pollution control technologies. Although the Clean Air Act had already established national ambient air quality standards for a number of pollutants including sulfur dioxide it was the Clean Air Act Amendments that clarified national standards for sulfur dioxide and added a specific technology requirement for electric utilities. The amendments required that most new coal-burning plants use flue gas desulfurization units or scrubbers to achieve the required maximum emissions rates. To achieve the air quality standards plants were required to demonstrate the use of best available control technology for each pollutant emitted including sulfur dioxide. Because the legislation mandated the specific means by which the Chapter | utilities were to control their pollution it created no incentive for them to innovate to increase the ability of the scrubbers to reduce pollution. Rather the utilities faced only an incentive to develop methods to lower the operating costs of scrubbers to reduce the costs of complying with the regulation The Clean Air Act Amendments by enacting a market-based trading regime radically shifted the utilities approach to complying with the emissions reductions mandate. Utilities were required to hold permits for each ton of sulfur dioxide emitted. These permits were made tradable : a plant that found itself unable to cover its total emissions with the initial allocation of permits could purchase permits from another plant that had more permits than it needed. Plants were no longer required to install scrubbers ; instead they could choose the method of reducing emissions that they found to be most cost-effective and thus were given an incentive to engage in research and development that would reduce emissions further Indeed research into patents granted before in the electric utilities industry shows that innovation in that industry had no effect on how much pollution the scrubbers were removing but instead sought to lower their operating cost. After the Clean Air Act Amendments innovations again as measured by patents granted continued to lower operating costs but also increased the removal efficiency of scrubbers. By using a market mechanism regulators were able to meet the goal of reduced emissions in a much more efficient and environmentally conscious manner : the dynamic market-based approach not only spurred environmentally friendly innovation but also encouraged firms to control emissions in a more efficient and cost-effective way Creating a regulatory environment that enhances economic efficiency is a difficult task. Just as markets are not always perfect so too government agencies are not inherently benevolent omniscient or omnipotent ( Box ) Unlike market participants who are motivated primarily by the self-interested goal of maximizing their profits government regulators often are motivated by several sometimes conflicting mandates. Regulators can also make mistakes. They may make assumptions or estimates that result in unintended consequences and increase the burden of regulation by imposing inappropriate standards penalties production restrictions or prices. Further the government may suffer from persistent problems in retaining sufficient knowledge and staffing expertise in the activity being regulated. Finally individuals motivated by rent seeking or economically inefficient social goals may unduly influence regulatory decisions. All of these factors may lead regulators to make decisions that impair economic efficiency The President s Management Agenda for fiscal year provides a strategy for addressing inefficiencies in government and government regulation. This strategy aims to refocus government activities in ways that are citizencentered results-oriented and market-based and that actively promote | Economic Report of the President Box The Government Is Not Perfect Either There are many ways in which markets may fail or at least fall short of the perfect market described in any elementary economics textbook. A common result of such imperfections is that more or less of a good or service is produced than is optimal from the perspective of society as a whole. Nonetheless when market failure is diagnosed it is important to avoid a reflexive leap to the conclusion that the government can necessarily bring about a better outcome. Just as the actual operation of a market may deviate from the idealized model so too government intervention may not always achieve the ideal outcome envisaged by lawmakers or regulators Whenever markets are alleged to have failed policymakers need to consider the following question : Can the government bring about a particular outcome more efficiently than the market ? Actual government regulators unlike their omnipotent theoretical counterparts face an array of potential complications that may make the answer to that question negative. The following are some examples : Inability to respond effectively to market dynamics. The bureaucratic environment in which regulators typically operate may impede their ability to act quickly in response to changing technology or market conditions. The result can be a significant drag on the economy Imperfect information about particular industries. Government regulators may lack the necessary information or foresight to devise or implement effective regulation for an industry Regulation that is uninformed can result in unforeseen consequences Lack of competitive pressure. Regulators and other government officials do not face the same competitive pressures that firm owners and managers and other private sector actors do. It is precisely this competitive pressure that induces private firms to innovate and enhance their productivity and its absence may prevent government regulation from being equally innovative and efficient Complications such as these may mean that even an imperfect market might achieve a more efficient outcome than government regulation even if theory suggests that government intervention would improve on the market outcome. Policymakers therefore should consider not only market failure but also government failure and should ask themselves tough questions about the likely efficacy of government intervention in the circumstances at hand Chapter | innovation. By mandating more strenuous review of government costs and performance the President s agenda seeks to balance the imperfections of government activity against those of the market. As part of this agenda citizen-oriented government activities are intended to limit rent seeking by bureaucrats and private interests ; results-oriented activities will be regularly reviewed and their impacts on overall economic efficiency assessed to allow a better understanding of program costs and benefits ; and market-based activities will be used to reduce informational and incentive discrepancies between the public and the private sectors to help improve the quality of information available to regulators and the quality of their decisions Do the Benefits Justify the Costs and How Are Both Distributed ? On the one hand one reason that regulation sometimes has an adverse impact on the general public may be that proponents of the regulation focus on its benefits and disregard its costs. On the other hand proposed regulations whose benefits would justify the associated costs may be blocked because opponents focus on the costs and downplay the benefits. Whether or not a regulation is adopted may depend on how hard interest groups work to influence the legislative process and the regulatory agencies. As a result some regulations may be adopted that benefit a particular group to the detriment of overall societal goals whereas others that could be socially justified are blocked because they would impose significant net costs on particular groups. Appropriate regulation is based on the balancing of marginal costs and marginal benefits to society in general. When both costs and benefits are considered simultaneously regulations that are particularly beneficial or detrimental can more easily be identified. In this process it is important to consider the regulatory cost to the whole economy not just the direct budgetary cost to the government. Regulatory costs also include the private sector s direct and indirect compliance costs as well as incentive effects such as reductions in the incentive to innovate. To improve information about the benefits and costs of major Federal regulations ( those with annual impacts in excess of $ million ) the Administration is currently reviewing and revising its guidelines on regulatory analysis ( Box ) From an economic perspective the standard rule of thumb to ensure efficiency is that resources should be allocated across activities in such a way that the marginal benefit is equal to the marginal cost. For example in the context of homeland security it may be the case that additional resources devoted to international counterterrorism efforts would reduce the risk of terrorist attack much more than would additional resources spent on border enforcement. If so resources should be shifted toward counterterrorism up | Economic Report of the President Box Assessing the Economic Impact of Major Regulatory Initiatives Federal regulatory agencies issue approximately new rulemaking notices each year. About of these are projected to have effects of such magnitude as to warrant review by the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) Of those between and each year meet the necessary criteria to be designated economically significant that is creating annual benefits or costs worth more than $ million. Every economically significant proposal must undergo a formal analysis by the agency initiating the proposal of its benefits and its costs. The OMB establishes guidelines for the regulatory agencies on how to perform these economic analyses. In an effort to promote their transparency and maximize the net benefits to society the OMB and the Council of Economic Advisers are currently revising these guidelines Consistent with the principles of good regulation outlined in this chapter one proposed revision would have agencies complement their benefit-cost analysis of proposed economically significant regulations with a cost-effectiveness analysis. The two types of analysis are conceptually very different : a cost-effectiveness analysis identifies those options for achieving the regulation s objectives that make the most effective use of the resources available but it does not require quantification in dollar terms of the relevant costs and benefits. This exercise provides the analyst with a transparent means of comparing regulatory outcomes across an array of policy choices while maintaining scientific rigor. Yet it is important to note that although all efficient policies are cost-effective not all cost-effective policies are efficient. This fact highlights the advantages of properly recognizing the total benefits and the total costs of promulgating new regulations reviewing existing ones and developing legislative proposals concerning regulation In this spirit the guidelines highlight several state-of-the-art techniques by which to estimate the benefits of a regulation and they outline appropriate methods for estimating its costs. On the benefits side the guidelines endorse the use of stated and revealed behavior in actual markets as signaling economic values. On the costs side the guidelines urge that all of the costs associated with the regulation including monitoring and enforcement costs direct compliance expenditures and other direct costs such as legal and transactions costs product substitution and discouraged investment be recognized This major revision of the conduct of regulatory analysis is consistent with the Administration s goal to establish a greater focus on accomplishment by producing performance-based budgets. Under this new approach high-performing programs will be reinforced and poorly performing activities reformed or terminated. This paradigm change Chapter | Box continued increases accountability and provides the necessary structure to more completely integrate information about costs and program performance in a single oversight process. This is a necessary first step in shifting budgetary resources among programs to ensure that the greatest possible benefits are achieved with the available funds to the point where the marginal impact on overall homeland security is unaffected by further resource shifting that is when risk mitigation per dollar is equalized across activities. This kind of economic analysis of major regulations generates information that can be used to distribute limited regulatory resources to those areas where they will do the most good Because even socially efficient regulation creates winners and losers firms and other interest groups have an incentive to spend considerable resources trying to capture the benefits of regulation for themselves. Even when the benefits far exceed the costs regulation rarely affects all participants equally. For example regulation can create barriers to competition by raising the cost of market entry or by imposing fixed compliance costs which put smaller firms at a disadvantage relative to larger ones that can spread those fixed costs over their larger revenue base. Sometimes existing firms may successfully lobby for exemptions from new rules. For these reasons the Regulatory Flexibility Act as amended by the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of specifically requires a separate analysis of the impact of new regulation on small businesses. Such analyses can limit or at least shed light on the rent-seeking activities of dominant firms and other interest groups Recent experience with regulation governing the introduction of generic pharmaceuticals illustrates these points. In this case manufacturers of brandname pharmaceuticals took advantage of government regulation to shelter their products from competition from lower priced generic substitutes. The brand-name manufacturers circumvented the spirit of the law but not necessarily its letter by listing minor variations on their patents in order to extend their protection from competition. Generic drugs represent a cost-effective means of providing Americans low-cost access to important medical technology. The market entrance of generic drugs typically priced far below their branded counterparts logically leads to their rapid substitution in place of name-brand drugs. The Hatch-Waxman Amendments to the Federal Food Drug and Cosmetic Act enacted by the Congress in amounted to a major reform of the approval process for generic drugs and has led to a large | Economic Report of the President increase in the number of such drugs available to consumers. This profusion of generic drugs whose use is also encouraged by health insurers has saved consumers vast sums of money However it has recently come to light that certain provisions of the Hatch-Waxman amendments are subject to potential abuse. Under the amendments a generic drug maker may seek permission from the Food and Drug Administration to produce a generic equivalent of a brand-name drug whose manufacturer claims patent protection. However the brand-name manufacturer is given the opportunity to obtain a stay on the marketing of the competing generic during which time it can defend its patent in court In recent years brand-name drug manufacturers have increasingly adopted a strategy of listing new patents often for characteristics such as product packaging following a generic manufacturer s application to market an equivalent generic. Such a move forces the generic manufacturer to resubmit its application and effectively extends the government-enforced stay on generic competition. The Administration has proposed a new rule that seeks to counter this strategy and balance the need for property rights protection and innovation against the need for competition and greater access to lower cost generics. The new rule does this in two ways. First it would limit a brand-name manufacturer s ability to forestall generic competition by limiting the government-enforced stay on generic competition. Second it would tighten the patent listing process to ensure that only appropriate patents are filed. The potential savings to consumers from these changes are estimated at $ billion annually The Demand for Regulatory Reform The more regulation limits the choices of producers consumers or investors the greater is the possible harm to economic activity and the greater the demand for regulatory reform. Moreover the impact and efficacy of regulations can change over time. With time regulations are more likely to become constraining or simply irrelevant because of changes in technology or in the products and services available in the marketplace. Such changes are often a prerequisite for successful regulatory reform because they weaken resistance to reform from those interest groups that benefit from the status quo When government regulation controls prices profits or entry into a potentially competitive industry effectively shielding certain incumbent firms from competition regulatory reform can yield benefits for consumers potential market entrants and the industry as a whole. Reform of regulation in the airline railroad and trucking industries and the lifting of geographical restrictions on bank expansion are all cases in point. As a result of the Chapter | competition that followed regulatory reform of these industries prices fell innovation increased and resources were more efficiently allocated. Gains may also be available from reform of government regulations that address persistent market imperfections for example with regard to health safety or environmental quality. In these cases reforming regulation to more closely comply with the principles of regulation outlined earlier in this chapter can reduce the costs of meeting regulatory goals Like the demand for regulation itself the demand for regulatory reform arises for two distinct and conflicting reasons. Sometimes such regulatory harm comes to light when producers or investors perceive potential profit opportunities if the regulation is removed. Some calls for reform arise from the recognition that a regulation is imposing more costs than it is creating benefits or providing unfair advantages to some at the expense of others. For example when the restrictions on entry in the New York City dairy market discussed above raised milk prices there New Jersey dairies saw the chance for profit if those restrictions could be jettisoned. The courts agreed finding that if the New Jersey dairies were allowed to sell milk in New York City the price of milk there would drop to that in other nearby locales where ample competition existed. In other cases consumers themselves may discover that regulation is preventing them from finding desired products and services. For example the regulatory requirement that certain prescription drugs be supplied in child-resistant containers made opening the container difficult for the elderly and the handicapped. Subsequently the Consumer Product Safety Commission launched an educational awareness program to inform the public and pharmacists about appropriate exemptions from and requirements of safety cap regulations Other calls for reform however may arise because a firm perceives an opportunity to gain or take advantage of market power. This demand for regulatory reform is a type of rent seeking as the firm is attempting to influence regulatory outcomes in order to receive favorable treatment for itself Regulatory Review and Regulatory Reform The President recently declared that There comes a time when every program must be judged either a success or a failure. Where we find success we should repeat it share it and make it the standard. And where we find failure we must call it by its name. Government action that fails in its purpose must be reformed or ended. Regulation often has unintended consequences or causes changes in economic behavior that make it less desirable or effective than anticipated This makes it important to revisit from time to time the question of whether the results of a regulatory initiative solve real problems that the American | Economic Report of the President people care about. In this sense regulatory review represents an important backstop against policies that are misguided ineffective or outdated This principle can be illustrated by a simple anecdote in which a specific command-and-control regulation that appeared to offer a straightforward solution to an apparently uncomplicated situation in fact provoked a dynamic reaction that few if any had anticipated. This story shows how even in the seemingly most innocuous cases government regulatory failure can greatly complicate matters reducing consumer choice and economic efficiency In in an effort to reduce the incidence of burns among children the Federal Government implemented a regulation requiring newly manufactured pajamas for small children to be made flame-resistant. Amended in to include larger children s sleepwear this standard required that fabrics used for children s sleepwear self-extinguish when exposed to a small open flame such as from a cigarette lighter candle or match. Although the regulation neither prescribed specific fabrics nor required flame-retardant treatments in order to comply manufacturers either switched to synthetic materials ( mostly polyester ) that were inherently flame-resistant or treated fabrics such as cotton with flame-retardant chemicals One such chemical called TRIS was widely used by industry as a flame retardant to treat acetate triacetate and some polyester garments. However TRIS was subsequently found to be carcinogenic and was therefore banned from use in cotton sleepwear. Polyester then became the fabric of choice for manufacturers since it did not require the use of a flame-retardant chemical Parents however began to express a demand for natural fibers such as cotton for their children s sleepwear. In response to this demand retailers began increasing their stocks of cotton and cotton-blend long underwear sets that did not meet the Consumer Product Safety Commission s flammability standard for children s sleepwear in some cases intermingling them with flame-resistant sleepwear on children s sleepwear racks. Responding to this change in consumer preferences in the commission voted to exempt snug-fitting sleepwear ( and all infants clothing up to size months ) after concluding that snug-fitting pajamas exhibited a lesser propensity to burn Once again consumers responded to this restriction by altering their choices. They continued to purchase children s long underwear in large quantities as well as traditional flame-resistant polyester sleepwear that had improved in style and comfort. They did not show a preference for snugfitting pajamas which tended to be less comfortable and comfort was likely the primary concern of parents who preferred cotton sleepwear to synthetic garments in the first place. Unit sales of children s underwear increased from to by about percent ( million pieces ) According to a wellknown clothing trade publication this gain in underwear sales was attributable to underwear being used as sleepwear. Unit sales of children s Chapter | sleepwear ( excluding underwear ) increased over the same period by about percent ( million pieces ) reflecting an increase in sales of traditional fireresistant sleepwear garments. In the Consumer Product Safety Commission launched an educational program for parents by requiring manufacturers to place hangtags and permanent labels on garments reminding parents to choose either snug-fitting or flame-resistant sleepwear This example highlights how even well-intended regulations can have a high cost and unexpected consequences. It also demonstrates that market forces continue to function after regulation is imposed : although the regulation sought to limit the options of producers and consumers consumers preferences ultimately determined what was actually manufactured and sold Effects of Reform on Prices When reformed regulation opens an industry to new entrants and frees prices to respond to market forces rather than regulatory fiat prices typically fall. Deregulation of the airline industry is a prime example. Almost from its inception and through the late 1970s the airline industry was subject to strict Federal regulation. The Civil Aeronautics Board ( CAB ) established by the Congress in exercised nearly complete control over the industry with authority to establish maximum and minimum fares control market entry and exit and govern airlines route structures. By the mid-1970s however pressure for reform of airline regulation was building motivated in part by research arguing that regulation suppressed competition and resulted in welfare losses to society. The CAB responded to this pressure in the late 1970s by reducing entry restrictions and control over fares. Major cuts in fares soon followed accompanied by higher industry profits. These initial positive results spurred the Congress to pass the Airline Deregulation Act ( ADA ) in From to airfares fell approximately percent in inflation-adjusted terms According to a recent estimate of the welfare gains from this regulatory reform before September consumers were saving about $ billion ( in dollars ) annually in lower fares compared with what they would be paying if the previous system were still in place. One may reasonably assume that this downward pressure on prices resulted at least in part from increased industry competition : as of late domestic carriers flew scheduled service in the United States compared with only in Regulatory reforms in other industries have had a similarly salutary effect on consumer prices. Until the Interstate Commerce Commission ( ICC ) regulated shipping rates for railroads and prevented railroads from abandoning unprofitable lines. After partial regulatory reform in rates on rail freight fell steadily : by real rates were roughly half their level. Regulatory reform in the trucking industry which took place primarily between the late 1970s and the early 1980s resulted in similar rate declines | Economic Report of the President From the mid-1930s to the beginning of reform in regulation had effectively controlled shipping rates and given incumbent truckers veto power over the extension of new or expanded authority to transport goods This stifled competition from potential entrants. Declines in shipping rates by truck and rail combined with improved flexibility and on-time dependability also made possible by regulatory reform are estimated to have saved U.S. industry between $ billion and $ billion annually Effects of Reform on Innovation and Consumer Satisfaction Another common effect of the competition fostered by regulatory reform is increased innovation resulting in greater variety and higher quality for consumers. Before deregulation of the trucking industry both permitted routes and goods carried were narrowly specified creating costly inefficiencies. Reform allowed truckers to offer on-time delivery and more flexible service so that manufacturers could order components to arrive just in time at the assembly line and retailers could have the finished goods just in time to be sold. This streamlining resulted in greatly reduced costs of holding and maintaining inventories The case of the airline industry is particularly revealing of the potential for innovation unleashed by regulatory reform and the resulting benefits to consumers. Before reform airlines competed primarily by attempting to provide better service to customers since they were essentially prohibited from competing on the basis of price. In the spirit of such nonprice competition airlines attempted to offer more flights while decreasing the number of passengers on each flight and emphasizing the quality of food and other inflight services. Following reform it was expected that fares would fall but that service quality would decline as well in accord with consumer preferences. In reality however the unanticipated development of an entirely new route structure the hub-and-spoke system allowed airlines to increase flight frequency giving customers a wider variety of departure times from which to choose. Under the regulated regime with its restrictions on entry of existing carriers into currently served markets such massive route restructuring would have been impossible. Research has shown that consumers valued this innovation an unexpected benefit of unregulated competition far more than enough to compensate for other declines in service quality such as longer average travel times. Research has also shown that the benefit to consumers is about $ billion each year from increases in flight frequency thanks to the hub-and-spoke system in addition to the billions in gains from lower fares Chapter | The same competition that produced the efficiencies of the hub-and-spoke system continues to inspire innovation and reshape the structure of the airline industry in efficiency-enhancing ways. Following the hub-and-spoke revolution another wave of innovation resulted in the emergence of carriers offering low-fare no-frills point-to-point service as an alternative to the major airlines that dominated the major hubs. This too was a direct response to consumer preferences. More recently the introduction of the regional jet a new type of small jetliner is again changing the face of air travel. The low operating costs of regional jets make it more economical to serve medium-length routes capable of supporting only a modest number of passengers. This innovation opens up the prospect of adding smaller cities more frequent service to the spokes of hubs and possibly even a new market for point-to-point service. Without the stimulus of competition associated with regulatory reform in the airline industry these efficiency-enhancing cost-saving innovations in air travel would likely not have been conceived much less brought to fruition Effects of Regulatory Reform on Resource Allocation In general regulation that stifles entry and competition presents an attractive opportunity for reform to improve the efficiency of resource allocation. A corollary however is that in some instances reform can result in transitional losses to parties that were protected under the regulatory scheme. For example truckers who had benefited from entry barriers that kept shipping rates artificially high saw a percent drop in their wages relative to workers in the rest of the economy ; before reform however ICC-licensed truckers paid their workers about percent more than comparable workers in other industries Another efficiency-enhancing reallocation of resources can be seen in the airline industry where some carriers succumbed to competition following reform but were replaced by new more competitive entrants. By the total market valuation of the major airlines alone adjusted for inflation was more than double that of all carriers in before regulatory reform The lifting of restrictions on the geographic expansion of banks provides yet another example of the efficiency gains and economy-wide benefits that result when regulatory reform induces a reallocation of resources. These reforms involved both State and Federal actions including the passage of the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of Beginning in the 19th century and continuing through much of the 1970s States imposed geographic restrictions on the ability of banks to open branches. Such restrictions were motivated in part by a desire to protect bank profitability since taxes on banking activity were an important source of revenue in some States as well as by fears that unfettered bank expansion | Economic Report of the President would lead to a concentration of financial power. The development of large corporations with interstate banking needs ultimately created pressure for a less fragmented banking system but that need was not fully met until a major episode of reform occurred at the State level which began in and was essentially complete by the end of Although little evidence is available on the effects of the Federal-level reforms studies of State-level reforms indicate impressive net benefits. Bank efficiency and thus the efficiency of economy-wide resource allocation increased following the introduction of statewide banking as loan losses noninterest expenses and loan rates all fell significantly. With these improvements came more rapid growth of both personal income and State government revenue in States that had embarked on branching reform. These increases in bank efficiency reveal the implicit cost of the old branching regulations and are attributable to a number of factors. First restrictions on branching and interstate banking may have limited opportunities for the most efficient banks to expand. When those restrictions were lifted the weaker banks lost some of the protection from competition they had enjoyed and gave up market share to the stronger banks improving efficiency in the allocation of resources. Second the lifting of geographic restrictions may have increased pressure on managers concerned about takeovers resulting in increased managerial discipline ; evidence of this is a higher turnover rate for banks chief executive officers and a tighter relationship between pay and performance. This increased discipline may also have improved banks performance. Finally the geographic restrictions had limited banks ability to expand to their most efficient size ; removing these restrictions thus allowed small banks to grow and to take advantage of economies of scale by reducing their average costs and increasing their opportunities to diversify the risks associated with lending Pitfalls of Regulatory Reform The potential benefits from regulatory reform for firms consumers and the broader economy are great. Yet reform holds several potential pitfalls if not undertaken with considerable care. Efforts to reform the regulation of thrifts in the 1980s and of electricity markets in California in the 1990s led in both cases to costly debacles increasing public skepticism about reform. But regulators advocates of reform and the general public can learn much from these experiences and applying those lessons will help ensure the success of future efforts. Although reform in these markets held great promise for efficiency gains with corresponding benefits to consumers the precise form that reform took in these instances illustrates the complexity of the issues with which reform must typically contend. The two cases explored here underline the Chapter | dangers of partial or incomplete reform. They also show the dangers of not considering potential deviations from competitive conditions or the creation of perverse incentives Failure to Coordinate Reforms California s recent attempt to deregulate its electricity markets demonstrates the potentially expensive consequences of regulatory reform that lifts restrictions in one part of an industry without addressing restrictions elsewhere in the same industry. For most of its history the electricity industry in California was heavily regulated and heavily concentrated : a few privately owned vertically integrated monopolies owned and operated electricity generation transmission and distribution facilities throughout most of the State. Under pressure from consumers who paid some of the highest electricity prices in the Nation the California legislature in passed a restructuring law Among other things this law required the traditional monopolies to open their transmission and distribution lines to competing generators and wholesale marketers and it encouraged utilities to divest their existing generating capacity. Independent power producers were allowed to apply for environmental and siting permits and to sell power to eligible wholesale and retail customers. Retail customers were permitted to choose between purchasing electricity directly on the wholesale electricity market and continuing to pay regulated rates to obtain the default service from their local utility distribution company. Utilities serving retail customers were required to obtain electricity at unregulated rates through newly established wholesale market institutions and to charge customers a regulated rate for that electricity The restructured wholesale and retail markets for electricity functioned reasonably well as long as demand remained low or moderate and generation remained high. Regulators did not sufficiently anticipate however that the excess capacity that prevailed in the industry before restructuring would dissipate as rapidly as it did. Many interdependent factors including an increase in electricity demand rising natural gas prices rising prices for pollution emissions permits and other problems on the supply side combined to drive wholesale energy prices higher than regulators had expected. This proved financially disastrous for the utilities because the fixed price at which they were compelled to sell electricity to retail customers was now far below the wholesale price at which they could purchase electricity. In December utilities were paying almost $ a megawatt-hour for electricity in the wholesale market and reselling it to retail customers at $ a megawatt-hour ( Chart ) Their burden was compounded by the fact that regulators refused to allow the utilities to enter into long-term forward contracts to hedge their short positions. Ultimately the failure to coordinate the reform of wholesale and retail electricity markets in California proved a leading factor in | Economic Report of the President the effective bankruptcy of California s two largest utilities and the collapse of the wholesale markets which precipitated an expensive effort to guarantee continued electricity availability Deviation from Competitive Conditions Other factors also contributed to the failure of California s experiment in electricity deregulation. Although spot markets worked reasonably well at low and moderate levels of demand relative to supply the fact that consumers were sheltered from price fluctuations meant that in situations where demand was high relative to supply even small producers had considerable market power Generators quickly found that under these circumstances withholding electricity supply led to higher prices that increased their profitability further roiling markets. From November until May about percent of total generating capacity was not in service roughly double the typical historical outage rate. California government officials have argued that in some cases plants were withdrawn from service for strategic reasons a claim that generators dispute. In any case regulators had not planned for this extreme situation and had not built adequate flexibility into the regulatory structure to respond effectively. Moreover by keeping retail prices fixed regulators shortcircuited the pricing mechanism and precluded the possibility that consumers would respond to higher electricity prices by curtailing consumption Chapter | Furthermore by failing to address problems in the licensing process for new power plants and by creating an atmosphere of uncertainty over their potential profitability regulators may have diminished the ability and the incentives of market participants to respond to high prices in the longer term by developing new generating capacity To prevent widespread blackouts the State of California itself eventually had to enter into the sort of long-term contracts for electricity production that regulators had previously prevented utilities from entering. However because these contracts were signed in the spring of at the height of a spot market crisis California committed itself to purchase power at prices at least three times those prevailing in futures markets by the end of that summer Had all of the factors complicating electricity deregulation been carefully considered had the possibility of deviations from competitive conditions been entertained or had lessons from successful reform efforts in other jurisdictions been learned California might have avoided this costly experience Creating Perverse Incentives In any regulatory reform special care must be taken to ensure that the proposed changes do not inadvertently foster incentives for parties to engage in activities or take risks that are likely to be harmful to the public good or counter to the purpose of the reform. Another telling case of a reform that created perverse incentives is that of the thrift industry where regulatory reform without appropriate safeguards resulted in imprudent risk taking at the expense of the government Until the late 1970s government regulation set limits on the activities that savings and loan associations or thrifts could undertake essentially constraining them to taking in deposits and making mortgage loans. Because the deposits they accepted were short term and the mortgages they issued long term the thrifts were exposed to interest rate risk : a sharp increase in shortterm interest rates would increase their deposit interest costs while leaving their interest income from mortgages substantially unaffected. In Regulation Q which established an interest rate ceiling on bank deposits was extended to cover thrift deposits as well. This regulation temporarily resolved the interest rate squeeze facing the thrifts but at the expense of depositors for whom few alternative instruments offered safety and liquidity comparable to thrift or bank deposits. Other financial firms soon learned to circumvent Regulation Q by creating money market mutual funds. With this innovation Regulation Q ceased to provide interest rate protection to thrifts which then began to run substantial losses with the rising inflation and sharply higher interest rates of the late 1970s and early 1980s. In response to the thrifts pleas for relief the Congress passed legislation in and that significantly expanded the thrifts lending authority : federally chartered thrifts were now | Economic Report of the President permitted to make commercial real estate loans commercial loans and consumer loans and to take direct ownership positions in investment projects The reform also allowed thrifts to offer adjustable-rate mortgages and phased out interest rate ceilings on deposits In industries throughout the economy creditors protect their interests by monitoring the management and financial health of the firms they lend to Owners and managers who enjoy limited liability may face incentives to take excessive risks with the firm s assets or to operate in other ways that conflict with the creditors interests. This danger is particularly acute when the firm is running losses that put it in danger of imminent bankruptcy. In the case of banks and thrifts however Federal deposit insurance short-circuits this usual safeguard. Thus no mechanism existed to induce potential depositors to avoid the riskier thrifts. A thrift s principal creditors its insured depositors have little incentive to monitor the institution s financial health or its risk taking because their deposits are insured by the Federal Government to a maximum of $ per account. Also thrifts faced flat rates for deposit insurance instead of rates adjusted for the likelihood of insolvency. Accordingly no economic disincentive deterred thrift managers from taking excessive risks The usual regulatory response to the absence of this normal market-based protection is safety and soundness regulation in which the government exercises the oversight role normally carried out by a firm s creditors. The Achilles heel of thrift reform was precisely that it failed to accompany the thrifts deregulation with enhanced safety and soundness regulation. The effective bankruptcy of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation ( FSLIC ) in the early 1980s constrained the regulatory response as the capital positions of some thrifts eroded. In contrast to the airline industry where safety regulation was maintained as reform proceeded the necessary safety and soundness regulation of thrifts was undermined. Minimum net worth requirements for thrifts were actually lowered in both and Accounting rules were liberalized so that thrifts could avoid the consequences of failing to maintain inadequate capital. Also the number of field-force examiners declined between and and the number of examinations per thrift and per billion dollars of thrift assets fell significantly. Moreover the Congress raised the peraccount limit on federally insured deposits from $ to the present $ further discouraging depositors from taking an active oversight role and increasing the exposure of the Federal Government to the risky behavior of thrift managers. These conditions enabled thinly capitalized or insolvent thrifts to act on their incentive to shift risk to the FSLIC and ultimately the taxpayer through increases in asset risk and capital distributions to shareholders Regulatory reform of the thrift industry could have been just as beneficial as that in other industries. The reforms provided thrifts with new opportunities to improve their financial condition by opening up new investment Chapter | and loan markets to them and by increasing their ability to attract new deposits. Without the check of additional safety and soundness regulation however those thrifts whose financial condition was deteriorating faced incentives and were given the means to engage in excessive risk taking Ultimately this combination contributed importantly to an industry-wide crisis which culminated in in a Federal bailout whose ultimate cost to taxpayers was $ billion Putting the Principles to Work Of course inventorying and showcasing sound regulatory principles is not enough ; good principles that are not acted upon represent lost opportunities and frustrate effective public policymaking. Whether the principles outlined in this chapter become a dead limb on the tree of regulatory policy evolution or a vibrant branch depends on whether policymakers act to put these ideas into practice This Administration has pursued the principles of sound regulatory reform while recognizing that sound science drives good policy. It is now undertaking a major revision of the guidelines for conducting regulatory analysis that utilizes these principles to ensure a greater focus on performance and efficiency. The new guidelines emphasize transparency and increased accountability which together will provide the necessary structure for the sharing of information across regulatory agencies. This will ensure that the funds available for regulatory activity achieve the greatest possible benefits Examples from the environmental arena show that the Administration is pursuing these principles in its regulatory initiatives. Efficient policies are a hallmark of the President s strategy. The President s Clear Skies Initiative to improve air quality in the United States uses market-based regulation to tackle a pollution problem on which a scientific consensus has emerged Announced by the President on February Clear Skies will reduce emissions by power plants of three noxious air pollutants by well over half sulfur dioxide by percent nitrogen oxides by percent and mercury by percent over the next years. The reductions will also occur in a timely fashion as illustrated in Chart which compares the nearterm reductions under Clear Skies with those under the Clean Air Act Amendments of Clear Skies uses a dynamic approach to regulation that provides firms with the flexibility to reduce emissions in the most efficient and least costly manner possible. Through a market-based cap-and-trade program Federal emissions limits or caps are set for each pollutant and emissions permits are distributed | Economic Report of the President to electricity generators. The cap is to be reduced over time first in and again in and firms are required to respond by reducing their emissions accordingly. The advantage of this market-based approach lies in its ability to allow individual firms to choose for themselves the most efficient methods to reduce emissions. If they reduce emissions by more than the cap requires they can sell their unneeded permits on the open market or bank them for later use ; if their emissions exceed the cap they can purchase unused permits from other firms. Within this structure firms can design an efficient and costeffective strategy tailored to both their current budgets and their future plans Further this approach creates an incentive for firms to innovate to find economical techniques for reducing emissions. This dynamic approach to regulation is in sharp contrast to previous methods of command and control which were characterized by uncertainty over their enforcement The Clear Skies Initiative is modeled on the highly successful acid rain reduction program under the Clean Air Act which also used a cap-and-trade system. This program accomplished dramatic reductions in sulfur dioxide emissions at two-thirds the compliance cost of a traditional emissions reduction program. It resulted in a decrease in pollution greater than all other Clean Air Act programs combined. Emissions were reduced more quickly than required : annual sulfur dioxide emissions were cut in the first phase by Chapter | percent below allowed levels. Just as remarkable the program requires only a handful of EPA employees to administer. By taking this successful program as its model the Clear Skies Initiative hopes to achieve the same levels of efficient and cost-effective emissions reductions The Clear Skies Initiative is an example of a new original program that enjoys scientific consensus and adheres to the principles of good regulation The Administration has also aggressively pursued reform of existing regulatory programs in the area of air pollution. An example is the proposed changes to New Source Review ( NSR ) Established as part of the Clean Air Act Amendments NSR is intended to protect public health and welfare as new sources of air pollution are built and when existing sources are modified in a way that significantly increases air pollutant emissions When the Congress established NSR its intent was to maintain and improve air quality while providing for economic growth. Through the issuance of mandatory permits regulators oversaw the construction and modification of plants by establishing various actions that the sources had to undertake to control emissions. Although this appeared at the time to be a viable approach to emissions regulation over time NSR has become substantially more complex as industrial practices and regulations have evolved In June the EPA issued a report to the President on NSR citing several adverse impacts of the regulation. Generally the report found that NSR impedes or results in the cancellation of projects that would maintain or improve the reliability efficiency or safety of existing power plants and refineries. Not only did the regulatory uncertainty and lack of flexibility surrounding NSR hinder investment the report found but the added costs and delays imposed by the NSR process had become quite burdensome as well. The NSR permit process can add more than a year to the time needed to review proposed modifications to a plant and can cost over $ million Such obstacles might lead firms to delay or forgo plans to modernize their facilities in ways that would benefit the environment To take just one example a manufacturer that operates a process that includes a drying system determined that the system s energy efficiency could be improved if the existing drier nozzles were replaced with Teflon-coated nozzles. The firm found however that the replacement would be economical only if the expense of obtaining an NSR permit could be avoided. NSR currently does exclude repairs and maintenance activities that are deemed routine but it relies on an intricate and lengthy analysis to determine whether a given repair meets the definition of routine. Since the firm could not readily discern whether the installation of new nozzles would be considered routine maintenance a repair or a replacement it decided not to proceed with the project. In this way NSR deters firms from conducting needed repairs and often results in unnecessary emissions of pollutants. In this case NSR requirements actually made the environment worse off | Economic Report of the President The Administration recognizes that government action that fails in its purpose must be reformed or ended. Recent EPA research points to the conclusion that the NSR program has become outdated and is in need of revision : although NSR was intended to be a method of reducing pollution it has led to actions by the private sector that were not intended and that do not promote the goals of the regulation. After careful consideration of the detrimental effects of the regulation this Administration has chosen to undertake reforms that will remove constraints on firms that wish to make plant-level modifications that will have beneficial impacts on the environment Conclusion Administered effectively government regulation can contribute greatly to the Nation s economic well-being. But regulation is not a silver bullet Unintended consequences occur and can negate the positive effects of regulation. Although no regulatory agenda is foolproof this chapter has showcased some fundamental principles of regulation and regulatory reform that can foster competition and correct market failures while maintaining both static and dynamic efficiency. These principles include the encouragement of economic flexibility and dynamism an increase in market orientation and a reduction in reliance on command-and-control regimes In addition regulatory review is an important safety valve for relieving the regulatory burden The two policy initiatives summarized above the adoption of Clear Skies legislation and the reform of NSR highlight the shortcomings of a one-sizefits-all regulatory approach. In some cases when the science dictates it regulation must be made more stringent. In others where regulation impedes progress reforms must be instituted that reduce or change the nature of the regulation. The principles laid out in this chapter together with the lessons learned from past experience can lend important insights into efficient ways to tackle such difficult issues as homeland security and corporate reform Chapter | C H A P T E R Tax Policy for a Growing Economy T he income tax has been the single largest revenue source for the Federal Government ever since World War II. Today it touches nearly every aspect of our lives. The income tax also fosters economic inefficiency and its complexity leads to staggering compliance costs. Past efforts at partial reform of the income tax have not succeeded in reducing its complexity removing its distortions of economic incentives or making it more fair. Some might think that significant obstacles block the way to making great progress toward achieving these goals but in fact such reform can be accomplished within the basic framework of the existing tax system In the Internal Revenue Service spent $ billion on processing enforcement and information systems but this direct cost of administering the income tax is just a small fraction of its total cost. It has been estimated that individual taxpayers in the aggregate spend up to billion hours each year to comply with the tax system about hours per taxpayer. The present tax code with its myriad exclusions exemptions adjustments deductions and credits has grown into a labyrinth of complexity. In tax year nearly million taxpayers ( percent of all taxpayers ) used paid tax preparers to complete their tax forms. Many taxpayers purchase tax-help books and computer software. Compliance costs are also onerous for business taxpayers especially small businesses and the typical Fortune company spends almost $ million a year on tax matters The current tax system also causes households and businesses to rearrange their affairs in a number of ways that make poor use of economic resources leading to substantial economic waste and ultimately reducing real incomes The system affects a number of important economic decisions such as how much to save and invest how much risk to take how much home mortgage debt to carry how much in tax-exempt bonds to hold when to realize capital gains whether to hold assets that produce dividends or capital gains or interest how much labor to supply and how much to hire whether to organize business operations in corporate or noncorporate form and to what extent to comply with the tax system. Perhaps one of the more salient distortions in the income tax today is that caused by the double tax on corporate income. As discussed extensively later in this chapter this double taxation occurs when income distributed to shareholders as dividends or realized as capital gains is subject to individual tax after already being taxed at the corporate level. Double taxation causes too little capital to be allocated to the corporate sector and a disproportionate share of capital to be allocated to other sectors of the economy. For a discussion of the President s recent proposal to eliminate the double tax on corporate income see Chapter These distortions and others lower saving rates and inhibit investment capital accumulation risk taking and innovation thereby lowering the growth potential of the economy real incomes and consumption. It has been estimated for example that elimination of the double tax on corporate income alone could increase economic well-being by as much as $ billion each year forever. Tax preferences provided through the array of exclusions exemptions adjustments deductions and credits represent policy decisions to exclude some income from the tax base but this poses a tradeoff : a higher overall tax rate is then required to raise a given amount of revenue and this distorts household and business decisions and imposes a corresponding burden on the economy. Reduction or removal of many of these distortions through broadening the tax base and lowering tax rates would by one estimate increase accumulated capital by to percent and real GDP by to percent. The economic gains from fundamental reform of the tax system could lead to substantial increases in economic well-being for all Americans The major objectives of tax reform are to reduce complexity improve economic incentives and address fairness. The central theme that brings these objectives together is that household and business decisions should depend on the tax code as little as possible. Taxing all income but taxing it only once is a key ingredient of many reform plans. This would involve broadening the tax base while lowering tax rates. Some efforts have also focused on a shift from taxing income to taxing consumption or consumed income A possible argument against reform is the suggestion that the current tax system instead needs to be ripped out by its roots and completely replaced Arguments for such wholesale reform certainly have merit. This chapter however illustrates ways in which the current system could be modified to improve incentives and boost real incomes An important goal of any tax reform proposal is to reduce complexity. In the current tax system much of the complexity and thus much of the compliance burden result from the numerous tax preferences differential taxation and the taxation of capital income. Aspects of the current system often involve complicated phase-ins and phaseouts designed to target tax benefits to certain groups of individuals or businesses. Replacing these targeted tax preferences with broad exclusions or lower tax rates would reduce this complexity. Differential taxation or the taxation of different types of income at different rates such as the double tax on corporate income and the exclusion for many employer-provided fringe benefits creates incentives for taxpayers to rearrange their affairs to realize income in ways that are taxed more lightly. The use of tax shelters and arrangements that allow taxpayers to defer their tax liability is to a large extent the result | Economic Report of the President of these kinds of differentials. Reducing differential taxation would reduce complexity reduce the incentives for tax shelters and improve other economic incentives. Finally research suggests that compliance costs are substantially higher for taxpayers with significant amounts of financial and business income. Defining such income and allocating it to individual taxpayers involves substantial recordkeeping. Many reform proposals would both reduce the tax on certain types of capital income to promote saving and investment and simplify the taxation of such income Some opponents of reform argue that taxing consumption rather than income would necessarily place a relatively heavier tax burden on lower income taxpayers. Conventional distributional analysis typically considers a snapshot of taxpayers economic well-being at a particular point in time Research has shown that when a longer view is taken differences in wellbeing whether measured by income or by consumption tend to be not as great because of the fluidity of household incomes over time. Also analyses of the distributional effects of moving to a tax based on consumption rather than income often do not recognize that a substantial portion of capital income which is earned primarily by higher income taxpayers is taxed under both income and consumption tax principles. The distributional effect of moving to a consumption tax looks considerably more progressive when the taxation of a substantial portion of capital income under a consumption tax is taken into account. Indeed both an income tax and a consumption tax levy tax on the extraordinary ( or what economists call supernormal or inframarginal ) returns to capital This chapter revisits these issues focusing particularly on ways in which the influence of taxes on key economic decisions could be diminished within the framework of the current tax system. First the key objectives of reducing complexity improving economic incentives and achieving fairness are laid out in greater detail. The broad principles that underlie the two main approaches to taxation that based on income and that based on consumption are then described. These principles focus on how to raise enough revenue to fund a given level of government services in a way that has the least effect on economic decisions. Next a framework is outlined against which the current hybrid tax system can be compared and contrasted. Then two issues important to evaluating the distributional effects of moving to a consumption tax the fluidity of taxpayer incomes and the taxation of capital income under a consumption tax are discussed. This is followed by a discussion of how the current tax system taxes neither wholly income nor wholly consumption highlighting the ways in which the current system departs from these broad principles. Finally the chapter considers some of the major decisions and tradeoffs involved in proposed changes to the tax system. Modest structural changes are outlined that would move the current tax system toward either an income- or a consumptionbased system improve economic incentives and reduce complexity Chapter | Objectives of Tax Reform At the outset some overriding and fundamental objectives for tax reform can be identified : simplicity fairness and the promotion of long-term economic growth through improvements in incentives. These objectives are very much interrelated. Complexity for example can undermine one view of fairness if despite the progressive tax rate schedule and targeted tax preferences taxpayers perceive that higher income taxpayers pay less tax than they should through tax avoidance and tax sheltering. Similarly complexity from the phase-in and phaseout of targeted tax preferences can distort economic decisions and thus impede long-term growth by imposing a high effective tax rate on certain taxpayer decisions. But sometimes these objectives come in conflict. For example addressing fairness through targeted tax preferences may distort economic decisions and undermine long-term growth through differential taxation and a higher overall tax rate Simplicity : Freeing up Resources for Productive Use The current tax system is often viewed as difficult to understand and the resulting billions of hours and billions of dollars devoted to tax administration and compliance are a drag on the economy. As mentioned above taxpayers spend as much as billion hours a year on Federal tax matters and compliance costs associated with the Federal income tax equal about percent of revenue or about $ billion in The numerous tax preferences and the interactions among them together with differential taxation give rise to much of the complexity in the current tax system. The taxation of capital income and the complex rules governing depreciation also result in considerable complexity for both households and businesses. The rules used to define business receipts and deductions require recordkeeping and complex calculations sometimes over many years. Self-employed taxpayers spend an average of hours a year on such tax matters. Studies consistently find that compliance costs are most onerous for smaller businesses. Taxpayers with capital income such as capital gains dividends interest and rental income also tend to have high compliance costs Compliance costs can be high even for individuals who receive most of their income as wages. The number of tax preferences has risen often involving multiple definitions and preferences often give rise to complicated interactions between provisions. For example the tax code currently defines a child in at least five different ways : one way for purposes of qualifying for the child tax credit another to qualify for the child and dependent care tax credit another to determine head of household filing status another for the Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) and another for the exemption for dependents. Taxpayers with children may need to understand which | Economic Report of the President definition applies to some or all of these provisions when filling out their tax returns. Multiple definitions also encumber the provisions of the tax code relating to education expenses ( such as the Lifetime Learning credit the Hope credit the education deduction Coverdell Savings Accounts and college savings and prepaid tuition plans ) household maintenance tests and earnings tests. An increasing number of taxpayers are also required to comply with two parallel tax systems : the regular tax and the alternative minimum tax ( Box ) A major source of complexity in the current income tax is its attempt to target tax benefits to meet a variety of social goals. Integration of social goals into the tax system takes the form of altering the definition of ability to pay across a wide set of taxpayer characteristics. In this respect defining a child five or more different ways is important if it is desirable to vary tax preferences along these dimensions. However it comes with considerable compliance and economic costs. What is often not appreciated is the extent to which the targeting of these tax preferences subjects taxpayers with the same income to different effective tax rates ( Box ) Elimination and consolidation of tax preferences would help simplify the tax system and improve economic incentives Fairness : Relating Taxes to Ability to Pay and to Economic Well-Being The income tax system should relate a taxpayer s tax liability to his or her ability to pay and to his or her economic well-being. This is the rationale behind the current progressive rate structure whereby tax rates rise with annual income as well as behind many of the existing tax preferences However the link to ability to pay begins to weaken when taxpayers with the same level of income pay different amounts of tax because of differences in eligibility for some tax preferences or have different opportunities to avoid paying taxes. Taxpayers fortunate enough to receive good tax advice might for example learn of opportunities to shelter income from tax legally ; this can erode confidence in the tax system. Faith in the fairness of the tax system can also be undermined when compliant taxpayers see others evading substantial amounts of tax How ability to pay is measured is also crucial to perceptions of fairness The current income tax system uses annual income as a yardstick for ability to pay. Some have argued however that what a taxpayer actually consumes better reflects his or her economic well-being than how much income that taxpayer earns. Consumption patterns are determined by incomes over a time horizon that extends well beyond year. A household s past income and in particular its expectations about future income are critical in determining how much the household spends in any given year. Researchers have Chapter | Box 5-1.The Toll of Two Taxes : Compliance with the Regular and the Alternative Minimum Tax An increasing number of taxpayers are required to comply with two parallel income tax systems : the regular tax and the alternative minimum tax ( AMT ) Although the AMT itself is not very complicated taxpayers may be surprised to learn that some of the deductions and credits they claim under the regular tax and even the benefit of the lower rate brackets are substantially reduced if they become subject to the AMT. Indeed these factors are exactly what push many taxpayers onto the AMT The AMT is in many respects an example of a government policy that has had unintended consequences. The minimum tax the precursor to today s AMT was enacted in following a report that very high income individuals had paid no tax. Although its original intent was to ensure that a relatively few high-income individuals pay tax it is projected that some million taxpayers will pay the AMT by assuming that the tax reductions enacted in are permanently extended ( Chart ) Moreover more than two-thirds of married taxpayers with two or more children and percent of taxpayers with incomes between $ and $ will face the AMT by Some estimates indicate that by the AMT will raise more revenue than the regular tax | Economic Report of the President generally concluded that incomes over longer time horizons are a better indicator of differences in economic well-being than income in any one year Annual incomes can vary from lifetime incomes for many reasons. One is that income tends to vary in a predictable way over a person s working life Most individuals earnings are relatively low when they enter the work force and then rise as they gain job experience. Earnings typically peak after midlife and fall after one enters retirement. Early in their lives taxpayers might dissave ( that is dip into their savings or more likely borrow ) to finance college and job training expenses and then save during their middle years so as to accumulate wealth on which to support themselves in retirement. How much a taxpayer consumes in a given year depends both on that taxpayer s earnings and on how much he or she decides to save. Aggressive savers can support a higher level of consumption in retirement. Incomes can also vary in response to a variety of other events such as transitions between jobs unemployment marriage and divorce illness and volatility in business income and income from the sale of assets Two conclusions can be drawn from this distinction between lifetime and annual incomes. First annual consumption rather than annual income might be a better proxy for economic well-being because consumption is more closely related to income over a longer time horizon than to income in a given year. Second the use of annual income in analyzing the distributional effects of the current tax system and proposed changes overstates the extent of inequality among taxpayers. Some of the measured inequality will actually reflect comparisons between taxpayers of different ages for example comparing a working professional with a retiree who left the work force long ago. Other measured inequality will reflect temporary shocks to income due to changes in employment status living arrangements and the uneven manner in which some people earn their income. Distributional analyses that take these factors into account may provide a better measure of ability to pay and of economic well-being Long-Term Growth : Boosting Economic Performance by Improving Incentives A central aspect of tax reform is whether it can improve the economy s overall performance leading to a rise in real incomes. Reducing the tax system s deleterious impact on incentives to work save invest and innovate would help increase growth and boost real incomes in the long term. The tax system affects these incentives in a number of ways. Differentials in the rate of tax imposed on economic decisions cause households and businesses to shift attention and effort to less taxed activities. These distortions in household and business decisions can result in a misallocation of resources in the economy and reduce real incomes below what could be achieved otherwise Chapter | Box What Tax Rate Do Taxpayers Really Face ? Many taxpayers look to their statutory tax rates their tax bracket to gauge how large a bite the Federal Government takes from their paycheck. Some might be surprised to learn that their effective marginal tax rate what they actually pay on their last dollar of income can differ substantially from their statutory tax rate Moreover even though statutory tax rates are relatively low at low levels of income reflecting the progressivity of the current tax rate schedule the effective marginal tax rates that low-income taxpayers face can in some situations be unexpectedly high Chart shows the effective marginal tax rate for a hypothetical family of four at various income levels. What is striking about this chart is that effective rates do not consistently rise with income. Rather there are numerous spikes and steps that reflect the phase-ins and phaseouts of various deductions credits and other provisions Taxpayers may receive a tax benefit from the child tax credit for example but find that the tax on their last dollar of income is pushed up as this credit phases out The distribution of effective marginal tax rates for taxpayers at given income levels is shown in Chart which documents the extent to which effective marginal tax rates vary at given levels of income. The chart shows marginal tax rates for the 10th 50th and 90th percentiles where taxpayers are ranked at each level of income by their marginal tax rate. At any given income level percent of taxpayers will have marginal tax rates above the line indicated for the median taxpayer and percent of taxpayers will have marginal tax rates exceeding the line for the 90th percentile. For example percent of taxpayers with $ in income have marginal tax rates that are below percent ( the tax rate at the 10th percentile ) ; percent have marginal tax rates below and half above percent ; and percent have marginal tax rates above percent As the chart shows marginal tax rates diverge considerably even among taxpayers at the same income level especially at lower incomes. The divergence arises because of the various deductions and credits that phase in and then out at various rates depending on a host of taxpayer characteristics and choices. Indeed these phase-ins and phaseouts would cause considerable variation in effective marginal rates even under a flat statutory tax rate schedule | Economic Report of the President Chapter | As described above reduction of these distortions can have a substantial effect on capital accumulation ( and thus wealth ) increase long-term growth and boost real incomes Analysis of Alternative Reforms The two main approaches typically advocated by economists to revamping the current income tax involve moving the current tax base to one that is closer to comprehensive income or replacing the current income tax with a tax that falls only on consumption. Comprehensive income which some advocate as the best measure of an individual s overall well-being and ability to pay is defined as current consumption plus increases to wealth. Taxation based on comprehensive income would include in the tax base all labor income income from the ownership of capital ( such as dividends interest rents and accrued capital gains ) and gifts and bequests received. Deductions reflecting the cost of earning income such as job-related training expenses would be allowed because they reflect neither purchases for consumption nor any accretion to wealth. One feature of a comprehensive income tax is that it treats individuals with the same accrued purchasing power equally regardless of the source thus adhering to the principle of horizontal equity. An individual receiving income primarily from labor for example would be treated no differently than a person with the same level of income from capital or a bequest This framework however has some practical problems related to the taxation of capital gains inflation income volatility and imputed income Although capital gains reflect additions to wealth measuring these gains as they accrue is at best problematic : it requires frequent valuation of assets and accurate market values for some assets can not easily be established. Another problem is that inflation causes asset appreciation unrelated to changes in purchasing power ; a proper accounting would require that the inflationary component of capital gains be removed from the tax base. Dividends and net interest income should likewise be included in taxable income only to the extent they exceed inflationary returns. Yet another problem is that the volatility of taxable income combined with a progressive tax rate schedule could cause two taxpayers who have the same taxable income when cumulated over several years to pay different amounts of tax thereby violating the principle that taxpayers with equal ability to pay be treated equally One of the most vexing problems associated with a comprehensive income tax is the need to include imputed income in the tax base. Imputed income arises from consumption or accretions in wealth that occur outside of normal market mechanisms and therefore are difficult to value. The value | Economic Report of the President of the services that a homemaker provides is a standard example of imputed income. Another is imputed rent which accrues to a taxpayer who owns his or her own home because that taxpayer is just as well off as another who owns a house of equal value but receives rental income from a tenant. Under a comprehensive income tax imputed rent the flow of housing services received by owner-occupants who in effect rent their house to themselves would be included in income. Expenses related to producing that income including depreciation mortgage interest and property taxes would be excluded from income however. Clearly taxing such imputed values raises enormous practical difficulties A key aspect of analyzing a tax base is taking into account all of the points of collection in the tax system. Income for example can be taxed and collected either at the business or at the individual level. If tax on a comprehensive income tax base were collected entirely at the business level businesses would pay tax on their business receipts less expenses but would deduct neither compensation to employees nor interest payments nor dividends paid to shareholders. If businesses are not allowed to deduct compensation they in effect withhold and remit to the government the tax on compensation when paying the business-level tax Tax on interest and dividends could also be paid at either the business or the individual level. If paid only at the business level dividends and interest would not be deductible and the corresponding income would be excluded from tax at the individual level. If instead dividends and interest were taxed only at the individual level businesses would receive a full deduction for dividends and interest paid The current income tax demonstrates the importance of considering all points of collection. Under the current tax system interest income is not subject to the business-level tax because interest payments are treated as a deductible business expense. Instead interest payments are included in individuals taxable income. In contrast corporate dividends are subject to tax at the business level because dividend payments are not deductible. What is striking however is that dividends are also included in individuals taxable income. Dividends are thus taxed twice Consumption rather than income has been suggested as another potential tax base. As discussed above one rationale is the claim that consumption is more closely related to a taxpayer s well-being than annual income. Also by taxing consumption rather than income the tax system would not distort taxpayers decisions about how much income to save. In contrast because the income tax includes the return to saving in the tax base it taxes future consumption ( that is current saving ) more heavily than current consumption Under an income tax current consumption is tax-favored relative to future consumption thereby discouraging saving Chapter | A hypothetical consumption tax could be implemented in any of several ways. It could for example take the form of a national retail sales tax imposed broadly on all consumption goods at the final stage of production An alternative form of consumption tax common in Europe is the creditinvoice method value-added tax ( VAT ) where a business pays taxes on its total receipts but receives a credit for taxes previously paid by suppliers on goods that the business has purchased from them. This tax builds in a degree of self-enforcement because businesses can claim a credit against their tax bill only if another business has previously paid tax on the sale. Nevertheless the experience with State sales taxes and with the European VAT suggests that compliance can be undermined and considerable complexity added when certain final products are fully or partly exempted. Some have suggested that transactions-based national retail sales taxes where revenue is collected at every point of final sale raise difficult administrative and compliance issues and may become infeasible at a rate above percent Alternatively a tax on final goods consumed by households could be imposed on businesses total receipts less payments to other businesses including purchases of equipment and structures. This type of entity-based consumption tax called a subtraction-method VAT imposes tax on final purchases by consumers which is remitted on the value added by businesses at each stage of production. Because a subtraction-method VAT does not provide a deduction for compensation nearly percent of the tax base reflects compensation to workers. Under this approach the tax on housing consumption would essentially appear as a tax on the construction and sale of new homes. This payment of tax on the value added at each stage of the production of new homes is equivalent to prepaying the tax on the future stream of annual housing consumption that the home provides ; that is it is equivalent to a tax on annual imputed rental income The deduction for purchases from other businesses under a subtractionmethod VAT ensures that the tax does not fall on previously taxed business sales. Unlike with an income tax the deduction for investment expenditure ( in other words expensing rather than depreciation ) exempts from tax a portion of the return to a capital investment. In economic terms the deduction for investment expenditure exactly equals the tax on the cash flow from the expected normal return on the investment. Therefore the deduction eliminates the tax on this part of the investment return ; that is the return to capital at the margin is fully exempt from tax. However to the extent the investment returns an amount in excess of the expected normal return perhaps because of chance innovation or successful risk taking the tax on these above-normal returns ( what economists call supernormal or inframarginal returns ) will exceed the tax value of the initial deduction. That is these supernormal returns will generally be taxed. Treatment of investment | Economic Report of the President earnings under a consumption tax would thus be similar to that under Individual Retirement Accounts as Box explains The subtraction-method VAT has received a lot of attention in discussions of tax reform because with slight modification its structure becomes very similar to that of the current income tax. Instead of taxing compensation at the business level as under the subtraction-method VAT compensation could be taxed at the household level by allowing businesses to deduct employee Box How Are Consumption Taxes and Individual Retirement Accounts Similar ? Individual Retirement Accounts ( IRAs ) treat investment earnings in the same way that a consumption tax would. They thus provide a framework for describing how a consumption tax would exempt a portion of investment earnings from tax. If taxpayers deduct contributions to an IRA from their taxable income they are also required to include all distributions from the IRA in their taxable income. For the purpose of discussing the tax treatment of the return to saving under a consumption tax the IRA contribution limits can be ignored. An investor with unlimited access to capital would invest up to the point where the payoff from an additional dollar invested ( the marginal investment ) just covers the costs of the investment including taxes. The value of the upfront deduction for the initial investment however will exactly offset ( in present value ) the tax on the expected normal return when the IRA is distributed Consequently with an IRA the decision to invest an additional dollar is unaffected by the tax. Returns above the expected normal return ( extraordinary returns ) however will generally be subject to tax Consumption taxes treat investment earnings in essentially the same way. Under a national retail sales tax the most straightforward type of consumption tax no tax is paid on income that is saved or on investment earnings that are reinvested. Tax is paid only on sales of final goods and services that is when the taxpayer consumes. The taxpayer in effect receives an upfront deduction on savings. Imposing a tax on final sales is thus effectively the same as taxing a distribution from an IRA. Other types of consumption taxes such as the subtraction-method value-added tax and the two-tiered value-added tax where compensation is taxed at the household level work in essentially the same way Roth IRAs provide tax benefits that are similar to those of deductible IRAs but differ in the timing of taxes paid. In contrast to a deductible IRA contributions to Roth IRAs are not deductible from taxable income Contributions are made with after-tax dollars but distributions from Roth IRAs are tax free. An important insight about deductible IRAs and Chapter | Box continued Taxation of Investments With and Without Extraordinary Returns : Deductible IRA versus Roth IRA Investment without extraordinary returns Item Deductible IRA Investment with extraordinary returns Deductible IRA Roth IRA Roth IRA Investment $ $ $ $ Initial tax payment................................................. Contribution Investment earnings.............................................. Account balance after year Tax due upon distribution...................................... After-tax distribution/account value Note. Calculations are for a hypothetical 1-year investment assuming no restrictions or penalties on distributions. The taxpayer is assumed to face a percent tax rate when making the contribution and upon distribution. The investment without extraordinary returns is assumed to return percent which is similar to the historical return to corporate equities. The extraordinary or inframarginal return is assumed to be $ on the first $ contributed to each IRA and percent on the remaining $ contributed to the deductible IRA Source : Council of Economic Advisers Roth IRAs is that an equivalent investment in each type of account will result in the same after-tax account balance and finance the same amount of consumption during retirement The table above illustrates the equivalence between deductible and Roth IRAs for an investment without extraordinary returns. In this example $ is invested in a deductible IRA and $ in a Roth IRA before paying tax. In the case of the deductible IRA the upfront deduction offsets any tax due. In the case of the Roth IRA the taxpayer contributes the after-tax amount to the IRA. After year the initial investment plus investment earnings are distributed. Tax is paid on the distribution from the deductible IRA but not on that from the Roth IRA.The key point is that the after-tax distributions from the two IRAs are identical ; that is both investments finance the same level of consumption. This result will always hold provided the duration and rates of return of the investments are the same and the tax rates at the time of contribution and the time of distribution are equal. Aside from these factors savers should generally be indifferent between deductible and Roth IRAs | Economic Report of the President Box continued What is the significance of this difference in the timing of tax payments between deductible and Roth IRAs ? Under a Roth IRA the taxpayer effectively is prepaying tax. Conversely under a deductible IRA the government in effect becomes a co-investor in an amount equal to the upfront deduction. The government receives its share of the earnings on the investment in the form of the tax payment due upon distribution. For an investment with expected normal returns the tax payment due upon distribution under a deductible IRA is equivalent to the prepayment of tax under a Roth IRA. If the government could reinvest the tax received from prepayment under a Roth IRA in an equivalent investment the value of its investment would be exactly equal to the tax payment due upon distribution under the deductible IRA However this equivalency may not hold if the investment yields certain types of extraordinary returns : what economists sometimes call inframarginal returns such as might result from innovation discovery or an idea with an extraordinarily large payoff. If these returns are at some level fixed they preclude reinvestment of the tax prepayment at the same extraordinarily high return. In contrast risky investments do not necessarily produce inframarginal returns because additional investments could be made at the same rate of return The table compares the after-tax value of investments in deductible and Roth IRAs with such extraordinary returns. With a deductible IRA the extraordinary returns are taxed through the government s role as a co-investor. However under the Roth IRA this type of extraordinary return goes untaxed and the Roth IRA has a correspondingly higher after-tax value than the deductible IRA This result has important implications for consumption taxes. A consumption tax that works like a deductible IRA will tax all extraordinary investment returns including inframarginal returns from innovation and ingenuity. The example of the deductible IRA also illustrates how expensing of investment taxes such extraordinary returns The different tax treatment of extraordinary returns under a deductible IRA than under a Roth IRA also illuminates the key difference between a destination-based tax which taxes imports but not exports and an origin-based tax which taxes exports but not imports ( discussed later in the chapter ) The taxation of exports under the origin principle works like a prepayment mechanism that has the effect of exempting extraordinary returns from tax Chapter | compensation and imposing a tax on compensation at the household level In contrast to a subtraction-method VAT this structure ( sometimes called a two-tiered consumption tax ) has several possible advantages. First its similarity in structure to the current income tax could ease the transition and facilitate acceptance. Second unlike transactions-based and entity-based consumption taxes a two-tiered consumption tax would permit progressivity to be introduced directly through the household-level tax by allowing generous exemptions to individuals or by retaining tax preferences available under current law. Of course targeting of tax preferences for social policy objectives introduces complexity and may have the unintended consequence of distorting taxpayer behavior by implicitly imposing high effective marginal tax rates Switching to a consumption tax without the necessary transition provisions might impose a one-time levy on existing capital. In the context of a cash flow tax such as a subtraction-method VAT that allows expensing of investment this one-time levy occurs because full expensing makes new investment cheaper. The one-time levy would not distort economic decisions however because it is imposed on existing capital for which the decision to invest has already been made not on new capital. Taxing existing but not new capital may transfer income from the old who have accumulated assets over their lifetimes to the young who have just begun to do so. This raises important issues of fairness. The one-time tax on existing capital would mean a reduction in the tax burden of the young reflected through lower tax rates which itself would offset the decline in value of existing assets and improve incentives to work and save and allow a higher rate of capital accumulation Consumption tax reform could offer some type of transition relief to reduce the one-time tax on existing capital. Partial transition relief could take the form of allowing businesses to retain their basis in existing capital. The extent of transition relief would determine the size of the tax on existing capital. The more generous the transition relief the smaller the benefits of a shift to a consumption tax base What Does the Current System Tax ? The current tax system deviates from both a comprehensive income tax base and a comprehensive consumption tax base in important ways. First a substantial share of income is removed from the tax base through the exclusions exemptions deductions and credits available under current law. As Chart shows tax preferences under current law reduce the income tax base from what it would be under a comprehensive income tax by over percent. A few major preferences such as the personal exemption the standard deduction and itemized deductions including the home mortgage | Economic Report of the President interest deduction account for percent of income excluded from the comprehensive income tax base. Exclusions primarily for tax-preferred savings and employer-provided health insurance remove another percent with other tax preferences accounting for the rest of the gap Tax preferences can distort economic decisions by creating tax differentials between different types of income and consumption. These preferences are similar to government transfers or to subsidies that have the same effect as direct government expenditures. As already noted these preferences pose a tradeoff against the higher marginal and average tax rates needed to raise a given amount of revenue which then distort household and business decisions. Preferences that apply unequally to taxpayers with similar resources also violate the principle of horizontal equity Many of these preferences however serve useful social purposes. Some of the preferences listed in Chart for example such as that for employerprovided health insurance subsidize health care expenditure. The personal exemption the child tax credit and the EITC adjust taxable income to reflect ability to pay An important difference between a comprehensive income tax and the current income tax is the high degree of differential taxation present in the latter The double tax on newly equity-financed corporate investment as described later in the chapter is one of the most important examples but others abound There is considerable variation across asset types in the acceleration of Chapter | depreciation allowances implying different tax rates for different investments The current tax system also taxes capital gains and dividends differently excludes from tax the implicit returns from consumer durables and exempts from tax the interest paid on State and local government bonds Like a comprehensive consumption tax the current income tax also exempts a substantial amount of income generated from returns to savings through a variety of tax-preferred retirement plans and accounts. ( Together these amount to the largest item listed in Chart ) In roughly million individuals participated as either active workers separated but vested workers survivors or retirees in the current system of employermanaged pensions. About million workers were active participants in defined-contribution plans ( plans in which benefits vary with the return on the invested funds ) Contributions to these plans are tax deductible with employers often providing matching contributions. Another million workers participated in defined-benefit plans to which employers make taxdeductible contributions on behalf of employees with benefits typically based on past pay and years of service. The investment income earned within these accounts accrues tax-free but distributions are included in taxable income Individual Retirement Accounts ( IRAs ) and similar arrangements such as Medical Savings Accounts Coverdell Savings Accounts and college savings and prepaid tuition ( Section ) plans provide similar tax advantages. The | Economic Report of the President TABLE Household Saving in Tax-Preferred and Taxable Accounts Item Billions of dollars Percent of gross household saving Percent of expanded disposable income Expanded disposable personal income Gross household saving Saving in tax-preferred plans/accounts Employer pension plans Individual Retirement Accounts Life insurance and other tax-preferred accounts Investment in owner-occupied housing Net acquisition of taxable financial assets ( less accrued taxes ) Less : Household borrowing Home mortgage borrowing Consumer and other borrowing Equals : Net household saving................................................................. Note. Expanded disposable personal income is equal to disposable personal income plus net investment in government retirement accounts and corporate retained earnings less the accrued tax liability of saving Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Council of Economic Advisers using methodology described in William G. Gale and John Sabelhaus Perspectives on the Household Saving Rate Brookings Papers on Economic Activity and updated data from Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Investment Company Institute combined effect of the upfront deduction for contributions and the tax deferral on earnings is a zero tax ( in present value terms ) on the returns to assets held within these accounts although as discussed below ( and in Box ) so-called extraordinary returns are still taxed in all but the Roth IRA and other types of accounts where tax is prepaid. In about $ trillion in assets was held within these tax-preferred retirement accounts. An additional $ billion was held within State-sponsored prepaid tuition and college savings plans Because saving is the difference between income and consumption the exclusion of significant amounts of investment income from the tax base has the effect of transforming the current tax system into a system that is partly based on consumption. Table puts this point in perspective by comparing various categories of saving in the United States for ( the latest date for which consistent data are available ) Gross household saving was about $ billion in that year. Saving net of borrowing was about $ billion implying a household saving rate of about percent of income. Saving in tax-preferred accounts defined-benefit plans definedcontribution plans IRAs and life insurance accounts accounted for nearly percent of gross household saving in Saving in owner-occupied housing accounted for another percent of gross household saving. As previously noted imputed rental income is not Chapter | taxed under the current system. Most of the appreciation in the value of owner-occupied housing is likewise not taxed through the current exclusion from capital gains taxation ( $ for taxpayers filing jointly $ for single taxpayers ) This treatment exempts from tax most investment income from owner-occupied housing. Interest and dividends are taxed when received but tax on the appreciation of financial assets is paid only upon disposition of the asset ( that is tax is deferred ) and then at preferential capital gains rates although the amount subject to tax includes inflationary as well as real gains Although tax-preferred retirement saving and housing thus face effective tax rates on the expected normal return that are close to zero ( in present value ) taxpayers do not in many cases face a zero tax rate on their last dollar of investment income. There are two explanations for this. First an individual s saving may exceed his or her eligible contributions to these accounts Second taxpayers may be investing outside of these accounts because their purposes are other than the prescribed goals of these accounts. Moreover only about percent of employees had access to or were covered by an employermanaged pension plan in However virtually all individuals with earnings have access to some type of tax-preferred savings program including IRAs because taxpayers without access to an employer-managed pension plan are generally eligible to deduct contributions to an IRA from taxable income Thus the set of taxpayers who do not receive consumption tax treatment on their last dollar of retirement savings consists of those without access to a pension plan and who make the maximum IRA contribution plus those ( very few ) with access to a pension plan who make the maximum contribution. Data for the mid-1990s indicate that only about two-thirds of taxpayers reporting deductible IRA contributions ( million in ) contributed the maximum amount allowed and some of these taxpayers also contributed to ( k ) -type plans. Most other taxpayers received consumption tax treatment on their last dollar of saving for retirement and even more will do so as the higher contribution limits for both ( k ) -type plans and IRAs enacted under the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of are phased in over the next several years A number of special considerations arise when one contrasts the current tax system with either the comprehensive income or the consumption tax model. These considerations affect important productive resources or sectors of the economy such as human capital housing and the nonprofit sector and are discussed below Taxation of Human Capital Because human capital is the most important component of national wealth it is also important to consider the tax treatment of this capital under | Economic Report of the President a comprehensive income or consumption tax. Investment in human capital through education can be thought of as creating an intermediate input to be used in the production of a final good and that pays a return : the educated worker s future stream of wages. Under the consumption tax model only final goods not intermediate goods should be subject to tax. Under the current tax system the tax treatment of human capital investment is mixed Costs of human capital accumulation include forgone earnings as well as direct costs such as books tuition and supplies. Presently of course the implicit cost of education represented by earnings forgone while receiving education is not subject to tax but consistent with a consumption tax is immediately expensed. Direct costs including books tuition and supplies however are currently subject to varying degrees of taxation Under current law a variety of tax provisions affect the tax treatment of education expenditure. The Hope and Lifetime Learning tax credits and the temporary deduction for higher education expenses ( scheduled to expire after ) all provide varying degrees of relief but they may not provide relief at the margin or for the last dollar of postsecondary education expenditure for many taxpayers. There are also several types of education savings vehicles such as Coverdell Savings Accounts and State college savings and prepaid tuition plans which exclude investment earnings on education-related savings from tax. The college savings plans in particular because of their very high contribution limits tend to provide consumption tax treatment at the margin on the return to saving for higher education. The potential costs of the residual bias against human capital formation can be significant Research has indicated that a 1-percentage-point increase in the income tax rate may cause the long-run stock of human capital to decline by almost percent an effect with significant implications for national wealth Nevertheless in addition to the various types of household saving listed in Table the expensing of forgone earnings and the various tax preferences for education move the current system toward consumption tax treatment of human capital Taxation of Housing As discussed above investment in owner-occupied housing is tax-favored relative to other investment under the current tax system. The primary source of this tax preference is the exclusion of the annual value of housing services imputed rental income from income taxation. Although the owner of a rental property is taxed on his or her rental income no tax is paid on the annual flow of housing services received by owner-occupants. Owneroccupied housing enjoys other tax advantages. Certain expenses related to homeownership such as mortgage interest and State and local property tax Chapter | payments are allowed as itemized deductions. The deductibility of local property taxes lowers the price of local public services. As noted above the first $ of capital gains is excluded from income upon sale of a primary residence. These advantages result in greater consumption of housing services and services provided by local governments are tax-favored relative to similar privately provided services Taxation of Nonprofits The nonprofit sector religious groups private educational institutions government-sponsored enterprises hospitals and various associations and foundations is excluded from the current income tax to the extent that the organizations themselves are generally not subject to tax. The wages of nonprofits employees are of course subject to tax. There are also substantial tax incentives in the tax system for individuals and businesses to contribute to nonprofit organizations. Whether this relative tax advantage would be retained if the current income tax were replaced by a consumption tax depends on how the tax is structured. Under a two-tiered consumption tax similar in structure to the current income tax the current relative tax advantage of nonprofits could be retained. The wages of their employees would remain subject to tax under this type of consumption tax. However under a transactions-based consumption tax such as a national retail sales tax there would be greater difficulty in exempting nonprofit organizations from tax. In the case of a national retail sales tax a system of exemptions for purchases made by nonprofits would be needed and this could add complexity. The cost of charitable giving to nonprofits however might change substantially under a consumption tax for two reasons. First there is the issue of whether the individual and business deductions for charitable giving would be retained. Second incentives to give would be affected by any change in the tax rate schedule. To the extent tax rates fall as a consequence of fundamental tax reform the tax incentive for individuals and businesses to give to nonprofits would decline as well Distributional Consequences of Tax Reform It is sometimes argued that a consumption tax base is less fair than an income tax base because the benefit of not taxing capital income accrues largely to those with higher incomes. However this claim depends critically on the time frame used to analyze the distributional effects of the two tax bases. Consumption taxes are generally less regressive when viewed from a lifetime perspective than when viewed from an annual perspective. It might be expected that for many individuals lifetime consumption should be | Economic Report of the President roughly equal to lifetime income. If this is the case the lifetime incidence of a consumption tax and of an income tax should be close to proportional Also as discussed above a one-year snapshot of the distributional effects of many tax changes can be misleading because this type of distributional analysis fails to take into account the fluidity of taxpayer incomes and other characteristics ( Box ) Younger taxpayers entering the work force are likely to have relatively low incomes as they continue to acquire human capital through education and job experience. As their human capital develops their incomes tend to rise peaking shortly before retirement. Saving and consumption patterns follow this cycle with a period of accumulation accelerating in midlife and peaking before retirement when dissaving begins. These patterns have been well documented and distributional analyses that do not take them into account may be misleading Consumption taxes may also be less regressive than often thought because the bases of both a consumption tax and an income tax include key elements of what is commonly called capital income. Capital income can be broken down into four components : the return to waiting ( that is the opportunity cost of capital ) the return to risk taking ( the risk premium ) economic profit ( that is the inframarginal return to investing ) and the difference between expected and actual returns. The key to analyzing the difference in distributional effects between a consumption tax and an income tax is that a consumption tax exempts the first component of capital income from tax whereas an income tax includes it. The remaining three components are generally taxed under both systems To understand how some forms of a consumption tax subject some capital income to tax it is useful to consider how the tax treats investment expenditure. Under a cash flow consumption tax a firm expenses its capital purchases. A successful investment will generate a series of future cash flows to the firm. These future cash flows will be subject to tax but the present value of the expected future series of tax liabilities as valued by the market will be exactly equal to the tax value of expensing the capital expenditure Because deductions have the same impact as other Federal Government capital market transactions they are valued the same as a risk-free investment often assumed to be represented by the interest rate on Treasury bills The key point is that to the extent that future cash flows from the investment exceed ( in present value ) the initial investment the excess will generally be taxed. Future cash flows resulting from extraordinary profits due to innovation or the return to risk taking are all generally subject to tax That is to the extent the actual return exceeds the yield on a risk-free investment as reflected by the Treasury bill rate the difference will generally be subject to tax under both a consumption tax and an income tax. The general public is thus in a sense a proportional shareholder in all enterprises a co-investor under an income or a consumption tax. Thus the general Chapter | public shares in the rewards to the extent the returns are unexpectedly high and shares in the losses in the case of a shortfall. Only the return to waiting is generally exempt from tax under a consumption tax. As noted above ( Box ) certain types of extraordinary returns such as inframarginal returns may also be free from tax if tax is prepaid because the government no longer acts as a co-investor and does not share in these inframarginal returns However under a consumption tax prepayment may be limited to difficultto-tax activities such as housing services and investment in intangibles How important is it that only the opportunity cost of capital the expected normal return generally goes untaxed under a consumption tax ? The answer depends critically on how large this opportunity cost is relative to total capital income and on who tends to receive this component of capital income. If this component is large and received primarily by higher income taxpayers shifting to a consumption tax would have the immediate effect of benefiting these taxpayers. It is important to note that the real risk-free rate of return available to a tax-exempt investor has historically been below percent a year Box Taxpayers Exhibit Substantial Fluidity Across Tax Rate Brackets Do taxpayers tend to face the same marginal tax rate over time or do they change tax rate brackets as predictable and unpredictable life events occur and their circumstances change ? The table on the next page considers the dynamics of statutory tax rate brackets over a 10-year period : the statutory tax rate brackets of taxpayers in are compared with their statutory tax rate brackets in ( these were the years for which these data are available ) In each year the statutory tax rates the taxpayer would have faced had the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of been in place in and ( with appropriate inflation adjustments ) are compared. If most taxpayers face the same tax rate at the beginning and the end of this 10-year period it might be concluded that a static one-year snapshot is a good indicator of a taxpayer s lifetime average tax rate The tabulations however show a substantial amount of dynamics Taxpayers who remained subject to the same statutory tax rate in both year and year are on the diagonal of the table ( shown in bold ) About percent of taxpayers ( the proportion of taxpayers not on the diagonal ) were in a different tax rate bracket at the end of the period than at the beginning. There was significant movement toward higher tax brackets reflecting upward mobility. In all about percent of taxpayers had moved to a higher tax rate bracket at the end of the | Economic Report of the President Box continued Taxpayers by EGTRRA Rate Bracket Using Panel of Taxpayers from through Year tax bracket ( percent ) Year tax bracket ( percent ) Returns in year ( thousands ) Taxpayers by rate bracket ( percent distribution ) Note. Tabulations from panel of taxpayers. Tabulations include only non-dependent taxpayers present in all years of the panel data set. Each cell entry indicates the percent of taxpayers in a rate bracket in the last year of the panel ( i.e. column entry ) relative to the number of all taxpayers in that rate bracket in the first year of the panel ( i.e. row sum ) Source : Council of Economic Advisers based on tabulations provided by Department of the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis years. About percent of the taxpayers in the bottom ( zero tax rate ) bracket in year had moved to a higher bracket after years the vast majority moving to either the percent or the percent bracket About percent of taxpayers in the bottom two brackets combined ( the zero and percent brackets ) had moved to a higher bracket by the end of the period although relatively few moved beyond the percent bracket. There is also substantial movement down the tax rate schedule. In all about percent of taxpayers moved to a lower tax bracket. About percent of the taxpayers in the top bracket in the first year were in a lower tax bracket after years. Forty-seven percent of taxpayers in the top two brackets in year had moved down to at least the percent tax bracket by year Although relatively few taxpayers moved from the lowest tax rate brackets to the highest a considerable fraction moved from the highest brackets to the lowest. Of those starting in the percent tax bracket or below only percent reached the top two brackets. In contrast of those starting in the percent bracket or above percent had moved to the percent bracket or below after years. Of course taxpayers in the lower brackets may also be more likely to become nonfilers a possibility not accounted for here A considerably larger percentage of taxpayers were subject to any particular tax rate at some time over the 10-year period than in just the initial period. For example more than twice as many taxpayers Chapter | Box continued were subject to one of the top two rates in either year or year ( percent of returns ) than in just the first year ( percent of returns ) Moreover this calculation excludes those taxpayers who may have faced the top two rates during the intervening years but not in year or year and the possibility that some taxpayers may not have filed a tax return in some years. An analysis of all taxpayers who filed a return in year and were still alive in year shows that nearly four times ( percent ) as many taxpayers were subject to one of the top two rates in at least of the years A number of factors explain the fluidity of taxpayers across tax rate brackets over time. One piece of the puzzle is that most taxpayers incomes grow as they gain job experience and education but then decline in retirement as they leave the work force and rely on their Social Security benefits pensions and savings which may be nontaxable. Chart shows the change in a hypothetical couple s marginal tax rate as that couple s income follows this life cycle pattern of growth followed by decline. In this example a two-earner couple with two children earn about $ at age and pay income and Social Security taxes. They buy a home and save for life s uncertainties their children s education and their own retirement using taxable accounts plus a ( k ) When they retire they collect Social Security and live to the age of For simplicity it is assumed that they neither receive an inheritance nor leave a bequest. The couple s marginal tax rate the rate paid on the last dollar of earnings varies greatly over the life cycle reflecting the couple s passage through the various tax rate brackets and the phase-in and phaseout of various tax deductions and credits as their earnings and other characteristics change. The couple at first faces a percent marginal tax rate then briefly faces a marginal tax rate of percent because of the phaseout of the child tax credit and then faces a percent marginal tax rate in midlife during the peak earnings years. Toward the end of life the couple is in the percent statutory rate bracket reflecting the decline in income in retirement but pays cents on the last dollar of income because the couple is in the phase-in range of the tax on Social Security benefits Many taxpayers also have short-term fluctuations in their income as they move in and out of the labor force or between jobs or as their business and investment income is hit by the ebbs and flows of the business cycle. Finally factors other than income such as having children going through marriage and divorce or facing unusually high medical expenses as well as charity or home mortgage interest can all affect which tax bracket a taxpayer falls into | Economic Report of the President Box continued The substantial movement of taxpayers across rate brackets suggests that tax burdens in a given year may tell a very different story of the distribution of the tax burden than do measures of tax burdens over longer horizons. These differences are important for evaluating the distributional effects of changes in tax rates. Analyses that rely on annual snapshots of taxpayer incomes are likely to suggest that a small fraction of taxpayers benefit from rate cuts when in fact a larger fraction of taxpayers are likely to benefit because of the substantial movement of taxpayers up and down the tax rate schedule over time Chapter | Decisions on the Path to Reform A number of choices would be involved in any effort to reform the tax system. Some of these choices represent substantial shifts in tax policy but could be made without major structural changes to the current tax. Also some of these changes do not involve a choice between the income and the consumption tax frameworks but must be addressed within either framework Integration and the Double Tax on Corporate Income The current tax system imposes a heavy tax burden on equity-financed corporate investment through the double tax on corporate income Eliminating the high degree of differential taxation is the rationale behind the President s proposal to abolish this double taxation. Corporate income from a newly equity-financed project is subject to two layers of tax. First the corporate tax is paid on earnings at the firm level at a maximum rate of percent For income distributed as a dividend the second layer of tax is paid by individual shareholders at a maximum rate of percent ( plus any State or local income tax ) Alternatively for assets held for more than years shareholders pay tax at a statutory rate of percent on the appreciation in stock value that arises from corporate earnings retained and reinvested in the firm. The total effective tax on corporate income is calculated by combining the two layers of tax. As Table shows the effective tax rate ( for Federal tax alone ) on corporate income distributed to shareholders as dividends can be as high as percent. For corporate income that is retained by the firm and realized by a shareholder as a capital gain the effective tax rate can be as high as percent after accounting for substantial deferral. The effective tax rate on capital gains is lower than the effective rate on dividends because of the preferential tax rate on long-term capital gains realizations and the ability to defer taxes until gains are realized The double taxation of corporate income affects economic decisions in a number of important ways that may reduce corporate investment encourage artificially high debt-to-equity ratios discourage the payment of dividends and favor noncorporate organizational forms. The high tax on capital may also discourage risk taking and innovation through its effect on entrepreneurship New firms innovate by developing new products and technologies and are a testing ground for new forms of internal organization. Other firms can imitate successful new approaches leading to economy-wide improvements in productivity and faster economic growth | Economic Report of the President TABLE Tax Rates on Capital Income for a Hypothetical Investor in Capital income Individual tax rate percent percent Percent Dividends Retained earnings Debt Pass-through income Note. Calculations are for a new equity-financed project and assume a percent corporate tax rate and the indicated individual tax rate on ordinary income in An effective percent rate is assumed for capital gains realizations ( i.e. percent rate for assets held for more than years multiplied by to approximate the benefit of deferring tax on accrued gains until the asset is sold Source : Council of Economic Advisers Debt Versus Equity Financing Equity financing is tax disadvantaged relative to debt financing because interest income unlike dividends is generally subject to only one layer of tax at the individual tax rate. As already mentioned interest payments are deductible as a business expense and thereby excluded from the corporate tax base. Table shows that the maximum effective tax rate on interest earnings is percent the maximum tax rate on ordinary income. The encouragement of debt financing through the tax system results in an increased risk of bankruptcy and financial distress. A heavier debt burden leaves firms particularly vulnerable to capital market risk during a downturn or weakness in the economy. Business failures and financial distress can result in losses to shareholders debtholders and employees alike Dividend Payout Policy The double taxation of dividends may also distort corporate dividend payout policy and the investment decisions of firms. The economics literature has generally found that for new equity-financed investments corporate income paid out as dividends is tax-disadvantaged relative to corporate income that is retained. This has important economic consequences. The heavier tax burden on dividends can encourage investment in established businesses with internally generated earnings because these businesses will tend to have more retained earnings because of the tax distortion. The distortion also favors stock repurchases over dividends Dividends may also provide a number of important benefits to investors that have a direct bearing on corporate governance. Payment of dividends may provide a signal to investors of a company s underlying financial health Chapter | Indeed it may be a particularly potent signal given the current backdrop of shaken confidence in corporate financial reporting. A firm can not continue to pay dividends for very long unless it has the earnings to support such payments. Corporate managers and directors may have better information about the firm s future cash flows than do persons outside the company and dividend payments may reflect this information. Dividend payments may also be one way for shareholders to impose discipline on corporate managers : reducing the amount of cash at the discretion of management may focus management s attention on the most productive investments rather than on purchases that may not increase shareholder value Choice of Organizational Form The high tax on corporate income affects the allocation of capital shifting it from the corporate sector to owner-occupied housing and the noncorporate business sector ( which includes sole proprietorships partnerships S corporations and nonprofit organizations ) This entails an inefficient use of resources and reduces real output and incomes. The higher tax on corporate income discourages the use of the corporate form of organization despite the nontax benefits of incorporation such as limited liability and more centralized management. The corporate and the noncorporate forms may also offer different advantages with respect to scale economies and the development of entrepreneurial skill which may not be fully exploited because of the tax distortion Table shows the extent to which the current system taxes capital in the corporate sector at a higher rate than capital in other sectors particularly the noncorporate business and housing sectors. The economy-wide effective tax rate is roughly percent. However the overall effective tax rate of between percent and percent in the corporate sector ( depending on the treatment of intangibles ) is well over half again as high as the to percent effective tax rate ( again depending on intangibles ) in the noncorporate business sector. The effective tax rate on owner-occupied housing in contrast is percent. The tax penalty on income from capital in the corporate sector relative to other sectors is thus substantial The President s proposal to eliminate the double tax on corporate income would encourage a more productive allocation of capital. A study by the Treasury Department estimates that even in the absence of increased investment the long-run economic benefit of eliminating the double tax ranges from about to percent of consumption or between $ billion and $ billion in Moreover the repeal of the double tax would be expected to lead to increased investment and thus further economic gains from stronger growth and job creation | Economic Report of the President TABLE Effective Tax Rates by Asset and Sector Under Current Law and Various Reforms [ Percent ] Current law Economic depreciation Expensing Corporate sector Equipment.................................................................................. Structures Public utilities............................................................................ Inventories Land Intangibles................................................................................. Total without intangibles........................................................... Total with intangibles................................................................ Noncorporate sector Without intangibles With intangibles......................................................................... Owner-occupied housing Economy-wide average Without intangibles With intangibles......................................................................... Asset and sector Note. Calculations include Federal taxes only and assume a percent inflation rate and a percent real after-tax rate of return. Investments are assumed to be financed using percent debt and percent equity Effective tax rates are capital stock-weighted averages. Calculations do not reflect the temporary percent expensing provision included in the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act of Source : James B. Mackie III Unfinished Business of the Tax Reform Act : An Effective Tax Rate Analysis of Current Issues in the Taxation of Capital Income National Tax Journal June Uniform Taxation of Investment Another key aspect of the current tax system is that the provisions for depreciation do not provide deductions that mirror the economic lives of assets nor do they adequately account for inflation. This divergence between depreciation as provided in the current tax code and economic depreciation is a departure from the framework of a comprehensive income tax. Table shows how a move to economic depreciation would change effective tax rates in the corporate sector Revamping the current system of depreciation to more closely reflect economic depreciation would be a fundamental reform that would level the playing field across different types of business investment. However as shown in Table such a change would actually raise the effective tax rate on overall business investment because it does not include the accelerated depreciation and expensing available for some investments under current law. Although Chapter | greater neutrality between types of business investments would be achieved particularly within the corporate sector the distortion between business investments and owner-occupied housing would be increased. Also a system based on economic depreciation is complicated by the difficulty of frequently updating asset classes and lives to keep pace with innovation and changes in technology. Moreover true economic depreciation would require indexing of depreciation allowances for inflation which may contribute to complexity As described above under the consumption tax model businesses would deduct from their receipts all business expenses including purchases of equipment and structures. Consequently a shift to a consumption tax would involve replacing the system of depreciating investment under current law and the income tax model with complete expensing. Expensing of investment in the year it is placed in service is more generous than either current or economic depreciation for most investment and it exempts from tax the expected cash flow from a marginal investment. With expensing there is no tax on investment at the margin because expensing exactly offsets ( in present value ) the tax on the expected future cash flow from the investment. Cash flow that arises from risk taking inframarginal returns and unexpected losses or gains would continue to be taxed because it exceeds the present value of expensing. ( See Box above for a discussion of the tax treatment of these types of extraordinary returns in the case of deductible and Roth IRAs. ) Expensing is needed under the consumption tax model to exclude purchases of intermediate goods from the tax base so that only final sales to consumers and hence consumption are taxed Expensing of investment would dramatically lower the taxation of capital income. As Table shows it would lower the economy-wide effective tax rate on investment to near zero and virtually eliminate the tax-based disincentive to save and invest. Expensing also improves neutrality by removing tax differences between investments in the corporate and investments in the noncorporate sector The relative tax advantage of housing would be greatly altered under either the income or the consumption tax model. A comprehensive income tax would subject housing services to taxation eliminating the relative tax advantage of housing and improving economic incentives but introducing considerable complexity. Under a consumption tax housing consumption would be taxed either by taxing the sale of newly constructed housing ( that is prepayment ) or by taxing the annual flow of housing services. Housing would lose its tax advantage relative to other capital. The effect of these changes on housing prices and the housing stock is the subject of extensive debate | Economic Report of the President Broadening the Tax Base and Lowering Tax Rates Broadening the tax base usually means eliminating the various tax preferences under the current tax system. These preferences represent a policy decision to reduce the effective tax rate for some but they pose a tradeoff in that a higher overall tax rate is needed under both the income and the consumption tax models to raise an equivalent amount of revenue Eliminating preferences would improve incentives in two ways. First as illustrated above many of the preferences carry with them high implicit tax rates as the benefits are phased out. Eliminating these preferences repeals these high implicit rates and the associated kinks in the effective tax rate schedule. Second once the preferences are eliminated the same amount of revenue can be raised with lower overall tax rates. Chart earlier in the chapter showed that the current tax base is considerably smaller than either the income or the consumption tax base Chart also indicated that the existing tax preferences are just as important if not more important in determining the size of the tax base when saving is included as when it is excluded ( that is the difference between the comprehensive income and comprehensive consumption tax bases ) The broader tax base under either reform would allow tax rates to be lowered Lower rates improve economic incentives spurring private activity by making more productive use of resources There are many avenues by which marginal tax rates can affect individual and business decisions. Individuals can shift compensation toward less taxed sources ; they can adjust labor supply saving investment and portfolio allocation decisions ; and they can alter their compliance behavior. The economic benefits of lower tax rates were precisely the rationale behind the reduction in tax rates enacted in the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of Some estimates suggest that the reduction in the top statutory tax rate from percent to percent will raise the affected taxpayers taxable incomes by as much as percent when fully effective in This rise in taxable incomes reflects individuals decisions to work save and invest more to increase tax compliance to reduce evasion and otherwise to shift efforts to activities that become more lightly taxed as a result of the lower tax rates. The extent to which taxes distort these decisions is to some extent diminished by lower tax rates. Moreover the rise in taxable incomes means that individuals behavioral response to the lower tax rates works to offset the direct cost of rate reduction to the government Some estimates indicate that repeal of the double tax on corporate income combined with the uniform treatment of investment and general base broadening would increase capital accumulation by over percent and output by Chapter | perhaps as much as percent in the long run. A shift to a consumption tax would go even further by excluding income from saving from the tax base Most estimates suggest that a shift to a consumption tax base would generally increase the size of the capital stock in the long run with some estimates suggesting an increase of as much as percent. Although estimates of the impact on output vary some models indicate that real output might rise in the long run by as much as percent Income Versus Consumption as the Base The major difference between the consumption and income models is that a consumption tax does not distort the choice between current and future consumption ( that is saving ) ; in other words it is intertemporally efficient In contrast an income tax distorts the relative prices of current and future consumption by reducing the after-tax return to saving. Under an income tax current consumption is tax-favored and saving disfavored relative to future consumption.Taxing consumption rather than income would eliminate this distortion. Because the tax base under the comprehensive consumption tax model is smaller than under the comprehensive income tax model however ( Chart ) a higher tax rate would be required to raise a given amount of revenue which may involve some degree of additional distortion. Nevertheless as discussed above studies indicate that elimination of the tax on income from saving can have important salutary effects on economic growth and real incomes by encouraging saving International Tax Considerations The U.S. economy is increasingly linked to the world economy through trade and investment. Domestically based multinational businesses and their foreign investment help bring the benefits of global markets back to the United States by providing jobs and income. Like all firms multinationals face a number of business decisions including how much to invest and where. Because multinationals by definition operate in a number of countries they also have to decide in which country to locate their headquarters and their decisions in turn affect which countries reap the majority of benefits from the multinationals operations In the context of tax reform it is important to consider how changes in the international taxation of income would change the incentives for companies to locate production intangible assets and research and development in one country rather than another. Reform can have important effects on these business decisions and on the efficient use of the Nation s economic resources affecting employment and the competitiveness of workers in the United States | Economic Report of the President Two alternative approaches to taxing international flows of income are the territorial system and the worldwide system. Under the territorial system individuals and businesses pay tax on income only where it is earned regardless of where they themselves reside. ( Certain passive or financial income from abroad such as royalties also is subject to tax in the country of residence. ) Under the worldwide system all income is subject to tax in the taxpayer s country of residence regardless of where it is earned. Income earned abroad may also be subject to tax by the country where it is earned. On the principle that the same income should not be taxed by more than one country foreign taxes are generally creditable against domestic tax on foreign income up to the domestic tax rate The United States uses a hybrid of these two systems. Resident individuals and businesses are subject to tax based on their worldwide income. For foreign subsidiaries of U.S. multinational companies tax is usually paid only when income is distributed to the domestic parent company as a dividend ; that is tax is deferred until repatriation at which time a credit can be claimed for foreign taxes paid. It is primarily the opportunity of tax deferral of certain active income that distinguishes the tax treatment of international income by the United States from a pure worldwide system. Deferral has the effect of relieving a substantial portion of the U.S. tax in present value terms on the income of foreign subsidiaries of U.S. companies. However because tax is imposed upon repatriation there is a disincentive to repatriate foreign income ; this disincentive is absent under a territorial system The rules surrounding deferral are the source of considerable complexity involving a bewildering assortment of definitions and rules. Deferral is extended to income from active business operations abroad in order to provide an equal footing with other operating businesses in the same foreign country. Deferral of U.S. tax is not extended to income from portfolio investments and other income viewed as highly mobile. Consequently certain income from portfolio-type foreign investments ( for example interest dividends and royalties ) is deemed distributed and is subject to current U.S. tax. However such income also includes various categories that are more active than passive such as foreign base company sales and services income income from shipping and certain income from oil activities The foreign tax credit requires companies to make complex calculations in order to claim the credit against the U.S. tax on repatriated dividends. The foreign tax credit is calculated by basket or type of income ( for example passive financial services and general active income ) so that excess credits generated on highly taxed active foreign business income can not be used to reduce the U.S. tax on lower taxed foreign income such as passive interest Over the past years U.S. companies have repatriated roughly half of the after-tax income earned by their foreign subsidiaries Chapter | The U.S. system of taxing international income dates back to the 1960s when the United States was the source of half of all multinational investment worldwide produced percent of the world s output and was the world s largest capital exporter. From this perspective it was appealing to construct a tax system that was viewed as neutral with respect to the location of foreign investment by taxing all income and taxing it all at the same rate. However this system is based on the idea that investment abroad is a substitute for domestic investment and on the assumption of perfectly competitive markets in a world with aggressive pricing and ease of entry and with no brand-name loyalty economies of scale or other sources of extraordinary profits The underpinnings of the worldwide system have shifted however. It is now recognized that most multinational corporations produce differentiated products and compete in industries characterized by economies of scale thereby undermining the perfect competition model of the past. There is some evidence that returns on foreign investment surpass those on domestic investment and exhibit above-normal returns because of factors such as intangibles ( brands patents and the like ) Moreover the United States is now the world s largest importer of capital and no longer dominates foreign markets For example in of the world s largest companies ( ranked by sales ) were located in the United States but by the mid-1990s that number had fallen to Companies can choose where to locate and under the worldwide system of taxation unless the domestic tax rate is the same in all countries in which a company operates the decision where to locate the company s headquarters will be affected by the countries tax systems There is some concern that the United States has become a less attractive location for the headquarters of multinational corporations. Although multinationals operate in a number of countries the Department of Commerce reports that the bulk of the revenue investment and employment of domestic multinational companies is located in the United States. In U.S. parent companies accounted for about three-fourths of U.S.-based multinationals sales capital expenditure and employment. Therefore where a firm chooses to place its headquarters will have a large influence on how much that country benefits from its domestic and international operations The United States is also one of only a few industrialized countries ( Switzerland and the Netherlands are other prominent examples ) that do not provide some form of integration of the corporate and individual income tax systems. The resulting double taxation of corporate income makes it more difficult for U.S. companies to compete against foreign imports at home or in foreign markets through exports from the United States or through foreign direct investment Another major choice in international taxation and one that is particularly important under the consumption tax model is that between the so-called destination and origin principles. Under the destination principle imports are | Economic Report of the President taxed by making them nondeductible or by levying an import tax and exports are tax-exempt. The tax base then includes all domestic consumption whether goods and services are produced at home or abroad. Under the origin principle the opposite rule applies : exports are taxed but imports are not and the tax base becomes consumption plus net exports. Either the origin or the destination principle can be applied under a consumption tax but the destination principle has the intuitive appeal of promoting economic growth domestically by exempting and thereby promoting exports Nevertheless under a flat-rate consumption tax the origin and the destination principle are equivalent at the margin. Under the destination principle again foreign investment is essentially expensed and the cash flow from the investment is taxed as imports. The tax benefit of expensing will exactly equal in present value the tax on the expected normal return of the investment as it returns through imports. Under the origin principle taxes are essentially prepaid by taxing exports and no tax is due on the returning cash flow. Returning profits would thus be taxed under the destination principle but not under the origin principle. The timing of the tax payment will be different but in present value terms the taxes paid under the destination principle and under the origin principle will be the same for an equivalent level of exports. This is similar to the equivalency between deductible IRAs and Roth IRAs discussed in Box The equivalency does not necessarily hold however in the presence of extraordinary returns ( returns to innovation inventions ideas and risk taking ) The returning extraordinary profits would be taxed under the destination principle but not necessarily under the origin principle. It is also important to note however that the tax on the returning cash flow under the destination principle could be avoided if a taxpayer is able to relocate abroad. Such a taxpayer would receive the benefit of the export exemption ( expensing ) and might avoid the tax on the returning cash flow ( imports ) through relocation. Under the origin principle in contrast the tax can not be avoided because it is in effect prepaid Conclusion Changes in tax policy involve many different objectives and can take many different forms. This chapter has focused on the primary choices involved in tax reform and the major differences among taxing consumption taxing income and maintaining the current hybrid tax. Proposals for tax reform pose the difficult question of how best to balance the sometimes competing objectives of simplicity fairness and faster long-term growth. Policy changes can improve efficiency and boost real incomes but it also matters enormously that all Americans have the opportunity to achieve economic success Chapter | C H A P T E R A Pro-Growth Agenda for the Global Economy M any developing countries throughout the world have taken important steps in recent years to promote the growth of their economies. Their actions have lifted millions out of poverty improved the health of their populations and contributed to progress in addressing environmental challenges Other countries including some of the world s poorest have had less success in achieving and sustaining strong economic growth. Developed and developing countries alike face the challenge of improving economic performance around the globe so that more people can share in the benefits that come with growth. The United States stands ready to address that challenge This chapter lays out some key factors that have been found to promote and sustain faster economic growth. Although these factors are important in all countries the chapter s primary focus will be on growth and development in low- and middle-income economies. Three broad principles securing economic freedom governing justly and investing in people underlie these key growth-promoting factors and provide the organizing structure for the discussion. Adoption of these principles creates an environment where market signals lead to better economic performance Economic freedom promotes growth by encouraging competition and entrepreneurship. Securing this freedom requires creating a stable domestic macroeconomic environment with low inflation regulating appropriately encouraging entrepreneurial initiative and opening to the global economy Governing justly means establishing the rule of law controlling corruption and guaranteeing political freedoms ; all of these help develop trust in the accountability and reliability of the government which in turn encourages entrepreneurship. Investing in people means devoting resources to enhancing the productive capacity and well-being of the general population in particular through improvements in education and health. Countries that ignore this task will see their economic growth suffer because people who are in poor health or poorly educated are less productive No one of these principles suffices to guarantee strong growth ; all three are mutually reinforcing aspects of a pro-growth agenda. Actions by the United States the broader international community and the international financial institutions can help developing countries improve their economic performance. But creating the proper incentives for domestic growth ultimately depends on decisions by those countries own citizens and governments The Administration has undertaken three important international economic policy initiatives that are consistent with these pro-growth principles. First it has sought and obtained from the Congress authority for the President to negotiate and conclude trade liberalization agreements with other countries in a streamlined fashion ; the agreements reached under Trade Promotion Authority will increase the integration of the world s economies especially those of developing countries. Second the Administration has launched the Millennium Challenge Account program which will extend additional developmental aid to the world s poorest countries provided they have adopted pro-growth policies. Third the Administration has called for reform of the multilateral development banks including both the World Bank and the regional development banks to increase their effectiveness in spurring economic growth through greater emphasis on measurable results and activities that increase productivity including private sector development In August of last year the Congress granted the President Trade Promotion Authority ( TPA ) through the Trade Act of This legislation authorizes the President to negotiate trade liberalization agreements with other countries and commits the Congress to a yes-or-no vote without amendments on any agreements reached under this authority. The President s enhanced ability to engage in international trade negotiations under TPA will help the United States conclude agreements that will increase competition boost productivity and promote growth in both the United States and its trading partners TPA will enhance U.S. influence and effectiveness at the trade negotiating table and will bring economic benefits to American families workers farmers and firms. Current U.S. proposals for trade liberalization of nonagricultural goods alone could save Americans about $ billion a year in import taxes resulting in $ worth of benefits annually for an average family of four This renewed negotiating authority will also promote prosperity in our trading partners including developing countries. Indeed those countries that are now the least integrated into the world economy including many of the world s poorest stand to gain the most in proportion to their current incomes from the increased openness that TPA makes more likely The Administration is already engaged in negotiating trade agreements in a variety of contexts including the multilateral negotiations organized under the auspices of the World Trade Organization as well as regional negotiations such as those toward a Free Trade Area of the Americas and various bilateral free trade negotiations. All of these initiatives seek to promote economic growth by decreasing barriers to trade in goods and services and establishing effective procedures for settlement of international disputes involving trade Moreover the rules-based trade agreements that are the object of these | Economic Report of the President negotiations will provide incentives for developing countries to improve their own domestic institutions to provide greater transparency strengthen the rule of law and improve the protection of property rights The second major Administration initiative the Millennium Challenge Account ( MCA ) will provide grants in aid to those developing countries that qualify by fostering and maintaining an environment conducive to economic growth. Funding for the MCA will increase over years to a total of $ billion in an almost percent increase over current U.S. bilateral development assistance. Recipients of MCA grants will be chosen by their demonstrated commitment to the three principles mentioned at the outset : securing economic freedom governing justly and investing in people. The specific MCA criteria associated with each of these principles are described in more detail later in this chapter The Administration s third pro-growth initiative involves reform of the multilateral development banks ( MDBs ) Meaningful reform of these institutions will raise economic growth and prosperity in poor countries around the world by encouraging the MDBs to focus on increasing productivity growth in those countries. The MDBs can do this by fostering innovation to support private sector development insisting on measurable results as a condition for continued aid and delivering an increased share of total assistance in the form of grants rather than loans The Administration believes that pursuing the pro-growth policies outlined in this chapter will help restore the flow of investment to low- and middleincome countries. This flow was interrupted by frequent and severe economic and financial crises in some of these countries during the 1990s. Net international private capital flows which averaged more than $ billion a year from to fell to less than $ billion a year in Restoring strong private investment flows into low- and middle-income countries will help create higher productivity jobs and raise living standards The chapter begins by laying out some basic facts about economic performance and social indicators in the developing world. It then discusses the three principles enunciated above and how they have been shown to lead to faster economic growth. Finally the chapter discusses the Administration s three major initiatives and how they embody pro-growth principles Chapter | The Importance of Growth The term economic growth can be understood both in narrow quantitative terms and in a broader more qualitative sense. Economists often measure growth as the annual percentage change in a country s real gross domestic product ( GDP ) per capita that is the 1-year change in the country s income adjusted for inflation and divided by the number of people residing in the country. By this definition growth simply indicates how the income of the average resident of the country has changed from one year to the next. In qualitative terms however sustained strong growth over time means prosperity instead of poverty job creation in place of economic stagnation and children who are strong and healthy rather than malnourished and facing death from illness. Helping countries boost their economic growth in other words is not just a matter of statistics ; it is about improving the lives of human beings The Global Growth Experience Chart illustrates the wide divergence in growth paths for several major world regions from to ( all of the growth rates that follow are in terms of real GDP per capita ) World income per capita grew at an annual rate of percent increasing a total of percent over the period. Performance in the East Asia and Pacific region ( East and Southeast Asia plus Australia New Zealand and the Pacific island nations ) far exceeded this benchmark : average income per capita in these countries more than tripled from $ in to $ in with growth of more than percent a year. In contrast incomes per capita in Latin America rose only from $ in to $ in which translates to an annual average growth rate of less than percent. Average annual income per capita in the countries of Sub-Saharan Africa actually fell by percent during the period from $ in to $ in or by percent a year. ( Unless otherwise noted all income levels in this chapter are reported in constant dollars. ) Measures of countries adherence to the pro-growth principles introduced above and described in more detail below suggest possible reasons for this huge variation. One is the presence or absence of macroeconomic stability : inflation varied substantially among the three regions in a pattern that mirrors their growth outcomes. Annual inflation in Latin America as a whole remained relatively high during the 1980s and 1990s averaging about percent. In contrast inflation in the fast-growing East Asia and Pacific region averaged only about percent during these two decades but fell sharply in many countries over the period. Inflation in slow-growing SubSaharan Africa also averaged only about percent. However unlike in East Asia and the Pacific inflation in Sub-Saharan Africa rose over the period from percent in the 1980s to percent in the 1990s | Economic Report of the President There were also important regional differences in the degree of countries openness to the global economy. The ratio of total international trade in goods ( imports plus exports ) to GDP is a common measure of this openness In East Asia and the Pacific this measure rose from percent in to percent in ; it rose more modestly in Latin America over that period from percent to percent. Sub-Saharan African trade as a fraction of GDP rose only from percent in to percent in In short the different regions growth performances are mirrored in the changing role of trade in their economies Investment in people also varied considerably across regions. Only about half of all children in Sub-Saharan Africa complete primary school according to surveys conducted from to ; the completion rate in East Asia and the Pacific was almost twice as high. Information for the period from to indicates that average child immunization rates for measles a key indicator of health care for children were percent for Sub-Saharan Africa versus percent for East Asia and the Pacific Pro-growth policies have yielded important success stories in individual countries as well with a number of developing countries in Asia Latin America and Africa significantly outperforming their neighbors in achieving higher standards of living. The growth experiences of China and India both of which have undertaken far-ranging economic reform in recent years have Chapter | been especially impressive. ( Box later in the chapter discusses China s reforms. ) China s income per capita grew from $ in to $ in for an average annual growth rate of percent. India s GDP per capita grew on average by percent a year over the same period from $ in to $ in Both countries were among the world s poorest at the start of the period. Their growth rates are even more noteworthy given that the average growth rate for this period for the poorest countries as a group ( those with incomes per capita of less than $ in ) was only percent. Economic growth in China and India has helped reduce their combined poverty rate ( the percentage of the population with incomes below $ a day ) from percent in to percent in ( Incomes here are evaluated at purchasing power parity that is adjusted such that $ purchases the same amount of goods and services in all countries. ) The enormous size of the population in both China and India ( and percent of world population in respectively ) means that economic progress in these two countries alone has contributed significantly to reducing global poverty Chile and Botswana are examples of countries in other regions that have also instituted pro-growth polices with impressive results. Chile has undertaken major tax reform opened its economy to international trade and investment privatized important sectors of the economy and reintroduced democratic governance. Botswana has protected private property discouraged corruption invested heavily in education and health and maintained sound fiscal and monetary policies. Neither country would seem to be particularly well situated geographically to benefit from an integrating global economy. Botswana is landlocked and is located in a region with some of the worst economic performance in the world ; Chile is located thousands of miles from major markets in the United States Europe and Asia and some of its larger neighbors have suffered recurrent economic crises. Yet Botswana and Chile recorded average annual per capita growth rates of and percent respectively from to far better than either the world average of percent or the percent average for middle-income countries ( defined by the World Bank as those with incomes per capita between $ and $ in dollars ) Part of the explanation for their impressive growth is the relatively stability of their macroeconomic environments : annual inflation during averaged percent in Chile and percent in Botswana. Moreover Chile s inflation rate fell dramatically over the period from percent to only percent ; the Latin American average for inflation as noted above was percent over the same period Despite the successes of Chile and Botswana there are numerous stories of countries that have experienced economic stagnation or even contraction. In countries out of for which consistent and complete data are available annual average growth in GDP per capita ranged between and percent | Economic Report of the President from to GDP per capita fell during that period for another countries in the sample in several cases by more than percent over the period as a whole The most troubling data are those that show a number of the world s poorest countries becoming even poorer over the past two decades. For example Sierra Leone ( with annual income per capita of $ in ) Zambia ( $ ) and Nicaragua ( $ ) experienced average annual per capita growth rates of and percent respectively over Real income per capita in Niger plunged percent over the same period to only $ In countries such as these life has become much more difficult for millions of people many of whom were already living at the edge of destitution The growth experiences of these desperately poor countries reflect their failure to promote economic freedom govern justly and invest in their people. Macroeconomic instability has been a serious problem for most of these countries : in Nicaragua annual inflation during the 1980s and 1990s averaged a staggering percent ; the figures for Zambia and Sierra Leone at percent and percent respectively are modest only by comparison Measures of openness have been scarcely any better. Sierra Leone s trade as a ratio to its GDP fell from percent in to only percent in Zambia s involvement in the global economy also declined : its trade was equivalent to percent of its domestic economic activity in and fell to percent in The Benefits of Growth Statistics on GDP per capita and its growth fail to capture the full human tragedy now playing out in the poorest countries. Already-poor countries experiencing stagnant or even negative growth have difficulty coping with the basic problems of human existence. Table shows that in the world s low-income countries suffered from higher rates of malnourishment shorter life expectancies and dramatically higher infant mortality rates than did countries with higher incomes. About one-quarter of the population of the low-income countries was undernourished according to a sample taken over compared with only percent of the population in the middle-income countries. In mortality among children under years old reached per in the low-income countries compared with only per in high-income countries. Life expectancy in low-income countries was years shorter than in high-income countries ( years versus years ) a difference that in part reflects the prevalence of epidemics like HIV/AIDS ( Box ) The positive association between higher levels of income and improved social indicators highlights the importance of economic growth for improving the human condition. This relationship was demonstrated in a Chapter | TABLE Income per Capita and Social Indicators Indicator Low-income countries Middle-income countries High-income countries ( ) Prevalence of undernourishment ( percent of population ) Under-5 mortality rate ( per children ) Life expectancy at birth ( years ) DPT immunization ( percent of children under months ) Measles immunization ( percent of children under months ) Public expenditure on health ( percent of GDP ) Public expenditure on education ( percent of GDP ) Addendum : Number of countries in each income category Not available Immunization for diphtheria pertussis and tetanus Note. Income is defined as gross national income per capita in : low income $ or less ; middle income $ $ ; high income $ or more Data are for for undernourishment ; for mortality rate and life expectancy ; for immunization ; for expenditure on health ; and for expenditure on education Source : World Bank World Development Indicators study of developing countries from to which found that a percent increase in income per capita is associated with a decline in infant mortality of as much as percent. This estimate implies that a percent increase in income per capita across the developing world could have averted infant and child deaths annually. Other broad measures of social outcomes reflect similar patterns. The fast-growing region of East Asia and the Pacific recorded a percent decline in the rate of under-5 mortality over the period compared with only a percent decline in SubSaharan Africa. Undernourishment fell by percent in East Asia and the Pacific but rose by percent in Sub-Saharan Africa during the 1990s Economic growth does not just lead to higher average incomes for poor countries ; it also offers hope for those at the margins of society. A study of developing and developed countries over found that the incomes of the poor ( defined as the poorest fifth of each country s population ) rose one for one on average with national income per capita ( Chart ) This means that economic growth did not just benefit societies richest but helped the poorest strata as well. Data show moreover that worldwide economic growth over the past years has been accompanied by the lifting of million people out of poverty ( where the poor are defined as those with incomes of less than $ a day in dollars ) Nonetheless the economic benefits of growth have not reached to every corner of the world. The World | Economic Report of the President Box Combating the HIV/AIDS Epidemic in Africa The impact of the worldwide HIV/AIDS epidemic is perhaps most dramatic in Sub-Saharan Africa. By the end of an estimated million Africans were HIV-positive about percent of the global total. In the previous year percent of all adults in Sub-Saharan Africa were living with HIV/AIDS compared with percent globally. AIDS is now the leading cause of death in the region. The epidemic has dramatically reduced life spans : estimates suggest that the region s average life expectancy of years would now be years if the epidemic had never occurred Although the greatest tragedy of AIDS is the misery and loss of life it inflicts the disease has also brought severe economic consequences to a region already suffering from extremely low incomes per capita and often-negative growth rates. Estimates suggest that AIDS has cut annual economic growth in the region by to percentage points South Africa one of the region s most important economies could suffer a drop in its economic growth by as much as percentage points as a result of the disease The economic consequences arise from a number of sources Infection rates are highest among young people so that the illness is most prevalent in individuals in their most productive years. Workers are at risk of having to leave their jobs as they cope with the effects of AIDS either their own illness or as a caretaker for a sick relative. This can be particularly disruptive to growth when skilled workers are affected. For example one estimate suggests that up to percent of teachers in Malawi and Zambia are HIV-positive. The direct and indirect costs of the disease also put strains on governments struggling with other social needs such as improving education. Societies will face pressures for increased expenditure on health care. Public and private investment could decline both because of lower expected profits and because of increased economic uncertainty. One striking indicator of the implications for health care is that an estimated to percent of urban hospital beds in C te d Ivoire Zambia and Zimbabwe are occupied by HIV-infected patients. This means that these beds are not available for patients with other illnesses. The impact on important social needs is shown by an estimate that treating one AIDS patient costs as much as educating primary school pupils for year A few countries have had some success in combating the spread of AIDS. The government of Uganda was one of the first to recognize and respond to the epidemic. It invested heavily in an education and outreach program involving HIV testing counseling and treatment These programs helped reduce Ugandan infection rates by more than percent from to Senegal acknowledged the need to Chapter | Box continued address the AIDS problem as early as and instituted education and outreach prevention programs. These efforts helped keep the infection rate low ( below percent ) even as infection rates rose dramatically in the country s neighbors. At the end of only about percent of Senegalese adults were HIV-positive The scope of the epidemic requires a global response and the United States has played a major role in this effort. For example in May the United States took a leadership position on the Global Fund to Fight AIDS Malaria and Tuberculosis. The United States now leads the world with the largest pledge $ million to the Global Fund. In the United States and other WTO members agreed to help developing countries that lack pharmaceutical manufacturing capacity by improving their access to drugs that combat the disease. This access will be increased by ensuring appropriate flexibility in the WTO rules that allow countries to compel licensing of patented medicines in the event of a domestic health emergency. Although final agreement on implementing this commitment has not yet been reached among WTO members the United States has unilaterally pledged not to challenge any member that breaks multilateral rules to export drugs produced under compulsory licenses to poor countries in need. In June the President announced a $ million International Mother and Child HIV Prevention Initiative which will help reduce transmission of HIV from infected pregnant women to their children in African and Caribbean nations. In the State of the Union address the President announced the Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief a five-year $ billion initiative to turn the tide in the global effort to combat the HIV/AIDS pandemic. This proposal nearly triples the current U.S. commitment to fighting AIDS internationally Bank estimates that billion people or percent of the world s population still lived on less than $ a day in Evidence that economic growth can benefit the poor makes the pursuit of growth-improving policies and institutions all the more vital Of course the relationship between economic growth and measures of the human condition can be complicated. For example evidence suggests that some measures of environmental quality show consistent improvement as countries become richer. This appears to be the case for example with such indicators as the availability of potable water and concentrations of arsenic in water supplies. However there is also evidence that other measures of environmental quality initially deteriorate on average as countries go through | Economic Report of the President the early stages of development but then improve once these countries become sufficiently rich. For example one study finds that the concentration of sulfur dioxide in the atmosphere rises as poor countries begin to industrialize but then falls as income per capita continues to rise beyond a certain point. Similar results have been found for deforestation and for atmospheric concentrations of particulate matter This inverted U-shaped relationship between economic growth and environmental quality could reflect changes in the composition of output This could happen if countries undergoing industrialization initially specialize in goods-producing industries with relatively high emissions and then eventually shift to services industries which typically generate lower emissions. The relationship could also reflect the greater ability of richer countries to devote resources to environmental measures perhaps combined with increased demand for such measures as average incomes rise and people s basic material wants become satisfied Promoting Growth The evidence just laid out suggests that economic growth is critical for improving the lives of millions in the developing world. This leads to some natural questions for policymakers : What can be done to improve growth Chapter | rates ? Why have some countries grown while others remain in poverty ? The answers to these questions are critically important for governments of lowand middle-income countries as they try to improve the lives of their people The answers also have helped the Administration in the design of its three major international economic initiatives as will be detailed below For some countries economic success may simply reflect their endowment with valuable natural resources such as oil or diamonds. But even countries with large supplies of such commodities can suffer poor economic performance. For example Nigeria was the fifth-largest petroleum exporter among the OPEC countries over the period with average annual oil revenue of $ billion yet its average annual per capita growth rate over this period was percent. Similarly Saudi Arabia experienced a growth rate of percent over this period despite its immense oil wealth Geographic location also influences economic outcomes the good fortunes of Chile and Botswana notwithstanding. A country s location affects the costs of transporting its goods to major markets the productivity of its agricultural resources and the likelihood of major natural catastrophes such as droughts earthquakes or hurricanes. For example one benefit of a coastal location is that it allows access to international sea routes making transportation of goods far more efficient. One study suggests that all else equal landlocked countries have growth rates percentage points lower on average than countries with outlets to the sea. Countries in tropical regions apparently face a similar disadvantage : the same study finds that their growth rates average percentage points lower than those of countries outside the tropics. The poor average performance of tropical countries is due at least in part to endemic diseases which can create serious health problems that often have a measurable impact on growth. In Sub-Saharan Africa for example health problems associated with malaria alone have been estimated to reduce average annual growth by as much as percentage point Geography also affects growth indirectly through its effect on institutions for example through the legacy of European colonization. In those parts of the world where conditions were relatively hospitable to Europeans for example where settler mortality rates were low the settlements that the European countries established tended to have better institutions such as effective judicial systems and strong property rights protections. Conversely in regions with high settler mortality rates such as the tropics European colonizers tended to invest less in building these pro-growth institutions. The weakness of these institutions continues to inhibit economic performance decades and centuries later Clearly natural resources and geography make a difference for economic outcomes but they are not the sole determinants. Sound policies and institutions both of which are shaped by the deliberate decisions of individuals | Economic Report of the President and governments are also important. In particular decisions involving the role of government in the economy ( economic freedom ) the development of political and legal institutions ( governing justly ) and the health and wellbeing of the population ( investing in people ) are all critical in shaping the environment in which people work and invest Charts and show that higher incomes are associated with less burdensome regulation and better protection under the rule of law. Chart shows the relationship between income per capita and an index of regulatory quality ; the latter is a composite measure developed by the World Bank of levels of regulation government intervention and price controls within a country and thus an indicator of economic freedom. Chart shows the relationship between income per capita and a similarly constructed measure of the rule of law which assesses the strength of property rights and the prevalence of crime and corruption ; this measure captures aspects of governing justly. Higher positive values of these two measures correspond to a less onerous regulatory burden or stronger rule of law respectively. The solid line in each chart shows a fitted relationship between the indicated measure and income per capita. Both charts show a clear positive relationship. Of course a positive correlation between measures of good policies and institutions on the one hand and income on the other does not necessarily demonstrate that the former causes the latter it could be that countries with higher average incomes are better able to afford or demand effective government. But other evidence suggests that to an important degree higher income is driven by good policies and institutions not the reverse. In other words explicit government decisions like the decision to enforce the rule of law and to protect property rights improve economic performance Table above lists some selected indicators of investment in people and shows their relationship with income per capita. Expenditure on health and education measured as a percentage of GDP rises as income increases. The increases in public expenditure on health are particularly dramatic : lowincome countries spend less than percent of their GDP on health compared with percent and percent for middle- and high-income countries respectively. Immunization rates for certain major childhood diseases in high-income countries are over percentage points higher than in low-income countries. Public expenditure on education also rises with income but less dramatically than the health variables. As with the variables discussed above these figures do not indicate the reason for this positive relationship : whether it is that richer countries can afford to spend more on education and health or that more investment in education and health leads to higher incomes. But the relationships are suggestive that private and public investment in health and education can be important for growth Chapter | | Economic Report of the President Pro-Growth Principles This section lays out three critical areas where countries can improve economic performance. Promoting economic freedom helps firms workers and consumers respond to market signals. Governing justly helps create an environment in which entrepreneurs investors and ordinary people can make economic plans with confidence that the government will not undercut those plans with arbitrary decisions. Investing in people is important for growth because an educated and healthy population is critical for taking full advantage of a society s economic potential Economic Freedom : Competition and Entrepreneurship Economic freedom is fundamental to growth. One of the primary responsibilities of a government pursuing pro-growth policies is to nurture a stable open economic environment in which market signals direct the allocation of resources. Reliance on the market provides incentives for entrepreneurs to take risks by starting new firms and investing capital in existing ones Competition from both domestic and foreign sources will require firms to use resources efficiently. Market signals encourage workers to raise their productivity not because a government instructed them to do so but because they see it in their own interest. A pro-growth environment is supported by a stable macroeconomic environment appropriate government regulation and openness to competition from both domestic and foreign sources as well as acceptance of foreign direct investment and financial market liberalization Macroeconomic Stability A stable macroeconomic environment characterized by low and stable inflation and responsible fiscal policy is an important component of a progrowth framework. Also important is an exchange rate for the country s currency that is not set arbitrarily by the government but reflects market conditions and is sustainable given the country s economic conditions Macroeconomic stability also facilitates access to international capital markets Foreign lenders will demand a higher interest rate on loans to an unstable economy if they lend at all and foreign equity investors will avoid countries with chronic macroeconomic problems that result in poor returns High and variable inflation makes it difficult for individuals and firms to plan for the future ; the resulting uncertainty leads to lower consumption and investment and thus slower growth. This connection has been found in many studies even after taking into account other economic factors such as income education investment and openness to trade and social factors Chapter | such as life expectancy fertility and inequality. One study suggests that the adverse effects of inflation on growth in developing countries are greatest when inflation is high. Chart illustrates this point by comparing inflation and growth for developing and developed countries from to Although higher inflation is associated with slower growth the effect is most apparent when inflation exceeds percent a year Fiscal deficits have been linked to inflation in developing countries because governments may be tempted to print money to finance large budget deficits This tendency is particularly problematic in countries with fixed exchange rates. Under a fixed exchange rate regime the monetary authority must buy or sell domestic currency as economic conditions change to maintain the official exchange rate peg. If budget deficits lead to excessive domestic money creation through central bank purchases of government bonds there will be pressure for the domestic currency to depreciate. The monetary authority will then be forced to buy domestic currency with foreign currency to maintain the peg Because its foreign exchange reserves are necessarily limited persistent fiscal deficits and the consequent exchange market intervention increase the likelihood of a balance of payments crisis and undercut foreign investor confidence Economic growth has been shown to be slower in countries with larger governments as measured by government purchases of goods and services as a percentage of GDP. Maintenance of an appropriate size and scope of | Economic Report of the President government with efficient mechanisms for both expenditure control and revenue collection is vital for economic performance. It is crucially important to give a high priority to strengthening public expenditure management Improved transparency and accountability including public expenditure tracking and fiduciary management are needed to ensure more effective use of domestic and external resources and thus make progress in increasing growth and reducing poverty Increased government spending can require higher taxes for its financing and this has adverse effects on growth since taxes distort incentives in a wellfunctioning economy. In particular taxes alter relative prices leading to efficiency-reducing economic distortions and slower growth by interfering with the market s ability to allocate resources When governments must finance large expenditures through high taxes those on whom the taxes are imposed will have an incentive to avoid them Faced with widespread tax avoidance or evasion governments might be tempted to turn to schemes that promise to secure revenue but are inefficient and particularly costly to the economy. One such measure now in place in a number of developing countries is the financial transactions tax a tax levied on bank account withdrawals or deposits ( or both ) Such a tax creates an incentive for financial transactions to take place outside of the formal financial sector. This reduces financial intermediation thus shrinking the base from which the tax was designed to garner revenue. Indeed research on the effects of such taxes in several countries in Latin America has found that the economic efficiency loss has ranged from percent of the revenue collected in Venezuela to percent in Ecuador. Moreover effective financial intermediation is important for growth for its own sake so that the adverse effects of taxes on financial transactions extend beyond the direct impact on the efficiency of revenue generation Taxes on international trade can be similarly attractive to governments because the activity to be taxed is localized at a relatively small number of border crossings ports and freight yards making collection relatively easy. But such policies also shield domestic industries from competition while raising costs for domestic firms that rely on imported components. When taxes on imports and exports are high they create increased incentives for smuggling which both reduces government revenue and undercuts the rule of law As already mentioned fear of macroeconomic instability decreases the attractiveness of a country to foreign investors. One measure of the private sector s assessment of the macroeconomic situation in a country is the country risk ratings developed by credit analysts. These measures are designed to help investors predict future investment returns. They are based on various measures of macroeconomic stability including government debt and inflation as discussed above. They also take into account other factors Chapter | important to growth including the country s political situation the level of corruption the quality of the bureaucracy the balance of the current account in goods and services and experience with government expropriation of private investments. These are discussed below Regulation Privatization and Entry Government interventions that lower growth rates include onerous or inefficient regulation government subsidies that distort market signals direct intervention in production through government-owned enterprises and government-directed lending. A large body of research has documented the damaging effects of excessive government involvement in the economy in developed and developing countries alike. For example evidence from countries over the period suggests that holding constant other factors including the initial level of income a one-time 10-percentage-point increase in government consumption as a share of GDP is associated with a one-time 1-percentage-point decrease in the growth of GDP per capita Privatization of state-owned enterprises has been found to improve growth. In one study of international airlines over privately owned airlines were found to be more productive than their state-owned counterparts : a change from complete state ownership to private ownership increased an airline s rate of productivity growth by to percentage points a year. Similar results have been found for privatization of public utilities. In Chile for example privatization of electric utilities led to more widespread access to electricity among the poor. Before the reform which began during the mid-1980s percent of the poorest fifth of the population lacked access to electricity ; years later this figure had fallen to about percent An important caveat however is that privatization alone is not sufficient to guarantee benefits to consumers ; competition must increase as well Otherwise the effect might be simply to replace a public monopoly with a private one with continued restraints on trade and continued high prices This problem was highlighted in a study of telecommunications reform in Latin American and African countries from to : the study found that the benefits to consumers including lower prices and better service resulted from increased competition rather than privatization per se Governments can enhance competition by reducing regulation on domestic firms that hinders their growth. Often small producers in an industry unable to meet the burden imposed by the official business registration process choose instead to operate informally that is without official sanction. A drawback to operating in this way however is that these informal producers find it more difficult to raise capital from financial intermediaries within the formal sector such as banks. This prevents them from growing and competing with | Economic Report of the President the larger established firms in their industry. In addition informal producers are less likely to participate in international markets because they have difficulty obtaining the letters of credit necessary for trade In Peru for example a study found that about half of all workers were employed outside the formal sector in part because of the onerous registration fees and other entry requirements faced by their employers. Subsequent research has shown that undue entry restrictions continue to limit business formation in a number of countries and not only developing ones. One study of countries reports that in the late 1990s an entrepreneur starting a new business in Austria needed to complete nine separate procedures which took at least business days and cost the equivalent of $ in government fees. Bolivian entrepreneurs were required to complete different procedures pay $ in fees and wait at least business days to acquire the necessary permits. By contrast in Canada an entrepreneur could finish the same process in roughly days paying $ in government fees and completing only two procedures Clearly there are many ways in which government involvement in the economy through regulation can affect economic outcomes. The measure of regulatory quality introduced in Chart incorporates the impact of a number of domestic government interventions including the incidence of price controls poor bank supervision and excessive regulation. The World Bank estimates that a 1-standard-deviation improvement in this regulatory quality measure is associated with a threefold increase in growth of GDP per capita Openness to International Trade International trade increases competition and productivity growth. It also brings greater specialization according to comparative advantage lower prices and a wider selection of products and services for both consumers and firms. Openness to trade allows exporters to sell their output in a larger market ; workers in export industries benefit as the resulting higher prices for the goods they make translate into higher wages and incomes Chart illustrates the relationship between growth and a measure of openness as estimated in a recent study of developing countries. A sample of developing countries was split into globalizers and nonglobalizers with the former defined as the countries in the sample that achieved the largest increases in their trade-to-GDP ratio from to In the 1960s and 1970s the nonglobalizers experienced somewhat faster growth of real income per capita on average than the globalizers. During the 1980s however globalizers experienced much higher growth rates : real income per capita grew an average ( weighted by population ) of percent a year in these countries compared with percent for the nonglobalizers. The divergence was even greater during the 1990s with percent annual Chapter | growth for the globalizers versus percent for the rest. To put these differences into perspective had the average globalizer and the average nonglobalizer each begun with an income per capita of $ in by the globalizer s income per capita would have grown to $ and the nonglobalizer s only to $ The fact that the latter figure is an average for fully two-thirds of a large sample of developing countries suggests that enormous benefits remain to be reaped from further removal of trade barriers and other distortions that affect trade. These gains are particularly important for developing countries which are typically too small to affect the world prices of the goods they import or export. If the government of such a country imposes a trade tax foreigners will continue to buy and sell at the unchanged world price since they have alternative markets. Consequently the impact of any trade tax in a small country ultimately is borne by domestic consumers and firms. The tax will lead to lower productivity lower standards of living and higher costs of producing goods. Higher barriers in developing countries will also reduce trade with other developing countries many of which would be natural trading partners under free trade. According to an estimate by the World Bank developing countries would gain over three times as much from tariff elimination by other developing countries as they would from tariff elimination by developed countries | Economic Report of the President An important part of these gains stems from improvements in productivity resulting from lower trade barriers and increased trade. Efficient firms will have an incentive to expand production and increase exports. Increased export production in turn results in lower average costs for firms that can exploit economies of scale. Inefficient firms unable to export to the international market or under increased competitive pressure from imports will reduce output or close. A parallel analysis applies to import-competing firms : those that can continue to produce will have an incentive to become more efficient while less efficient firms will leave the industry. In short international competition provides incentives to increase efficiency and productivity leading in turn to higher income per capita. ( Chapter further explores the links between productivity and growth. ) Trade liberalization has in fact increased productivity in a number of developing countries. A study of India for the period shows that the trade liberalization that began there in led to increases in the growth rate of productivity ranging from to percentage points in three out of four industries considered : electronics electrical machinery and nonelectrical machinery but not transport equipment all recorded gains. Similarly evidence suggests that productivity growth in C te d Ivoire tripled after trade liberalization took place there in Chilean firms also increased productivity in the wake of trade liberalization in the 1970s and 1980s : industries facing competition from imports experienced productivity gains to percentage points higher than those of industries not engaged in trade. Plants that closed down were on average percent less productive than those that continued to operate A further advantage of international competition in developed and developing countries alike is that it can reduce the ability of firms to exploit market power which can reduce productivity and thus growth. Firms insulated from competition whether domestic or international not only are free to increase prices to consumers but also can become inefficient if they restrict output and fail to take full advantage of economies of scale. Studies of India South Korea and C te d Ivoire suggest as well that domestic monopoly power fell after trade reform as shown by a drop in price-cost markups and an increase in productivity in many industries. Evidence from India and South Korea indicates that international competition has increased the benefits from more fully exploiting scale economies. Opening to the world market increased production runs and lowered average costs in firms in these two countries Barriers to trade can have unintended consequences for the adoption of new potentially growth-enhancing technologies. In Brazilian tariffs on data processing and information systems exceeded percent raising the cost of personal computers and contributing to a rate of computer ownership of only percent of the population. That same year Costa Rica had a far higher Chapter | rate of computer ownership ( percent of the population ) than Brazil in part because of zero tariffs on computers despite similar income per capita in the two countries ( $ in Brazil versus $ in Costa Rica ) Brazilian trade policies clearly add to the cost of realizing the productivity gains widely associated with computers Although increased trade leads to higher incomes and faster growth for the economy as a whole it can also mean economic dislocation for some workers Some firms will shut down and some workers will lose their jobs or face lower wages as international competition increases. Such dislocation can pose a hardship for those who lack alternative employment near where they live or whose specialized skills are not easily transferred to other employment Because such job turnover is an unavoidable part of a growing and dynamic economy countries must address the social consequences of dislocation including dislocation due to trade domestic competition or technological change. Nor should they do so only for altruistic reasons : countries that have adequate private and governmental institutions to deal with such transition costs will experience fewer pressures to avoid further trade liberalization or other economic reform. ( See Chapter for a discussion of new approaches to Trade Adjustment Assistance in the United States. ) This is important because societies that pursue pro-growth policies such as openness to trade will become richer as a result and therefore will have the resources they need to deal more effectively with these changes. Countries that instead avoid trade liberalization will face the opposite problem : a fortunate few will see their jobs protected but many more will have lost real opportunities for improving their lives perhaps without ever knowing it. The economy as a whole meanwhile will experience slower growth and have fewer resources with which to deal with broad social problems Foreign Direct Investment and Financial Flow Liberalization Economic freedom is also enhanced by openness to the flow of capital across international borders. Access to global capital flows provides countries with a means to finance investment projects and the acquisition of new technologies. At the same time the ability to invest capital abroad helps investors spread their risks and aids in the establishment of new industries. Capital account liberalization especially in the context of sound banking supervision and financial regulation leads to improved economic growth especially in developing countries. One study found that the benefits of capital account liberalization may be twice as great in non-OECD countries as in OECD countries. ( The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development or OECD is an association of industrialized market economies. ) Openness to financial flows low trade barriers and a good regulatory regime can encourage foreign direct investment ( FDI defined as cross-border | Economic Report of the President flows of capital for the purpose of control of an enterprise ) In particular if foreign firms are able to freely move financial assets and profits into and out of a country and if tariffs are low on imported inputs they will be more inclined to set up plants in that country thus contributing to its growth. A lack of burdensome regulation can also encourage foreign investors to make the commitment to establishing a long-term presence in a country. On the other hand FDI may be attracted by high tariffs on final goods entering the country ; this provides an artificial incentive for foreign companies to avoid the duties by establishing a domestic presence Besides bringing in valuable capital FDI also spurs growth through the management skills know-how and new technologies that foreign investors bring into the host country. These advantages have been shown in both developed and developing countries generally to result in higher productivity in foreign establishments than in domestic firms which in turn leads to higher wages in the foreign-owned plants. Mexican manufacturing data for suggest that both value added and gross output per employee were more than twice as high in plants owned by multinational corporations as in private domestic plants. Estimates from a study of Uruguay in found that productivity measured by value added per worker was twice as high on average in foreign firms as in domestic firms. One study of Indonesian manufacturing found that in foreign-owned firms paid wages as much as percent higher for white-collar workers and percent higher for blue-collar workers than did domestic firms Financial sector openness coupled with domestic financial liberalization spurs competition among domestic financial firms and between them and foreign participants in the financial sector. This openness exposes the domestic firms to the best practices of world-class financial institutions and exerts pressure on them to adapt quickly. Developed countries including the United States have gained from financial market liberalization. In a similar way developing countries import not only the latest bank management technology but also the best risk management practices the best work force training and the newest financial products. Developing countries that are open to the establishment of a foreign financial presence in their economies reap especially important benefits : those with open and competitive financial services markets have growth rates up to percentage points faster than those with closed markets For many developing countries reform of the financial sector will require liberalization of domestic laws and regulations to allow foreign firms to provide services in the domestic market on the same terms as domestic financial firms Transparency will require a mechanism by which firms can review and comment on proposed regulations and obtain easy access to information on existing laws regulations and licensing and other requirements in the financial Chapter | sector. In such a highly regulated area it is critical that all participants be aware of any changes in the rules or their administration. In addition effective planning by firms and workers requires that government regulations not change arbitrarily or too frequently. Otherwise investment can be expected to be lower because the returns will be more risky. Once again regulatory quality can play an important part in creating an environment in which economic growth can occur Efficient financial markets can also help elicit the best results from FDI. In particular one argument in support of FDI is that it enables residents of the host country to acquire knowledge and learn new techniques while working in foreign-owned plants and then go to work for ( or start ) a domestic firm and apply that knowledge there. However empirical studies have found mixed evidence on whether such technological spillovers systematically occur. If the country s financial system is not well developed ( for example if credit extended by financial intermediaries to the private sector is small in relation to GDP ) entrepreneurs may not be able to obtain financing to apply the new knowledge and technology in a new plant. One study of developed and developing countries from to suggests that a country s annual growth rate increases by percentage point when FDI is undertaken in the presence of well-developed financial markets Governing Justly : Rule of Law and Government Accountability A growing body of research shows that the quality of institutions is critical in explaining differences in growth rates across countries. For example if domestic legal institutions can not or do not enforce contracts businesses and individuals will be less likely to commit to long-term commercial relations absent informal ties such as family relationships. Government regulation or bureaucratic indifference that makes it difficult to acquire and retain rights to property can slow capital formation. Governments that are unresponsive to their citizens or that act arbitrarily when making economic decisions will lose the trust both of the domestic population and of potential foreign investors Consequently countries seeking to accelerate their economic growth must promote institutions that allow individuals and firms to respond to market incentives. The rule of law is one of the most important of these institutions because it directly affects the willingness of individuals to save and of entrepreneurs to undertake commercial activities If the rule of law is to provide an environment supportive of growth it must encompass not just what is commonly thought of as law and order but also more broadly the protection of property rights the ability to make and enforce contracts and the ability to settle private disputes fairly and effectively. People must also have reason to expect that the government will | Economic Report of the President not intervene in legitimate private transactions by expropriating property systematically favoring either debtors or creditors or supporting one sector of the economy over another in legal proceedings. Returns on investment have been found to be higher in countries with strong rule-of-law protections. For example one study concluded that rates of return on World Bank-financed projects over the last several decades were to percentage points higher in countries where the rule of law was well established than in countries where it was not. Another study of countries from to found that on average income growth was nearly three times as rapid in countries with greater civil liberties and political freedoms as in countries that were less free Enforcement of property rights is an important aspect of the rule of law regardless of a country s income. Legally held assets legitimate investments and profits from legal commercial transactions must be protected against seizure by criminals or by governments without compensation. Countries whose governments do not enforce property rights can be expected to suffer from slower growth. To see this consider the economic effects of a government that routinely seizes private resources without legal justification or adequate compensation. Investors assessing the risk of expropriation of their assets will then require a higher rate of return on any projects they undertake and some investment that would otherwise bring economic benefits to the country higher income higher productivity higher wages will be forgone The poor may be especially hurt by the absence of property rights. Many of the poor in the developing world lack formal title to what property they have which means they can not use it as collateral to borrow to expand their informal businesses or establish a new enterprise. In addition they often must rely on extralegal means to insure against appropriation of their investment by others because they can not rely on the formal legal system to protect their property Institutions that protect property rights are crucial for economic growth One study links the successful development outcomes in East Asia over the past several decades to the quality of institutions and property rights there Examining eight countries in the region over the period researchers found important contributions from just three variables : institutional quality initial income and initial education. Those countries with the weakest institutions Indonesia and the Philippines had the slowest growth Inadequate legal protections for passive or minority investors also affect investment and growth. One reason is that in countries with weak investor protection managers may be able to exploit inside information about their firms to the disadvantage of outside investors. Knowing this investors will be less willing to commit funds in the first place. A study of individual firms in developing and developed countries over the period found that countries with weak protection for outside investors had capital stocks only half as large as countries with strong investor protections Chapter | The rule of law is particularly important for the development and efficiency of the financial sector. For example banks can not function effectively without strong institutions that support the rule of law. Modern banking depends on the confidence of depositors that banks will safeguard the monies in their trust and that the government will provide supervision and regulation to ensure the banks soundness. Reforms that strengthen creditor rights contract enforcement and accounting practices boost financial development and with it economic growth. One study shows that if countries improve the legal protection of creditors they will have much stronger financial development which in turn accelerates long-term growth. Another study found evidence that the positive impact of capital account liberalization on growth ( as described above ) is enhanced through institutions that promote the rule of law Of course the nature of laws and institutions matters the laws must be appropriate and the institutions effective. The laws and institutions governing bankruptcy proceedings provide an example. In a number of developing countries the lack of sound bankruptcy law effective bankruptcy courts and other institutions effectively prevents creditors from enforcing their claims on bankrupt debtors even when their loans are collateralized Without the ability to collect on collateral financial institutions will require higher interest rates on any loans they offer effectively hampering access to credit for firms throughout the economy. The greatest impact may well be on smaller firms seeking to grow but unable to finance investment projects solely from internal cash flow. The importance of bankruptcy institutions is confirmed in a recent study of countries : researchers found that differences in laws related to investor protection were attributable to the historical origin of countries legal systems ( for example English French German or Scandinavian ) and that these differences had lasting effects. In those countries whose legal systems make it difficult for creditors to seize collateral secured against bankruptcy credit extended to private firms was lower as a share of GDP than in other countries. Reduced availability of credit can be expected to translate into higher real interest rates in these countries and thus lower rates of investment and growth When the rule of law is weak corruption can flourish and this too leads to slower growth. Corruption affects growth through a number of channels including tax evasion distorted investment decisions and suppression of legitimate business. Corrupt officials add to the damage of inefficient regulations because bribes then determine what economic activity is approved Corruption represents a tax on economic efficiency and social progress and is an enormous barrier to both domestic and foreign investment Corrupt individuals in the private sector may conspire with corrupt officials to avoid taxes depriving the government of needed revenue. The result is likely to be higher tax rates on a smaller base which can cause economic | Economic Report of the President distortions. For example a study of Sub-Saharan African countries covering the period found that a percent increase in corruption led to a decrease in tax revenue of to percent of GDP Corruption can harm growth more directly by limiting investment and entrepreneurial activity. Corruption increases risk and uncertainty which reduce the incentives to invest. A further channel for corruption is the diversion of resources intended for public infrastructure to the private consumption of corrupt officials. This leads to less investment and slower growth. One study of developing and developed countries found that a one-third decrease in corruption was associated with an increase in the investment share of GDP of percentage points and an increase in annual growth in income per capita of percentage point. Corruption can also retard the development of legitimate business. A study of Ugandan firms using data from to found that a 1-percentage-point decline in the rate of bribery was associated with an increase in firm growth of about percentage points The quality of political institutions can also play a role in economic outcomes. In particular increasing citizens voice in determining political decisions and ensuring the accountability of public officials fosters a more responsive government and strengthens the rule of law. A responsive and responsible government will gain the public s trust and create more incentives for private investment. One study that attempted to assess the economic impact of these factors estimated that an increase in a measure of voice and accountability was associated with a marked increase in GDP per capita Studies using broader measures of government effectiveness that incorporate individual freedoms regulatory quality and the amount of bureaucracy in a country have yielded similar results : an increase in a measure of government effectiveness corresponded to a marked increase in GDP per capita. Strong civil liberties and overall government effectiveness also have an impact on other social indicators : countries that score higher on voice and accountability and on government effectiveness tend to have lower infant mortality and higher literacy rates Investing in People : Health and Education Investment in human capital is also important for economic growth Well-trained and healthy workers are more likely to make the greatest possible use of the physical stock of capital in any country Formal education is a direct way to invest in human capital and there is some evidence of a positive relationship between national income and educational attainment. In the average duration of schooling in low-income countries was years ( years for females ) compared with years in high-income countries ( years for females ) In a cross-country analysis of Chapter | developing and developed countries covering a 1-percentagepoint increase in the primary school enrollment rate was associated with a 2.5-percentage-point increase in growth in income per capita Education is most effective in an environment in which the investment in time effort and money devoted to education leads to higher returns from increased labor productivity. If a society s high-paying jobs are awarded based on political connections or family and ethnic ties those excluded from such jobs will have less incentive to pursue their education which in turn will lead to slower economic growth. Similarly if a country s best-educated young people find employment in inefficient state-owned enterprises or bureaucracies ( as was the case in the centrally planned Soviet Union for example ) the impact of education on labor productivity will diminish. Empirical results from research on Asian and Latin American countries over are consistent with this hypothesis. In particular the effect of education on growth was found to be negligible in closed and highly regulated economies ; in countries that had undertaken free market reforms however a percent increase in educational attainment was associated with a 0.9-percentagepoint increase in the annual growth rate There are important caveats to the conclusion that higher educational achievement necessarily leads to faster growth. One difficulty is that the links between formal education and growth are complex. For example some evidence suggests that the positive relationship between education and growth arises in part because growth leads to increased schooling. This could happen if the expectation of strong growth in the future leads to an increase in the demand for schooling today as individuals sacrifice current earnings for higher wages in the future Education and the development of good institutions can be mutually reinforcing. Good institutions and policies can lead to higher returns on education and faster growth and in turn a well-educated population is an important element in developing good institutions. An illiterate population for example may be less likely to hold political leaders accountable because it is hard to acquire information about poor policies and outcomes if one can not read. An educated population is likely to be a well-informed population and one that can exert pressure for sound policies and institutions Effective health care is also important for improving the quality of the work force and increasing economic growth. Healthy employees are absent from work less often and the resulting higher utilization of capital leads to lower average costs and faster growth. Healthy workers also tend to earn higher wages indeed more so in developing countries where manual labor plays a larger role in the economy than in industrialized and servicesintensive developed countries. One study of countries found direct evidence linking health and growth suggesting that increasing average life expectancy ( a standard indicator of a population s general health ) by year | Economic Report of the President can lead to a percent increase in national income. This result suggests that countries with severe health problems and lowered life expectancy will have slower growth than they could otherwise achieve. The problem is particularly acute in low-income countries that face challenges associated with infectious diseases such as malaria and HIV/AIDS. ( See Box above. ) It is well established that countries with higher incomes have longer life expectancies lower maternal mortality rates and higher average birth weights. Determining the causal link between income and health is difficult however for reasons similar to those for income and education : on the one hand countries with higher incomes can devote more resources to health care but on the other better health outcomes improve productivity and raise growth rates Health and education outcomes of course can be interlinked. Sick children are more likely to be absent from school and this can lead to lower educational achievement and lower income later in life. For example school-age children are especially susceptible to infestation by parasitic worms. Recent estimates suggest that as many as one in four people worldwide are afflicted with various types of worms ; severe infestations can lead to anemia malnutrition and listlessness. A study of a joint public and private project in Kenya found that treatment with de-worming drugs led to a percent reduction in primary school absenteeism and was cost-effective : the net present value of increased wages from increased school participation far outweighed the cost of treating the children. This suggests that effective programs to invest in people can lead not only to healthier children but also to improved participation in schooling and ultimately to higher wages The Administration s Policies to Enhance Growth The discussion thus far has made it clear that creating the right environment for growth in developing countries requires above all actions by those countries themselves. To complement and reward their efforts the Administration has put forward three initiatives that will spur growth in developing countries and elsewhere by helping to create an environment in which incentives can improve economic opportunities. Trade Promotion Authority will help the President conclude trade agreements that will further integrate developing countries into the global marketplace and increase growth. The Millennium Challenge Account will increase development aid to countries that are pursuing policies and building institutions that adhere to the principles of good governance. The Administration s proposals to redirect the funds and priorities of the multilateral development banks will also help developing countries improve their growth prospects Chapter | All three initiatives are consistent with the pro-growth principles that this chapter has laid out. The Administration s focus under TPA on trade liberalization within a rules-based system is based on the principle of openness to goods and capital flows as well as the promotion of legal institutions and the rule of law. The MCA incorporates all of the principles described above by integrating them into the criteria used to determine the awarding of grants to developing countries. Reform of the MDBs will encourage private sector growth and effective economic management in the countries they serve Trade Promotion Authority The significance of TPA is that it enhances the President s ability to negotiate trade agreements by assuring foreign governments with which the United States negotiates that the Congress will vote yes or no on those agreements without amendment. The Congress retains its primary constitutional authority to regulate foreign commerce and the Administration will continue to consult Members of the Congress frequently on matters relating to the course of trade negotiations The agreements made possible by TPA will benefit the United States by creating new export opportunities and lowering prices for imported goods and services. But TPA will also foster growth in developing countries by increasing competition. The rules-based agreements will also promote institutions in developing countries that will help them take full advantage of trading opportunities The increased integration of developing countries into the global marketplace has already brought those countries enormous benefits. Research suggests that a percent increase in a country s trade relative to its GDP is associated with an increase in its income per capita of percent. Moreover evidence suggests that it is increased trade that leads to increased income rather than the reverse. A recent study suggests that the full implementation of trade liberalization under the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations completed in increased developing countries income by percent double the percentage increase accruing to the developed world India s GDP is estimated to have risen an even greater percent of GDP as a consequence of the same liberalization commitments Further trade liberalization will continue to raise world income. A recent World Bank study suggests that the elimination of all tariffs export subsidies and domestic production subsidies on goods would raise annual world income by $ billion by with middle- and low-income countries receiving percent of that increase. Another study suggests that if world barriers to trade in agricultural and industrial products and to trade in services were reduced by one-third the gains to the United States alone | Economic Report of the President would translate into additional annual income of $ for the average American family of four The President s new trade negotiating authority has already resulted in the successful completion on the substance of free trade agreement ( FTA ) negotiations with Singapore and Chile. These agreements cover a wide range of issues including among others the eventual elimination of tariffs increased openness to trade in telecommunications and other services transparency requirements protections for foreign investors and provisions for enforcement of labor and environmental standards. One study suggests that although the net benefits to the United States from these two FTAs will be relatively modest ( percent and percent of GDP respectively ) the benefits to Chile and Singapore will be proportionately greater ( percent and percent of GDP respectively ) TPA will provide an impetus to conclude a number of other trade agreements currently under negotiation most of which are with developing countries These negotiations include the ongoing discussions with countries in the Western Hemisphere toward a Free Trade Agreement of the Americas ( FTAA ) and the recently inaugurated talks with Australia Morocco the countries of Central America ( Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras and Nicaragua ) and the countries of the South African Customs Union ( Botswana Lesotho Namibia South Africa and Swaziland ) The commitment of the United States to conclude these talks under TPA reflects the Administration s determination to advance pro-growth trade liberalization especially in the developing world The FTAA in which countries in North Central and South America will participate is the most complicated and far-reaching of the regional trade agreements toward which the United States is currently negotiating. One study suggests that when the FTAA is in place the United States could experience a percent increase in GDP and the combined GDPs of the Latin American participants ( excluding Mexico and Chile ) could increase by percent. The same study suggests that Mexican and Chilean GDP would rise by percent and percent of GDP respectively as a result of the FTAA As with the FTAs with Chile and Singapore the benefits of these bilateral and regional agreements are proportionately larger for other countries than for the United States although smaller in absolute dollar terms. The reason for the asymmetric effects is straightforward : the U.S. economy is so large relative to these trading partners that the economic benefits of FTAs with them will be small as a share of U.S. economic activity. In addition U.S. trade barriers are already low on average so that the impact at home of further trade liberalization will be modest. For example the U.S. economy in was times larger than the Chilean economy and trade in goods with Chile ( exports plus imports ) amounted to only percent of total U.S. trade. U.S Chapter | tariffs in averaged percent compared with average Chilean tariffs of percent ; thus the costs of current trade barriers fall more heavily on Chile However U.S. exporters of goods and services and U.S. investors will be able to operate more freely in a fully liberalized Chilean market Despite their modest effects in relation to total U.S. output these agreements are important to the United States as part of the broader U.S. effort toward multilateral reduction in trade barriers under the auspices of the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) TPA will be especially important for the United States and developing countries by helping bring the current WTO negotiations to fruition. The importance of further integrating developing countries into the world trading system is reflected in the name given to these negotiations : the Doha Development Agenda. ( Doha the capital city of Qatar is the site of the WTO ministers meeting where the agenda was launched. ) The United States has offered bold proposals in the Doha negotiations for the reduction of trade barriers on agricultural and nonagricultural goods The agricultural initiative proposes to reduce agricultural tariffs limit governments support of agriculture to percent of the domestic value of production and eliminate agricultural export subsidies. The Administration has also proposed that by WTO members eliminate all tariffs on nonagricultural goods that are currently below percent and sharply reduce the rest including those on textiles and apparel. Going further the Administration has proposed that all nonagricultural tariffs be eliminated in all WTO member countries by The reduction and eventual elimination of tariffs on goods is but one aspect of the U.S. trade liberalization agenda in the WTO negotiations. The United States has put forth over a dozen proposals to reduce barriers to trade in an array of services industries. In addition the United States has advocated greater regulatory transparency both through general disciplines and through rules applicable to specific industries such as financial services. This initiative reflects the assessment discussed above that regulatory quality is key to economic outcomes These liberalization initiatives will bring important benefits to U.S. firms workers consumers and farmers both from increased exports and from lower priced imports. The U.S. agricultural and nonagricultural market access proposals are of particular importance to developing countries since many expect to increase their exports of agricultural goods as well as textiles and apparel to developed countries if barriers are reduced. However developing countries can also expect important efficiency gains and faster growth as they remove their own barriers The economic effects of the current WTO negotiations can not be examined in detail until the outlines of the final agreement become clearer One study provides some sense of the possible outcome however by | Economic Report of the President analyzing a hypothetical percent reduction of trade barriers across all sectors. In this scenario U.S. GDP rises by percent that of Europe ( the countries of the current European Union and the European Free Trade Area combined ) by percent and that of Japan by percent. The same study also predicts large increases in GDP in developing countries including the Philippines ( percent ) South Korea ( percent ) Mexico ( percent ) Chile ( percent ) the rest of Latin America ( percent ) and the Middle Eastern and North African countries ( percent ) These estimated effects of trade liberalization take into account only its static impacts such as a reallocation of resources to more efficient uses and the benefits accruing to consumers from lower prices. The estimates do not capture the dynamic effects on growth such as those arising from greater economies of scale productivity gains and access to improved technologies that increased openness would bring. Including these effects could substantially boost the impact of trade liberalization. For example the World Bank study previously cited found that by world income would increase by another percent with percent of that increase going to developing countries in response to the multilateral elimination of all trade barriers Thus including dynamic effects increases the impact of liberalization but also increases the potential benefits accruing to developing countries The conventional estimates also typically fail to capture gains in services trade in large part because quantifying barriers to such trade can be difficult Nonetheless services are becoming more important to developing countries with their average share in GDP rising from an estimated percent in to percent in Removing barriers to services leads to lower costs and greater efficiency in such important sectors as telecommunications e-commerce transport services professional services and financial services. A World Bank study suggests that multilateral liberalization in the services sector alone would increase combined developing-country GDP by nearly $ billion a gain nearly five times greater than the anticipated benefits of merchandise trade liberalization Of all the trade liberalization initiatives currently on the agenda the United States and its developing-country partners stand to gain the most from completion of the WTO negotiations but the bilateral and regional agreements will also bring benefits. For example a percent cut in all global tariffs could lead to gains in U.S. and Chilean GDP of $ billion and $ billion respectively and an increase in world GDP of $ billion The U.S.-Chile FTA would increase U.S. and Chilean GDP by $ billion and $ million respectively Some have argued that a focus on regional and bilateral trade liberalization could undermine the broader process of multilateral trade liberalization and the WTO as an institution. However the Administration sees these bilateral Chapter | and regional agreements as part of a strategy of competitive liberalization that is as steppingstones to worldwide trade liberalization rather than as a stumbling block. In other words the bilateral regional and multilateral prongs of the Administration s strategy for trade negotiations are intended to work in concert to help achieve the broadest possible degree of trade liberalization in the United States itself and among the greatest possible number of its trading partners Trade agreements negotiated by the United States have had and will continue to have other indirect benefits to economic performance. The rulesbased nature of modern trade agreements helps encourage the development of institutions consistent with the pro-growth principles enunciated in this chapter. In particular transparency rule of law contract enforcement and property rights are all part of recent U.S. rules-based trade agreements. The introduction of bilateral and multilateral trade and investment commitments can help transform economies in ways that foster these pro-growth policies For example rules-based trade agreements enhance the transparency of government actions. Trade commitments must be cataloged organized and made public not only to trading partners but also ultimately to domestic constituencies. As citizens become accustomed to public transparency and accountability in trade policy they may be more likely to demand similar transparency in other aspects of their country s public policy. Such accountability limits government s ability to make arbitrary decisions and thus ultimately creates better conditions for strong growth. In some respects domestic reforms reinforced by the rules-based trading system have already taken hold in China ( Box ) Trade agreements also encourage the rule of law and the enforcement of contracts. All such agreements require that governments write down their rules governing trade and in most agreements governments agree to submit trade disputes to external review by third-party panels. Governments that know that their actions can be reviewed by external and impartial dispute settlement bodies may be less likely to enforce laws arbitrarily. Similarly foreign firms can resort to a dispute settlement panel if a trading partner fails to enforce legally binding contracts. As domestic firms and individuals become more familiar with the legal procedures available to foreigners within the country they may pressure their government for similar nonarbitrary decisions and legal protections in internal matters. Once again the external commitment may help with internal reform A rules-based system also fosters the development of protection for property rights especially through agreements that cover FDI. Many trade agreements including the North American Free Trade Agreement and the bilateral FTAs between the United States and Israel and Jordan and now Chile and Singapore contain protections against uncompensated expropriation by | Economic Report of the President Box China the WTO and the Rule of Law The accession of the People s Republic of China to the World Trade Organization in December should strengthen and accelerate the economic reforms launched by the Chinese government over years ago. These reforms not only have increased trade and investment dramatically but also have enhanced transparency and decreased state control over the economy. The benefits of economic liberalization and reform can be seen in the huge reduction in poverty and dramatically increased income per capita in China since China s integration into the world economy has been one of the most dramatic events in the recent wave of globalization. In China s total goods exports and imports amounted to only $ billion Exports were tightly controlled by the various state bureaucracies Foreign direct investment was essentially nonexistent. Beginning in the early 1980s China began to move away from formal trade planning and toward market-based trade incentives. Tariffs and nontariff barriers replaced quantitative planning foreign direct investment was welcomed in many sectors and encouraging exports became a prime motivating factor in Chinese economic policies. Although China s policies remained far from textbook free trade during the early years of integration ( China s average tariff rate in was percent ) the dramatic shift in economic policy created far-reaching new economic opportunities By these reforms had brought enormous changes to the Chinese economy. Exports of goods had grown to $ billion a 14-fold increase since Imports of goods expanded from less than $ billion to $ billion over the same period. Average tariffs had fallen to percent by the time of WTO accession. Annual foreign direct investment flows had risen from $ million in to over $ billion in Income per capita had risen from $ in to $ in China s efforts to gain WTO membership led to external pressure for extension of the rule of law and more transparent decisionmaking in the country. For example during the 1990s the United States informed the Chinese government that failure to protect copyrighted materials such as software films and other recordings would undercut U.S support for China s membership. China finally agreed to begin to enforce intellectual property rights laws in but its enforcement efforts still need to be strengthened China s formal accession to the WTO will lead to further reform. By mid-2002 approximately existing laws and regulations had been repealed amended and new laws and legislation adopted in order to bring China into conformity with WTO rules. With its new WTO Chapter | Box continued obligations China has now made a formal external commitment to a whole range of trade-related reforms. Failure to live up to these commitments will put Chinese exports at risk in other WTO members markets because members may enforce China s commitments through WTO dispute settlement proceedings and may retaliate if China refuses to cease its actions deemed WTO-inconsistent. For example China is adopting regulations for controlling injurious dumping of imports as WTO rules allow. Whereas in the past bureaucrats could restrict imports arbitrarily however Chinese antidumping procedures henceforth will be carefully scrutinized by other WTO members for inconsistency with WTO rules China has undergone enormous changes in its economic orientation over the last years. Membership in the WTO brings with it an external commitment to this process of reform and makes a return to a centrally planned economy even more difficult governments. As these commitments to U.S. firms become widely known domestic firms in those countries may expect similar guarantees The United States also extends special benefits to certain low-income countries through various programs including trade capacity building assistance the Generalized System of Preferences the Andean Trade Preference Act and the African Growth and Opportunity Act ( AGOA ) AGOA which was signed into law in May reduces trade barriers for Sub-Saharan African countries products entering the United States below those required under the multilateral trade commitments negotiated under the WTO However countries in this region do not automatically qualify for lower U.S tariffs. To be eligible a country must have a market-based economy and its government must be making efforts to limit its interference in the economy and must protect property rights. In addition the government must undertake economic policies that aim to reduce poverty improve health and promote private enterprise. Finally eligible countries must be taking steps to combat official bribery and improve labor rights. In short through AGOA the United States offers lower trade barriers to poor countries in Sub-Saharan Africa that are making efforts to pursue good policies and promote good institutions. The principles behind AGOA are thus very similar to those of the second major new Administration initiative the Millennium Challenge Account which is discussed next | Economic Report of the President The Millennium Challenge Account In March the President proposed a new program designed to promote growth in developing countries. Over the next years the Millennium Challenge Account will increase annual U.S. bilateral development assistance by $ billion a percent increase over current levels MCA funds will be used to support activities that directly contribute to economic growth and poverty alleviation. MCA programs will be implemented by the private sector nongovernmental organizations and public sector agencies. The MCA will strive to achieve within recipient countries a broad coalition around development investments. Because MCA aid will be in the form of grants not loans in accordance with the policy set forth by the President at the Group of Eight summit in this development assistance will not increase the debt burden of recipient countries The MCA is based on the fact that development assistance is most effective when funds flow to countries that have already adopted policies and created institutions that promote growth. In other words only those countries that have taken concrete steps themselves to improve their condition will be potential MCA recipients. The MCA approach has the added advantage that as countries strive to qualify for U.S. grants they will be implementing policies that also encourage inflows of private capital and increased trade the real engines of sustained economic growth Countries receiving MCA assistance must be active partners in the development programs funded by the MCA. Each country selected for aid will negotiate and sign a contract with the MCA which will specify the following : a limited number of clear quantifiable goals ; concrete benchmarks that specify the time needed to accomplish the tasks ; commitments to financial accountability ; and conditions under which the contract would be terminated. MCA resources are meant to complement and enhance specific efforts and policies undertaken in the participating countries ; indeed the MCA program will not impose a development plan designed by others but rather recognizes that the countries themselves are in the best position to evaluate their own needs. In short MCA recipients must take responsibility for their own development programs Monitoring and evaluation to ensure accountability for results will be an integral part of every activity for which MCA funds are used. Monitoring and evaluation will be conducted by the MCA administrative structure or by third-party contractors or both. To facilitate such monitoring all contracts will include baseline data against which progress can be measured. The U.S Government will provide technical assistance to help countries establish these credible baseline data. Every contract will specify regular benchmarks for evaluating progress and provide for the corrective actions necessary to Chapter | keep the program on track. All evaluations and all terms of the contract will be made public in the United States and in the host country MCA contracts will fund projects for a limited term and include provisions for a midterm review. Programs will continue to receive funding under the terms of the country s MCA contract unless the country fails to meet the contract s conditions for performance. Funding for all or part of a particular MCA contract may be scaled back or ended for failure to meet financial standards or specific benchmarks. In addition a country s participation in the MCA may be terminated for failure to adhere to the three fundamental principles laid out earlier in this chapter economic freedom governing justly and investing in people as indicated by an absolute decline in the policy environment. Participation may also be terminated in the event of material change such as a military coup Allocation of MCA resources will be based primarily on quantitative benchmarks in order to ensure procedural accountability and transparency These criteria will focus on the three broad principles just mentioned. Use of published quantitative measures will also help countries understand why they did or did not qualify to receive MCA funds. This knowledge will enable countries to identify where they need to improve their policies in order to qualify for future grants. Table lists the specific indicators ( and the initial public sources for the data ) for the three MCA principles These indicators were chosen because of their quality and objectivity country coverage and public availability TABLE Millennium Challenge Account Indicators Principle Indicator Source Economic freedom Country credit rating Inflation Budget deficit Trade policy Regulatory quality Days needed to start a business Institutional Investor magazine International Monetary Fund International Monetary Fund national sources Heritage Foundation World Bank World Bank Governing justly Control of corruption Rule of law Civil liberties Political rights Voice and accountability Government effectiveness World Bank World Bank Freedom House Freedom House World Bank World Bank Investing in people Public primary education spending as percent of GDP Primary education completion rate Public expenditure on health as percent of GDP Immunization rates : DPT and measles World Bank national sources World Bank national sources World Bank national sources World Bank national sources Immunization for diphtheria pertussis and tetanus and for measles Source : Millennium Challenge Account fact sheet The White House | Economic Report of the President As described previously economic freedom broadly encompasses the freedom to start a business hire workers invest and make other business and personal decisions without undue government interference. In the MCA process economic freedom will be measured by six publicly available criteria : country credit ratings inflation rates budget deficits measures of openness to trade measures of regulatory quality and the number of days it takes to start a business. Country credit ratings are included because they contain useful summary evaluations by private sector sources of the country s macroeconomic situation. Inflation rates and budget deficits are included to capture those aspects of macroeconomic stability so important to growth. Trade policies including the degree to which imports are subject to tariffs and nontariff barriers as well as the extent of corruption in the national customs service will measure the extent to which a country s policy environment allows it to take advantage of global markets. Finally regulatory quality and the time it takes to start a new business provide quantitative measures of the environment for entrepreneurial activity The second principle governing justly involves various facets of good governance and good institutions that help sustain a pro-growth environment. The inclusion of criteria that embody this principle reflects the important complementary role of the quality of institutions in improving economic performance. The criteria will measure the extent to which citizens of a country are able to participate in the selection of governments the freedom to develop views and institutions independent of the state the role of elected representatives in policy formation the control of corruption and the rule of law. These are important indicators of whether there is political accountability in the country Measures of governing justly will be based on surveys by the World Bank and Freedom House a nonprofit nonpartisan organization. Rankings will be based on the following criteria : civil liberties political rights voice and accountability government effectiveness rule of law and control of corruption Assessment of the rule of law which as discussed above is important to investor and entrepreneurial confidence will cover such factors as the effectiveness of the judiciary and the enforceability of contracts. Ratings of political rights and civil liberties will be determined through a compilation of foreign and domestic news reports publications by nongovernmental organizations policy center research and academic and professional analysis The third principle investing in people involves public commitment to developing human capital through education and improved health. Here the quantitative criteria include public spending on primary education as a percentage of GDP the share of children who have completed primary school by the national graduation age public expenditure on health as a percentage of GDP and immunization rates of children under months for DPT ( diphtheria pertussis and tetanus ) and measles. The importance of Chapter | education in maintaining and improving worker productivity is reflected in the inclusion of both a public education input ( public spending on primary education ) and an education output ( the share of children completing primary school ) As noted in the earlier discussion of pro-growth principles improved health care is also important to better economic outcomes Consequently public expenditure on health care is included as an MCA criterion along with immunization rates for some of the most common serious childhood diseases worldwide Countries must demonstrate commitment to and performance on all three principles to be deemed a better performer and thereby qualify for possible MCA assistance. Eligibility will be limited to those countries that score above the median on at least half of the indicators in each of the three areas. However countries must score above the median on the corruption indicator to be considered for grants regardless of their scores on other criteria. This requirement reflects the importance that corruption plays in whether or not development assistance achieves its aims. As noted above reducing corruption supports the benefits of other good policies and of development assistance by building public trust in institutions encouraging investment and helping ensure that aid is put to pro-growth uses Candidate countries will be evaluated within one of two income categories. Initially only countries with gross national income per capita below $ ( in dollars ) will be eligible for grants. This level was chosen because it is the historical income threshold for assistance to the world s poorest countries from the International Development Association ( IDA ) the World Bank affiliate that specializes in assistance to the poorest countries. In subsequent years the income threshold for eligibility will be raised to $ the projected cutoff for the World Bank s designation for lower-middle-income countries. However the two income groups ( those with incomes per capita below $ and those with incomes between $ and $ ) will continue to be evaluated separately. This separation is important because as discussed above higher income is associated with better social and economic indicators. Grouping the countries in this way will ensure that countries of similar income and economic development compete with each other. Countries prohibited by current statutory restrictions from receiving U.S. assistance will not be eligible. Qualifying as a better performer does not guarantee receipt of MCA funds. The MCA Board of Directors composed of Cabinet-level officials and chaired by the Secretary of State will make final recommendations to the President As already noted the provision of grants rather than loans will ensure that the MCA program will not add to countries debt burdens. The resources provided can then be allocated as intended to development rather than debt service. Aid in the form of loans causes many heavily indebted poor countries to accrue even greater debt which can hinder their growth. One study of | Economic Report of the President developing countries from to found that for a country with average indebtedness doubling the debt ratio ( either the debt-to-exports ratio or the debt-to-GDP ratio ) reduces annual growth of GDP per capita by between and percentage point Reforming the Multilateral Development Banks The Administration believes that the World Bank and other multilateral development banks will be more effective in helping countries improve their living standards if when distributing aid they place greater emphasis on factors that improve productivity. The Administration s agenda for reform of the MDBs seeks progress toward better measurement monitoring and management of development assistance. The Administration also has pushed for an increase in the proportion of MDB assistance to the poorest countries that is delivered in the form of grants rather than loans MDBs will be more effective in reducing poverty if they address the basic causes of slow growth including poor business environments and inadequate education and health care. This means that MDBs should help countries reduce the impediments that constrain the creation of high-productivity jobs in the private sector. To this end the United States has secured agreement on a change in assistance strategies by the IDA. IDA funds will now include the distribution of resources to private sector development in addition to the public sector uses that have been its traditional focus. This agreement creates the basis for expanded collaboration between the IDA and the International Finance Corporation the World Bank Group s private sector finance arm Such collaboration will help remove the obstacles to private sector-led growth in the world s poorest countries The Administration also believes that a major priority for the MDBs should be greater attention to measuring development results. Donor and recipient countries both benefit from quantifying the outcomes of assistance programs and understanding the reasons for success or failure. The recent IDA replenishment agreement calls for a fundamental shift of focus within the MDBs toward measurable results. IDA will also establish a system that tracks specific results in education health and private sector development. These innovations will allow donors to link their contributions to IDA to observable outcomes. This approach will help direct scarce donor dollars toward those activities and projects that are demonstrably improving people s lives Furthermore the Administration s position is that MDBs should expand similar results-based operational plans into all of its grant and loan programs Consistent with the MCA approach U.S. leadership has resulted in a significant expansion of MDB grants for the world s poorest countries. In July the President called upon the World Bank and other MDBs to increase the proportion of their assistance to the poorest recipient countries that is Chapter | provided as grants rather than loans. One year later the United States finalized an agreement with other international donors on a substantial increase in grants. As a result of this agreement IDA grant assistance for programs targeting education HIV/AIDS health nutrition potable water and sanitation will be increased. U.S. leadership was also crucial in obtaining agreement on an increase in grants for the recently concluded replenishment of the African Development Fund. These agreements significantly advance the Administration s policy objective of helping poor countries make productive investments without saddling them with ever-larger debt burdens The Administration recognizes that countries may sometimes face economic crises that can lead to sharp net outflows of capital. Countries will be well served if these crises can be managed effectively. Consequently in parallel with MDB reform the Administration believes that clarifying the size of official financing packages from the international financial institutions is essential to increasing predictability in the market curbing excessive risk taking and providing the right incentives for countries to pursue good policies. The Administration has worked to create a more orderly and predictable process for restructuring sovereign debt so that the long-term growth of developing economies is not subverted by short-term crises. In particular the Administration has proposed the incorporation of collective action clauses into sovereign debt contracts to facilitate a more predictable and transparent resolution of sovereign debt defaults when they do occur Conclusion Economic growth has the potential to improve the lives of millions of people around the globe both through higher incomes and through improvements in social indicators such as health outcomes. This chapter has laid out three broad principles for promoting growth Economic freedom is a critical prerequisite for the harnessing of entrepreneurial energy to improve productivity and increase growth. Macroeconomic stability including low inflation and small fiscal deficits helps create an economic environment in which people can plan and invest. Governments should avoid burdensome regulation distortionary taxes and nationalization of industries because all of these lead to inefficiency and slow growth. Openness to international goods services and capital brings with it exposure to world best practices and generates the competition that leads domestic firms and workers to enhance their productivity Poor institutions especially those that fail to enforce property rights promote the rule of law and discourage corruption can subvert good economic policy decisions. Entrepreneurs will be less willing to commit resources for the long | Economic Report of the President term if they believe that arbitrary decisions by governments may rob them of the anticipated returns. Workers will be more reluctant to work hard if they believe the fruits of their labor will be seized by corrupt officials or criminals Ultimately promoting growth depends on appropriate policies aimed at both macroeconomic stability and creating a supportive economic environment Investment in people through improvements in both education and health will support a work force that can fully utilize the opportunities created by sound policies and good institutions. Well-trained workers will be better able to make productive use of the capital available to them both the existing capital stock and new investment. This will lead to higher productivity and enhanced growth. A healthy work force will be less prone to absenteeism allowing a higher rate of utilization of capital and this too will improve the country s economic prospects The Administration s initiatives the promotion of openness to the world economy through trade liberalization and the new approaches to bilateral and multilateral development assistance are intended to complement developing countries own efforts to improve their economic performance. TPA will help the United States reach agreements that increase trade and thus foster growth in developing countries. The MCA will provide both financial assistance to the least developed countries and incentives for them to implement progrowth policies. Reform of the MDBs will complement the MCA initiative by focusing these institutions funds on pro-growth efforts especially in the private sector and assisting the world s least developed countries through grants in aid. Through all these programs the United States will stimulate worldwide economic development raising incomes in developing countries and spreading prosperity both at home and abroad Chapter | Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Robert Glenn Hubbard Chairman Randall S. Kroszner Member Appendix A | Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling........................ John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner........................... Arthur F. Burns............................. Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier..................... Joseph S. Davis............................. Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt................................... Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller............................ James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck.............................. Warren L. Smith............................ Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker.................. Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon................................ Marina v.N. Whitman.................... Gary L. Seevers............................. William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel.......................... Charles L. Schultze....................... William D. Nordhaus..................... Lyle E. Gramley............................. George C. Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L. Weidenbaum................. William A. Niskanen Jerry L. Jordan Martin Feldstein William Poole................................ Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore...................... Michael L. Mussa.......................... Michael J. Boskin.......................... John B. Taylor............................... Richard L. Schmalensee David F. Bradford Paul Wonnacott Laura D Andrea Tyson Alan S. Blinder.............................. Joseph E. Stiglitz Martin N. Baily Alicia H. Munnell Janet L. Yellen Jeffrey A. Frankel.......................... Rebecca M. Blank......................... Martin N. Baily Robert Z. Lawrence....................... Kathryn L. Shaw R. Glenn Hubbard Mark B. McClellan Randall S. Kroszner Position Oath of office date Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member....................................... Vice Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chair Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chair Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July October December April July August February June October November November February July July June June January February April October August August May May July November | Economic Report of the President Separation date November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July July January January May September January August June January January April June February August August August March July January January January November Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to provide the President with objective economic analysis and advice on the development and implementation of a wide range of domestic and international economic policy issues The Chairman of the Council R. Glenn Hubbard continued to chair the Council during Dr Hubbard is on a leave of absence from Columbia University where he is the Russell L. Carson Professor of Economics and Finance and Co-Director of the Entrepreneurship Program in the Graduate School of Business and Professor of Economics in the Faculty of Arts and Sciences. He is a Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research. He also served as Senior Vice Dean of the Graduate School of Business at Columbia University Dr. Hubbard is responsible for communicating the Council s views on economic matters directly to the President through personal discussions and written reports. He represents the Council at Cabinet meetings meetings of the National Economic Council daily White House senior staff meetings budget team meetings with the President and other formal and informal meetings with the President. He also travels within the United States and overseas to present the Administration s views on the economy. Dr. Hubbard is the Council s chief public spokesperson. He directs the work of the Council and exercises ultimate responsibility for the work of the professional staff The Members of the Council Randall S. Kroszner is the other current Member of the Council of Economic Advisers. Dr. Kroszner is on leave from the University of Chicago s Graduate School of Business where he is Professor of Economics. He is also on leave from his positions as Editor of the Journal of Law & Economics and Associate Director of the George J. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State at the University of Chicago. Dr. Kroszner is also a Faculty Research Fellow at the National Bureau of Economic Research. He Appendix A | represents the Administration at a variety of international and domestic meetings. The Council s third Member Mark B. McClellan left the Council in November upon his appointment by the President to be Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration The Chairman and the Members work as a team on most economic policy issues. Dr. Hubbard was primarily responsible for the Administration s economic forecast macroeconomic analysis budget and taxation policy and retirement security. Dr. Kroszner s responsibilities included international finance and trade issues for both emerging markets and developed economies macroeconomic forecasting and a number of microeconomic issues including those relating to corporate governance financial markets energy environment transportation and the costs of regulation Macroeconomic Policies As is its tradition the Council devoted much time during to assisting the President in formulating economic policy objectives and designing programs to implement them. In this regard the Chairman kept the President informed on a continuing basis of important macroeconomic developments and other major policy issues through regular briefings. The Council prepares for the President the Vice President and the White House senior staff almost daily memoranda that report key economic data and analyze current economic events. In addition they prepare weekly discussion and data memoranda for the Vice President and senior White House staff The Council the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget the Administration s economic troika are responsible for producing the economic forecasts that underlie the Administration s budget proposals. The Council under the leadership of the Chairman and the Members initiates the forecasting process twice each year. In preparing these forecasts the Council consults with a variety of outside sources including leading private sector forecasters In the Council took part in discussions on a range of macroeconomic issues with a particular focus on issues relating to tax policy. The Council provided analytical support for major fiscal initiatives such as the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act of and the President s January proposal to strengthen the economy. The Council worked closely with the Office of Management and Budget the Treasury the Federal Reserve and the National Economic Council as well as other government agencies in providing analyses to the rest of the Administration The Council continued its efforts to improve the public s understanding of economic issues and of the Administration s economic agenda through regular | Economic Report of the President briefings with the economic and financial press frequent discussions with outside economists and presentations to outside organizations. The Chairman and Members also regularly exchanged views on the economy with the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System International Economic Policies The Council was involved in a range of international economic issues Discussions on trade policy matters involved a number of industries as well as broader trade liberalization initiatives in various multilateral regional and bilateral forums. The Council participated in the development of U.S. positions during the concluding stages of free trade agreements with Chile and Singapore as well as in ongoing negotiations under the auspices of the World Trade Organization and with regard to the proposed Free Trade Agreement of the Americas. The Council participated in international finance discussions involving a number of emerging market economies. A particular focus of the Council was in developing an analytical framework for a pro-growth agenda for emerging markets. The Council participated in the development of the President s Millennium Challenge Account which will increase aid to lowand middle-income countries that have a demonstrated commitment to progrowth policies and institutions The Council is a leading participant in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) the principal forum for economic cooperation among the high-income industrial countries. The Chairman heads the U.S. delegation to the semiannual meetings of the OECD s Economic Policy Committee ( EPC ) and serves as the EPC Chairman as well as Chairman of the Ad Hoc Group on Sustainable Development. In Dr Kroszner participated in the OECD s Working Party meeting on macroeconomic policy and coordination and Council staff participated in the OECD s Working Party meeting on microeconomic policies. Dr. Kroszner also participated in the annual OECD review of U.S. economic policy Members regularly met with representatives of the Council s counterpart agencies in foreign countries as well as with foreign trade ministers other government officials and members of the private sector. The Council represented the United States at other international forums as well including meetings of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC ) forum. The Council played a key role in organizing an APEC-led initiative focused on corporate restructuring initial results of which were presented at a conference in Singapore Appendix A | Microeconomic Policies A wide variety of microeconomic issues received the Council s attention during The Council actively participated in the Cabinet-level National Economic Council dealing with issues related to energy the environment homeland security and cybersecurity technology telecommunications and transportation among others. Dr. McClellan was extensively involved in formulating policy concerning health care and various aspects of welfare policy. Dr. Kroszner participated in a series of discussions on energy and environmental policies financial market issues corporate governance reform regulation and numerous issues relating to specific industries including lumber steel and transportation The Council participated in discussion on a range of environmental issues in A particular focus was on climate change initiatives including partnerships with other countries and negotiations associated with the Kyoto Protocol. The Council also played an integral role in regulatory discussions including the revision of the OMB Guidelines for the Conduct of Regulatory Analysis and the Format of Accounting Statements ; Dr. Kroszner co-chaired this process with the Director of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs. This document establishes guidelines for Federal government agencies on how to undertake economic analysis of proposed regulations Corporate governance reform was an important focus of the Council s efforts in Members and staff analyzed various underlying problems in corporate governance and engaged in discussions within the Administration and with outside organizations in the United States and other countries about policies to enhance accountability disclosure and enforcement. The Council was also involved in discussions relating to the Postal Service Amtrak the airlines government-sponsored enterprises bankruptcy reform and a host of technology-related issues such as cybersecurity fusion energy initiatives computer reservation systems and issues related to broadband The Council participated extensively in discussions related to labor market and social policies. Issues included prescription drug benefits reform of the Medicare system medical malpractice liability unemployment insurance and the President s proposal to offer reemployment accounts to certain unemployed individuals. The Council was also involved in discussions relating to financial institutions agriculture and the economic effects of ports disputes | Economic Report of the President The Staff of the Council of Economic Advisers The professional staff of the Council consists of the Chief of Staff the Chief Economist the Director of Macroeconomic Forecasting the Senior Statistician eight senior economists five staff economists and five research assistants The professional staff and their areas of concentration at the end of were : Chief of Staff Phillip L. Swagel Chief Economist Douglas J. Holtz-Eakin Director of Macroeconomic Forecasting Senior Statistician Steven N. Braun Catherine H. Furlong Senior Economists Cindy R. Alexander............. Industrial Organization Corporate Finance and Regulation S. Brock Blomberg International Finance Robert J. Carroll.................. Public Finance Robert N. Collender............ Regulation Energy Finance and Agriculture Christopher L. Foote. Macroeconomics Thomas C. DeLeire............. Labor Health and Education John A. List......................... Environment and Regulation Michael O. Moore............... International Trade Staff Economists D. Clay Ackerly.................. Anne L. Berry..................... Catherine L. Downard Brian H. Jenn..................... Peter H. Woodward............ Health Care and Labor Regulation and Industrial Organization International Finance Labor Regulation and Public Finance International Finance and Financial Markets Appendix A | Research Assistants Shelley D. de Alth Leandra T. DeSilva Christine L. Dobridge Paul S. Landefeld................ Adam R. Saunders.............. International Trade Environment and Regulation Macroeconomics Macroeconomics and Public Finance Macroeconomics Public Finance and Regulation Statistical Office Mrs. Furlong directs the Statistical Office. The Statistical Office maintains and updates the Council s statistical information oversees the publication of the monthly Economic Indicators and the statistical appendix to the Economic Report of the President and verifies statistics in Presidential and Council memoranda testimony and speeches Linda A. Reilly Statistician Brian A. Amorosi Statistical Assistant Dagmara A. Mocala............. Research Assistant Administrative Office The Administrative Office provides general support for the Council s activities This includes financial management human resource management and travel facility security information and telecommunications management support Catherine Fibich.................. Administrative Officer Rosemary M. Rogers Administrative Assistant John W. Arnold Information Management Assistant Office of the Chairman Alice H. Williams................ Executive Assistant to the Chairman Sandra F. Daigle Executive Assistant to the Chairman and Assistant to the Chief of Staff Lisa D. Branch Executive Assistant to Dr. Kroszner Stephen M. Lineberry. Executive Assistant to Dr. McClellan Staff Support Mary E. Jones...................... Executive Assistant for International Economics Labor Health Environment and Regulation Mary A. Thomas-Parker Program Assistant for Macroeconomics Industrial Organization and Agriculture | Economic Report of the President Diana E. Furchtgott-Roth served as Chief of Staff for the first half of and subsequently as Special Advisor to the Council Michael Treadway provided editorial assistance in the preparation of the Economic Report of the President Katherine Baicker Rex W. Cowdry John G. Matsusaka and William B Vogt provided consulting services to the Council during Student interns during the year were M. Caroline Beasley Jason P. Brinton Alexander Chan Carol L. Cohen Brian C. Grech Laura C. Hanlon Clarette S. Kim David Y. Lin Matthew Nestorick Samuel C. Roddenberry Douglas A. Smith Kevin P. Sweeney Thomas B. Valuk Peter H. Woodward and Aimee C. Zullo. Sarah R. Darley Evan M. Newman and Adam R. Sorkin joined the staff of the Council in January as student interns Departures Diana E. Furchtgott-Roth accepted a position as Chief Economist at the Department of Labor in early Douglas J. Holtz-Eakin left the Council at the end of January to become the Director of the Congressional Budget Office The Council s senior economists in most cases are on leave of absence from faculty positions at academic institutions or from other government agencies or research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to or years. Some of the senior economists who resigned during the year returned to their previous affiliations. They are Katherine Baicker ( Dartmouth College ) Peter M. Feather ( U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service ) William R. Melick ( Kenyon College ) and William A. Pizer ( Resources for the Future ) Others went on to new positions. They are Jeffrey R. Brown ( University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign ) Carolyn L. Evans ( Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ) Andrew J. Filardo ( Bank for International Settlements ) and Wallace P. Mullin ( George Washington University ) Staff economists are generally graduate students who spend year with the Council and then return to complete their dissertations. Those who returned to their graduate studies in are Irena I. Asmundson ( Stanford University ) and Katherine R. Baylis ( University of California Berkeley ) Judson L. Jaffe accepted a position at Analysis Group/Economics. Those who served as research assistants at the Council and resigned during are M. Marit Rehavi ( London School of Economics ) Heather C. McNaught ( Department of Justice ) and Jason M. Zhao. Mary A. Thomas-Parker Program Assistant retired after nearly years of Federal service the last years of which were with the Council During the Council lost a valued colleague. Susan P. Clements who served as a Statistician in the Statistical Office passed away in August ; she had retired in June for health reasons Appendix A | Public Information The Council s annual Economic Report of the President is an important vehicle for presenting the Administration s domestic and international economic policies. It is now available for distribution both as a bound volume and on the Internet where it is accessible at www.access.gpo.gov/eop The Council also has primary responsibility for compiling the monthly Economic Indicators which is issued by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. The Internet address for the Economic Indicators is www.access.gpo.gov/congress/cong002.html. The Council s home page is located at www.whitehouse.gov/cea/index.html | Economic Report of the President Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ 193914P2.CNT ECONO VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ 193914P2.CNT ECONO C O N T E N T S Page NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B Gross domestic product Real gross domestic product Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes Percent changes in real gross domestic product Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product Gross domestic product by major type of product Real gross domestic product by major type of product Gross domestic product by sector Real gross domestic product by sector Gross domestic product by industry Real gross domestic product by industry Gross product of nonfinancial corporate business Output price costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business Personal consumption expenditures Real personal consumption expenditures Private fixed investment by type Real private fixed investment by type Government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type Real government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type Private inventories and domestic final sales by industry Real private inventories and domestic final sales by industry Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts Real exports and imports of goods and services and receipts and payments of income Relation of gross domestic product gross national product net national product and national income Relation of national income and personal income National income by type of income Sources of personal income Disposition of personal income Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures and per capita gross domestic product in current and real dollars Gross saving and investment VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ 193914P2.CNT ECONO Page B Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and persons by race selected years POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B Population by age group Civilian population and labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Civilian employment by demographic characteristic Unemployment by demographic characteristic Civilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic Civilian unemployment rate Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic Unemployment by duration and reason Unemployment insurance programs selected data Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries Employment cost index private industry Productivity and related data business sector Changes in productivity and related data business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B B B B B B B B B Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufacturing industries Capacity utilization rates New construction activity New private housing units started authorized and completed and houses sold Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories Manufacturers shipments and inventories Manufacturers new and unfilled orders PRICES : B B B B B B Consumer price indexes for major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes for commodities services and special groups Changes in special consumer price indexes Changes in consumer price indexes for commodities and services Producer price indexes by stage of processing VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ 193914P2.CNT ECONO Page B B B Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B B B B B B B B B Money stock and debt measures Components of money stock measures Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base Bank credit at all commercial banks Bond yields and interest rates Credit market borrowing Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing Mortgage debt outstanding by holder Consumer credit outstanding GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B B B B B B B B B B B B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) by major type Federal Government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B B B B B Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits by industry Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Sales profits and stockholders equity all manufacturing corporations Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ 193914P2.CNT ECONO Page B B Common stock prices and yields Business formation and business failures AGRICULTURE : B B B B B B Farm income Farm business balance sheet Farm output and productivity indexes Farm input use selected inputs Agricultural price indexes and farm real estate value U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B U.S. international transactions B U.S. international trade in goods by principal end-use category B U.S. international trade in goods by area B U.S. international trade in goods on balance of payments ( BOP ) and Census basis and trade in services on BOP basis B International investment position of the United States at yearend B Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries B Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries B Foreign exchange rates B International reserves selected years B Growth rates in real gross domestic product VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ 193914P2.CNT ECONO General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Because of the formula used for calculating real gross domestic product ( GDP ) the chained ( ) dollar estimates for the detailed components do not add to the chained-dollar value of GDP or to any intermediate aggregates. The Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) no longer publishes chained-dollar estimates prior to except for selected series Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) Data in these tables reflect revisions made by the source agencies through January In particular tables containing national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) estimates reflect revisions released by the Department of Commerce in July VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ 193914P2.CNT ECONO NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B Gross domestic product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment and software Residential Change in private inventories : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B1.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Gross domestic product Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Total National defense State and local Nondefense AddenFinal Gross dum : sales of domesGross domestic national tic purproduct chases product Percent change from preceding period Gross Gross domes- domestic tic prodpuruct chases : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services GDP plus net income receipts from rest of the world Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B1.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Real gross domestic product [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Total Equipment and software Structures Residential Change in private inventories : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B2.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Real gross domestic product Continued [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Total Exports Imports National defense Nondefense Total State and local Final Gross sales of domesdomestic tic purproduct chases Addendum : Gross national product Percent change from preceding period Gross Gross domes- domestic tic prodpuruct chases : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Gross GDP domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services plus net income receipts from rest of the world Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B2.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes [ Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted ] Gross domestic product ( GDP ) Index numbers = Year or quarter GDP ( current dollars ) Real GDP ( chain-type quantity index ) GDP chain-type price index Percent change from preceding period GDP implicit price deflator GDP ( current dollars ) Real GDP ( chain-type quantity index ) GDP chain-type price index GDP implicit price deflator : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Percent changes based on unrounded data. Quarterly percent changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B3.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Percent changes in real gross domestic product [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product Exports and imports of goods and services Gross private domestic investment Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Exports Imports Total Nonresidential fixed Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Structures Equipment and software Residential fixed Federal State and local : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Note. Percent changes based on unrounded data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B4.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product [ Percentage points except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross domestic product ( percent change ) Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total NonDurable durable goods goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment and software Change in priResivate dential inventories : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B5.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product Continued [ Percentage points except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Exports Net exports Total Goods Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Imports Services Total Goods Federal Services Total Total NaNontional defense defense State and local : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B5.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Nonresidential Durable goods Nondurable goods Total : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Total Services Total Structures Equipment and software Total See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B6.ER3 ECONO Residential TABLE B Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product Continued [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Year or quarter Federal Total Goods Services Total Goods Services Total Total : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III National defense Nondefense Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B6.ER3 ECONO State and local TABLE B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment and software Residential : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B7.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports and imports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Year or quarter Total Exports Imports Total State and local NaNontional defense defense Percent change Gross domestic purchases Final sales of domestic product Total Less food and energy Gross national product Gross domestic Gross purdochases mestic Less prodfood uct Total and energy : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services changes based on unrounded data. Quarterly percent changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Percent VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B7.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Gross domestic product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Change Final in Gross sales of pridomestic domesvate product tic product inventories Total Total Final sales Durable goods Change in private inventories Final sales Change in private inventories Nondurable goods Final sales Change in private inventories Services Structures : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Estimates for durable and nondurable goods for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) ; later estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B8.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Real gross domestic product by major type of product [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Change Final in Gross sales of pridomestic domesvate product tic product inventories Total Durable goods Final sales Total Change in private inventories Final sales Change in private inventories Nondurable goods Final sales Change in private inventories Services Structures : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Estimates for durable and nondurable goods for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) ; later estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B9.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Gross domestic product by sector [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business Year or quarter Gross domestic product Total Total Nonfarm less housing General government Households and institutions Nonfarm Farm Housing Total Private households Nonprofit institutions Total Federal State and local : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Gross domestic business product equals gross domestic product less gross product of households and institutions and of general government. Nonfarm product equals gross domestic business product less gross farm product Equals compensation of general government employees plus general government consumption of fixed capital Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B10.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Real gross domestic product by sector [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business Year or quarter Gross domestic product Total Total Nonfarm less housing General government Households and institutions Nonfarm Farm Housing Total Private households Nonprofit institutions Total Federal State and local : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Gross domestic business product equals gross domestic product less gross product of households and institutions and of general government. Nonfarm product equals gross domestic business product less gross farm product Equals compensation of general government employees plus general government consumption of fixed capital Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B11.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Gross domestic product by industry [ Billions of dollars ] Private industries Gross domestic product Year Based on SIC : Total private industries Agriculture forestry and fishing Mining TransFiportanance Con- Manu- tion Whole- Retail insurstruc- facand sale ance tion turing public trade trade and utilireal ties estate Services Statis- Governtical ment discrepancy Based on SIC : Equals gross domestic product ( GDP ) measured as the sum of expenditures less gross domestic income Note. For details regarding these data see Survey of Current Business June and November and Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B12.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Real gross domestic product by industry [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ] Private industries Year Based on SIC : Gross domestic product AgriculTotal ture private for- Minindus- estry ing tries and fishing TransFiportanance Con- Manu- tion Whole- Retail insurstruc- facand sale ance tion turing public trade trade and utilireal ties estate Services Not Staallotis- Govern- cated tical ment by disinduscreptry ancy Equals the current-dollar statistical discrepancy deflated by the implicit price deflator for gross domestic business product Equals gross domestic product ( GDP ) less the statistical discrepancy and the sum of GDP by industry of the detailed industries. The value of not allocated by industry reflects the nonadditivity of chained-dollar estimates and the differences in source data used to estimate real GDP by industry and the expenditures measure of real GDP Note. For details regarding these data see Survey of Current Business June and November and Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B13.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Gross product of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net product Domestic income Gross product of nonfinancial corporate business Consumption of fixed capital : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Year or quarter Total Indirect business taxes Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Compensation of employees Total Profits Inventory valuation Divi- Undis- adjustdends tributed ment profits Profits after tax Total Profits Profits before tax tax liability Total Capital Net con- intersump- est tion adjustment Indirect business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B14.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Output price costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross product of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Price costs and profit per unit of real output ( dollars ) Price per unit of real gross product of nonfinancial corporate business Compensation of employees ( unit labor cost ) Unit nonlabor cost Total Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Consumption of fixed capital Indirect business taxes Net interest Total Profits tax liability Profits after tax : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III The implicit price deflator for gross product of nonfinancial corporate business divided by business tax and nontax liability plus business transfer payments less subsidies profits from current production With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Indirect Unit VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B15.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter Personal consumption expendi- Total tures Nondurable goods FurniMotor ture vehiand cles house- Total and hold parts equipment Clothing and shoes Food Services Gaso- Fuel line oil and and Total oil coal Total Electricity and gas Trans- Mediporcal tacare tion : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Housing Household operation Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B16.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Real personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter Personal consumption expendi- Total tures FurniMotor ture vehiand cles houseand hold parts equipment Nondurable goods Total Clothing and shoes Food Gasoline and oil Services Fuel oil and coal Household operation Total Housing Total Electricity and gas Trans- Mediporta- cal tion care : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Note. See Table B-2 for data for total personal consumption expenditures for Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B17.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Private fixed investment by type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonresidential Structures Private fixed investment Year or quarter Total nonresidential Equipment and software Nonresidential buildings including farm Total Utilities Information processing equipment and software Mining exploration shafts and wells Total Total Computers and peripheral equipment Software3 Other Industrial equipment Transportation equipment Residential : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Includes Includes Excludes other items not shown separately new computers and peripheral equipment only software embedded or bundled in computers and other equipment Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B18.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Real private fixed investment by type [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonresidential Structures Private fixed investment Year or quarter Total nonresidential Total Equipment and software Nonresidential buildings including farm Utilities Information processing equipment and software Mining exploration shafts and wells Total Total Computers Softand pe- ware ripheral equipment Other Industrial equipment Transportation equipment Residential : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Includes other items not shown separately new computers and peripheral equipment only software embedded or bundled in computers and other equipment Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Includes Excludes VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B19.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal State and local National defense Year or quarter Total Total Total Nondefense Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software Total Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software Total Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B20.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Real government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal State and local National defense Year or quarter Total Total Total Consumption expenditures Nondefense Gross investment Structures Equipment and software Total Consumption expenditures Gross investment Structures Equipment and software Total Consumption expenditures Gross investment Structures Equipment and software : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Note. See Table B-2 for data for total Government consumption expenditures and gross investment for Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B21.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Private inventories and domestic final sales by industry [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Private inventories Quarter Total Fourth quarter : Farm Construction mining and utilities Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Other industries Nonfarm Final sales of domestic business Ratio of private inventories to final sales of domestic business Total Nonfarm : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III NAICS : Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter change calculated from this table is not the current-dollar change in private inventories component of GDP. The former is the difference between two inventory stocks each valued at its respective end-of-quarter prices. The latter is the change in the physical volume of inventories valued at average prices of the quarter. In addition changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas change in private inventories is stated at annual rates Inventories of construction mining and utilities establishments are included in other industries through Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Final sales of domestic business equals final sales of domestic product less gross product of households and institutions and of general government and includes a small amount of final sales by farm and by government enterprises Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis. Estimates through are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Beginning with estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B22.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Real private inventories and domestic final sales by industry [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Private inventories Quarter Total Fourth quarter : Farm Construction mining and utilities Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Other industries Nonfarm Final sales of domestic business Ratio of private inventories to final sales of domestic business Total Nonfarm NAICS : : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas the change in private inventories component of GDP is stated at annual rates Inventories of construction mining and utilities establishments are included in other industries through Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Final sales of domestic business equals final sales of domestic product less gross product of households and institutions and of general government and includes a small amount of final sales by farm and by government enterprises Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis. Estimates for through are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Beginning with estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) See Survey of Current Business Table 5.13B for detailed information on calculation of the chained ( ) dollar inventory series Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B23.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts from rest of the world Year or quarter Exports of goods and services Total Total Goods Services Payments to rest of the world Imports of goods and services Income receipts Total Total Goods Services Income payments Transfer payments ( net ) Total From persons ( net ) From government ( net ) From business Net foreign investment : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services. Beginning with repairs and alterations of equipment were reclassified from goods to services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B24.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Real exports and imports of goods and services and receipts and payments of income [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Goods Year or quarter Total Total Nondurable goods Durable goods Services Income receipts : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV Goods Total Total Services Income payments : I II III Durable goods Nondurable goods Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services. Beginning with repairs and alterations of equipment were reclassified from goods to services Note. See Table B-2 for data for total exports of goods and services and total imports of goods and services for Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B25.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Relation of gross domestic product gross national product net national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Plus : Income Gross receipts domestic from product rest of the world Less : Income payments to rest of the world Less : Consumption of fixed capital Equals : Gross national product Total Less : Equals : Indirect Net businaness Govern- tional tax and Private ment product nontax liability Business transfer payments Plus : Subsidies less Statis- rent cur- Equals : surtical plus of National disgovern- income crepan- ment cy enterprises : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B26.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Year or quarter National income Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Plus : Net interest Contributions for social insurance Wage accruals less disbursements Personal interest income Personal dividend income Equals : Government transfer payments to persons Business transfer payments to persons Personal income : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III E : \ 2003_EOP \ B27.ER3 ECONO Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt TABLE B National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Compensation of employees Wage and salary accruals Supplements to wages and salaries Government Employer contributions for social insurance Proprietors income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm Year or quarter National income Total Total Other Total Other labor income Nonfarm Total Proprietors income Total Proprietors income Total : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III National income is the total net income earned in production. It differs from gross domestic product mainly in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes. See Table B-26 See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B28.ER3 ECONO TABLE B National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Total Rental income of persons Capital consumption adjustment Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Profits Profits before tax Profits tax liability Total Dividends Undistributed profits Inventory valuation adjustment Total Profits after tax Total Capital consumption adjustment Net interest : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Without capital consumption adjustment inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Without VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B28.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Wage and salary disbursements Private industries Year or quarter Personal income Goodsproducing industries Total Total Total Manufacturing Distributive industries Service industries Government Other labor income Proprietors income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Farm Nonfarm : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III The total of wage and salary disbursements and other labor income differs from compensation of employees in Table B-28 in that it excludes employer contributions for social insurance and the excess of wage accruals over wage disbursements See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B29.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Transfer payments to persons Personal dividend income Personal interest income Total Old-age survivors Government disability unemand ployment Veterans health benefits insurinsurance ance benefits benefits Family assistance Other Less : Personal contributions for social insurance : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Consists of aid to families with dependent children and beginning with assistance programs operating under the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of Note. The industry classification of wage and salary disbursements and proprietors income is on an establishment basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC for earlier years shown Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B29.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Percent of disposable personal income Personal Personal Interest transfer conpaypaid sumption ments by expendi- persons to rest tures of the world ( net ) Total Personal outlays Equals : Personal saving Total Personal Personal consumption saving expenditures : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Percents based on data in millions of dollars Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B30.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures and per capita gross domestic product in current and real dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Gross domestic product per capita ( dollars ) Population ( thousands ) Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are averages of quarterly data. Quarterly data are averages for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B31.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Gross private saving Gross government saving Gross business saving Year or quarter Total Total Personal saving Total Federal UndisCortribporate uted consumpcorpotion of rate fixed profits capital Consump- Current tion surplus Total or of fixed deficit ( ) capital Noncorporate consumption of fixed capital Total Total State and local : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Consump- Current tion surplus or of fixed deficit ( ) capital Includes private wage accruals less disbursements not shown separately inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments See next page for continuation of table With VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B32.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Gross saving and investment Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross investment Addenda : Gross saving as a percent of gross national product Statistical discrepancy Personal saving as a percent of disposable personal income Total Gross private domestic investment Gross government investment : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Year or quarter Net foreign investment For details on government investment see Table B-20 Net exports of goods and services plus net income receipts from rest of the world less net transfers Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B32.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and persons by race selected years Families Persons below poverty level Below poverty level Year ALL RACES WHITE BLACK Number ( millions ) Median money income ( in dollars ) Female householder Total Number ( millions ) Percent Number ( millions ) Percent Median money income ( in dollars ) of persons years old and over with income Males Number ( millions ) Percent Females All persons Yearround full-time workers All persons Yearround full-time workers $ $ $ $ $ The term family refers to a group of two or more persons related by birth marriage or adoption and residing together. Every family must include a reference person. Beginning based on householder concept and restricted to primary families Current dollar median money income adjusted by CPI U RS Based on revised methodology ; comparable with succeeding years Based on census adjusted population controls ; comparable with succeeding years Reflects November weighting correction Reflects implementation of Census 2000-based population controls and household sample expansion ; comparable with succeeding years Note. Poverty rates ( percent of persons below poverty level ) for all races for years not shown above are : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and Poverty thresholds are updated each year to reflect changes in the consumer price index ( CPI U ) For details see Current Population Reports Series P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B33.ER3 ECONO POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B Population by age group [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over Data for age groups are available for April : Total ; under ; ; ; ; ; ; and and over Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Data beginning are based on the census All estimates are consistent with decennial census enumerations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B34.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Civilian population and labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Civilian noninstitutional population Year or month Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Not in labor force Civil- Civilian ian emlabor ployforce ment/ parpopticipation ulation rate ratio Thousands of persons years of age and over Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Not seasonally adjusted labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force Civilian Civilian See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B35.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Civilian population and labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Civilian noninstitutional population Year or month Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Not in labor force Civil- Civilian ian emlabor ployforce ment/ parpopticipation ulation rate ratio Thousands of persons years of age and over Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments or other changes. See Employment and Earnings for details on breaks in series Note. Labor force data in Tables B-35 through B-44 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see Employment and Earnings Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B35.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Civilian employment Males Year or month Total Total years Unemployment Females years and over Total years Males years and over Total Total Females years years and over Total years years and over : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B36.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Civilian employment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White All civilian workers Year or month Black and other Total Males Females Both sexes Total Males Females Black Both sexes Both FeMales males sexes Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B37.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Unemployment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Total Males Black and other Females Both sexes Total Black Males Females Both sexes Total Males Females Both sexes : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B38.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Civilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Labor force participation rate Year or month All civilian Males Feworkmales ers Both sexes years Employment/population ratio White Black and other Black All civilian Males Feworkmales ers Both sexes years White Black and other Black : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Civilian labor force or civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B39.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Black and other or black Males Total Total years Females years and over Total years Males years and over Total Total years Females years and over Total years years and over Black and other Black : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. See Note Table B-39 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B40.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Black and other or black Males Females Total years years and over Total Total Males years years and over Total Total years Females years and over years years and over Total Black and other Black : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified Note. See Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B41.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Civilian unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Males All civilian workers : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Year or month Females Total years years and over Total years years and over White Black and other Black Experienced wage and salary workers Married men spouse present Women who maintain families Both sexes years Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B42.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Black and other or black Males Females Total years years and over Total Total Males years years and over Total Total years Females years and over years years and over Total Black and other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Black Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Note. See Note Table B-42 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B43.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Unemployment by duration and reason [ Thousands of persons except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Duration of unemployment Year or month Unemployment Reason for unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Average ( mean ) duration ( weeks ) Job losers Median duration ( weeks ) Total On layoff Other Job leavers Reentrants New entrants : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals for by reason for unemployment are not equal to total unemployment January job losers and persons who completed temporary jobs Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Data Beginning VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B44.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs Insured unemployment ( weekly average ) State programs Total benefits paid ( millions of dollars ) Year or month Covered employment p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p Thousands Insured unemployment Initial claims Exhaustions Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) Average weekly check ( dollars ) Weekly average ; thousands * * * * * * * * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Through includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs and UCX ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemembers effective October ) programs. Beginning covered employment data are State and UCFE programs only. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of wage and salary earners Covered employment data beginning are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Prior data are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Includes State UCFE RR and UCX. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) Federal Supplemental Compensation Emergency Unemployment Compensation programs and TEUC ( Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation ) Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Including Emergency Unemployment Compensation and Federal Supplemental Compensation total benefits paid for and would be approximately ( in millions of dollars ) : for and for Note. Insured unemployment and initial claims programs include Puerto Rican sugar cane workers beginning Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B45.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Goods-producing industries Year or month Manufacturing Total Total Mining Construction Total Durable goods Nondurable goods p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Note. Data in Tables B-46 and B-47 are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period which includes the 12th of the month. Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B-35 through B-44 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B46.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Service-producing industries Year or month Total Transportation and public utilities Wholesale trade Finance insurance and real estate Retail trade Government Services Total Federal State and local p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Note ( cont d ) which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; and which are based on a sample of the working-age population. For description and details of the various establishment data see Employment and Earnings Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B46.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Current dollars Manufacturing Year or month dollars Manufacturing ( current dollars ) Total private Total private Overtime Total Average weekly earnings total private Percent change from year earlier Level Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars $ $ $ $ $ p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p For production or nonsupervisory workers ; total includes private industry groups shown in Table B-46 dollars divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Current Note. See Note Table B-46 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B47.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Employment cost index private industry Total private Year and month Goods-producing Total Wages Total Wages comand Bene- comand pen- sala- fits pen- salasation ries sation ries Service-producing Total Wages comand Benepen- sala- fits sation ries Benefits Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing Total Wages Total Wages comand Bene- comand Benepen- sala- fits pen- sala- fits sation ries sation ries Index June = ; not seasonally adjusted December : : Mar June Sept : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Index June = ; seasonally adjusted Percent change from months earlier not seasonally adjusted December : : Mar June Sept : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Percent change from months earlier seasonally adjusted Employer costs for employee benefits Note. The employment cost index is a measure of the change in the cost of labor free from the influence of employment shifts among occupations and industries Data exclude farm and household workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B48.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Productivity and related data business sector [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Output per hour of all persons Year or quarter Output Hours of all persons Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers for recent quarters. The trend from is based on the consumer price index research series ( CPI U RS ) Current dollar output divided by the output index Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B49.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Changes in productivity and related data business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Output per hour of all persons Year or quarter Hours of all persons Output Compensation per hour Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm ness business ness business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector Real compensation per hour Business sector Nonfarm business sector Unit labor costs Business sector Implicit price deflator Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm business ness business sector sector sector : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector at work of all persons engaged in the sector. See footnote Table B-49 and salaries of employees plus employers contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index. See footnote Table B-49 Current dollar output divided by the output index Note. Percent changes are based on original data and may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-49 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Hours Wages VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B50.ER3 ECONO PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Total industrial production Total Utilities Nondurable Other ( non-NAICS ) Mining Durable Total industry and total manufacturing series include manufacturing as defined in the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) plus those industries logging and newspaper periodical book and directory-publishing that have traditionally been considered to be manufacturing and included in the industrial sector Note. Data based on the North American Industry Classification System ; see footnote Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B51.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Final products Year or month p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Total industrial production Nonindustrial supplies Consumer goods Automotive products Total Total Materials Equipment Other Nondura- durable Total Busible ness goods goods Defense and space Total Construction Business Total Nonenergy Energy Includes other items not shown separately Note. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B52.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Industrial production indexes selected manufacturing industries [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Durable manufacturing Primary metal Year or month Total p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Iron and steel products Nondurable manufacturing Computer and electronic products Fabricated metal products Machinery Transportation equipment Total Selected hightechnology Apparel Paper Total Motor vehicles and parts Printing and support Chemical Plastics and rubber products Food Computers and office equipment communications equipment and semiconductors and related electronic components Note. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B53.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Capacity utilization rates [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month Total industry Total Stage-of-process Durable goods Nondurable goods Other ( nonNAICS ) Mining Utilities Crude Primary and semifinished Finished p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Output as percent of capacity footnote and Note Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System See VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B54.ER3 ECONO TABLE B New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings Total Total Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction New housing units Total Commercial Total Industrial Federal State and local Other New series : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Includes farm residential buildings residential improvements not shown separately. Prior to also includes nonhousekeeping units ( hotels motels etc. ) buildings warehouses stores restaurants garages etc. and beginning hotels and motels ; prior to hotels and motels are included in total residential Religious educational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential public utilities ( telecommunications gas electric railroad and petroleum pipelines ) all other private and farm nonresidential Includes Federal grants-in-aid for State and local projects Includes Office Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B55.ER3 ECONO TABLE B New private housing units started authorized and completed and houses sold [ Thousands ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] New housing units started New housing units authorized Type of structure Type of structure Year or month Total unit to units units or more p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Total unit to units units or more New housing units completed New houses sold Authorized by issuance of local building permits in : permit-issuing places beginning ; places for ; places for ; places for ; places for ; places for ; and places prior to Monthly data derived Note. Data beginning for new housing units started and completed and for new houses sold are based on new estimation methods and are not directly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B56.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month SIC : NAICS : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Total manufacturing and trade Sales Inventories Ratio Manufacturing Merchant wholesalers Retail trade Sales Inven3 tories Ratio Sales InvenInven3 tories Ratio Sales tories Ratio Retail and food services sales Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures Seasonally adjusted end of period. Inventories beginning January for manufacturing and December for wholesale and retail trade are not comparable with earlier periods Inventory/sales ratio. Annual data are : beginning averages of monthly ratios ; for ratio of December inventories to monthly average sales for the year ; and for earlier years weighted averages. Monthly ratios are inventories at end of month to sales for month Food services included on SIC basis and excluded on NAICS basis. See last column for retail and food services sales Effective in data classified based on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Data on NAICS basis available beginning Earlier data based on Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Data on SIC basis include semiconductors. In data on NAICS basis were revised and exclude semiconductors Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning for wholesale and retail trade Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B57.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Manufacturers shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Shipments Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Year or month Total SIC : Inventories Total Total Materials and supplies Work in process Finished goods Total Materials and supplies Work in process Finished goods NAICS : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures adjusted end of period. Data beginning are not comparable with data for earlier data in data classified based on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Data on NAICS basis available beginning Earlier data based on Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Data on SIC basis include semiconductors. In data on NAICS basis were revised and exclude semiconductors Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Seasonally Effective VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B58.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Manufacturers new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] New orders Durable goods industries Year or month Total Capital goods nondefense Total SIC : NAICS : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Unfilled orders Nondurable goods industries Total Unfilled orders shipments ratio Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Total Nondurable goods industries Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures Unfilled orders are seasonally adjusted end of period. Ratios are unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ( excludes industries with no unfilled orders ) Annual ratios relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Data based on North American Industry Classification System. Other data shown on Standard Industrial Classification. See footnote Table B Note. Since there are no unfilled orders for manufacturers nondurable goods manufacturers nondurable new orders and nondurable shipments are the same ( see Table B ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B59.ER3 ECONO PRICES TABLE B Consumer price indexes for major expenditure classes [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Food and beverages Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec All items ( CPI-U ) Total Food Apparel Housing Transpor- Medical Entertaintacare ment tion Recreation Education and communication Other goods and services Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately = fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners costs Series reflect changes in composition and renaming beginning in and formula and methodology changes beginning in Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics December Household VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B60.ER3 ECONO Energy TABLE B Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Food and beverages Housing Food Year or month Total At home Total Shelter Away from home Total Total Fuels and utilities Owners Rent of equivarent primary lent pri- Total of resimary dence residence Fuels Total Fuel oil and other fuels Gas ( piped ) and electricity Furnishings and operations : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately other items not shown separately = December See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B61.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes Continued [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Transportation Medical care Private transportation Year or month New vehicles Total Used cars and trucks Total New cars Total Motor vehicle maintenance and repair Motor fuel Public transportation Medical care commodities Total Medical care services : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. See Note Table B-60 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B61.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Consumer price indexes for commodities services and special groups [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Commodities Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec All items ( CPI-U ) All com modities Commodities less food Services All services Special indexes Services less medical care services All items less food All items less energy All items All items All items less less food medical and care energy CPI-U- CPI-U- C-CPIX1 RS U ( Dec ( Dec. ( Dec = = = ) ) ) CPI-U-X1 is a rental equivalence approach to homeowners costs for the CPI-U for years prior to the first year for which the official index incorporates such a measure. CPI-U-X1 is rebased to the December value of the CPI-U ( = ) and is identical with CPI-U data from December forward. Data prior to estimated by moving the series at the same rate as the CPI-U for each year CPI research series using current methods ( CPI-U-RS ) introduced in June Data for are preliminary. All data are subject to revision annually Chained consumer price index introduced in August Data for and are subject to revision. See Monthly Labor Review September for details Note. See Note Table B-60 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B62.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Changes in special consumer price indexes [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] All items ( CPI-U ) Year or month Dec to Dec.1 All items less food Year to year Dec to Dec.1 All items less energy Year to year Dec to Dec.1 All items less food and energy Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year All items less medical care Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Percent change from preceding month Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Seasonally adjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. See Note Table B-60 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B63.ER3 ECONO Seasonally adjusted TABLE B Changes in consumer price indexes for commodities and services [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] All items ( CPI-U ) Commodities Total Year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Food Year to year Medical care Services Dec to Dec.1 Total Year to year Dec to Dec. Energy Medical care Year to year Dec to Dec. Year to year Dec to Dec. Year to year Dec to Dec. Year to year Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes and services fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Commodities Household Note. See Note Table B-60 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B64.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Finished goods Consumer foods Year or month Total finished goods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Capital equipment Total finished consumer goods Consumer goods Total Crude Processed Total Total Durable Nondurable : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Data have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B65.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Year or month Total Materials and components Foods and feeds Other For manufacturing For construction Processed fuels and lubricants Crude materials for further processing Containers Supplies Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B65.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Finished goods Intermediate materials supplies and components Crude materials for further processing Excluding foods and energy Year or month Total Foods Energy Total Capital equipment Consumer goods excluding foods and energy Total Foods and Energy feeds1 Other Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Energy Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Intermediate Data materials for food manufacturing and feeds have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B66.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Producer price indexes for major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Textile products and apparel Total Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power Chemicals and allied products : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Prices Data for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B67.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Transportation equipment Rubber and plastic products Lumber and wood products Pulp paper and allied products Metals and metal products Machinery and equipment Furniture and household durables Nonmetallic mineral products : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Year or month Motor vehicles and equipment Total Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B67.ER3 ECONO Miscellaneous products TABLE B Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Year or month Total finished goods Finished consumer foods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Consumer goods Total Finished energy goods Capital equipment Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. year Dec. year Dec. year Dec. year Dec. year Dec to Dec. Year to year Finished goods excluding foods and energy Dec. to Year to Dec. year SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnadsonUnadsonUnadsonUnadsonUnadsonjusted ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally adjusted justed justed justed justed Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Percent change from preceding month SeaUnadsonjusted ally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Changes Data from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B68.ER3 ECONO MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B Money stock and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures except debt end-of-period basis ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] M1 Year and month December : p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p M2 M3 Debt Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) M1 plus retail MMMF balances savings deposits ( including MMDAs ) and small time deposits M2 plus large time deposits RPs Eurodollars and institution-only MMMF balances Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors Percent change From year or months earlier From previous period M1 M2 M3 Debt Consists of outstanding credit market debt of the U.S. Government State and local governments and private nonfinancial sectors changes are from December to December ; monthly changes are from months earlier at a simple annual rate changes are from fourth quarter to fourth quarter. Quarterly changes are from previous quarter at annual rate Note. See Table B-70 for components Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Annual Annual VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B69.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Components of money stock measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Year and month Currency December : Nonbank travelers checks Demand deposits Other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) Small denomination time deposits Savings deposits including money market deposit accounts ( MMDAs ) p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p Small Data denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $ prior to are savings deposits only ; MMDA data begin December See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B70.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Components of money stock measures Continued [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) balances Year and month Institution only Retail December : Large denomination time deposits Overnight and term repurchase agreements ( RPs ) ( net ) Overnight and term Eurodollars ( net ) p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p Large denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of more than $ Note. See also Table B-69 Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B70.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and monetary base [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements Reserves of depository institutions Year and month Total December : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Nonborrowed plus extended credit Required Nonborrowed Monetary base Borrowings of depository institutions from the Federal Reserve NSA Total Seasonal Extended credit Data are prorated averages of biweekly ( maintenance period ) averages of daily figures Aggregate reserves incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with regulatory changes to reserve requirements. For details on aggregate reserves series see Federal Reserve Bulletin Total includes borrowing under the terms and conditions established for the Century Date Change Special Liquidity Facility in effect from October through April Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B71.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Bank credit at all commercial banks [ Monthly average ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Securities in bank credit Loans and leases in bank credit Real estate Year and month December : Total bank credit Total securities U.S Treasury and agency securities Other securities Total loans and leases Commercial and industrial Total Revolving home equity Other Con- Secusumer rity Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Data are prorated averages of Wednesday values for domestically chartered commercial banks branches and agencies of foreign banks New York State investment companies ( through September ) and Edge Act and agreement corporations Excludes Federal funds sold to reverse repurchase agreements ( RPs ) with and loans to commercial banks in the United States Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B72.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Constant maturities 3month 6month 3year 10year 30year Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor s ) Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York ComNewmerhome cial mortpaper gage yields months Prime rate charged by banks Federal funds rate Rate on new issues within period ; bank-discount basis Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Department of the Treasury. In February the Department of the Treasury discontinued publication of the 30-year series Beginning December data for corporate Aaa series are industrial bonds only Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B73.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor s ) Year and month 3month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 6month Constant maturities 3year 10year 30year Aaa Baa ComNewmerhome cial mortpaper gage yields months Prime rate charged by banks Discount rate Federal Reserve Bank of New York High-low Bills ( new issues ) High-low Federal funds rate Bank-discount basis ; prior to November data are for months paper. Series no longer published monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for and are ranges of the rate in effect during the period July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day s transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Housing Finance Board Moody s Investors Service and Standard & Poor s For Since VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B73.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Credit market borrowing [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item NONFINANCIAL SECTORS DOMESTIC FEDERAL GOVERNMENT Treasury securities Budget agency securities and mortgages NONFEDERAL BY INSTRUMENT Commercial paper Municipal securities and loans Corporate bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Home Multifamily residential Commercial Farm Consumer credit NONFEDERAL BY SECTOR Household sector Nonfinancial business Corporate Nonfarm noncorporate Farm State and local governments FOREIGN BORROWING IN THE UNITED STATES Commercial paper Bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances NONFINANCIAL DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN BORROWING FINANCIAL SECTORS BY INSTRUMENT Federal Government related Government-sponsored enterprises securities Mortgage pool securities U.S. Government loans Private financial sectors Open market paper Corporate bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages BY SECTOR Commercial banking Savings institutions Government-sponsored enterprises Federally related mortgage pools Asset-backed securities issuers Finance companies Funding corporations Other BY INSTRUMENT Open market paper U.S. Government securities Municipal securities and loans Corporate and foreign bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Consumer credit ALL SECTORS Credit unions life insurance companies mortgage companies real estate investment trusts and brokers and dealers See next page for continuation of table VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B74.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Credit market borrowing Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item I II III IV I II III NONFINANCIAL SECTORS DOMESTIC FEDERAL GOVERNMENT Treasury securities Budget agency securities and mortgages NONFEDERAL BY INSTRUMENT Commercial paper Municipal securities and loans Corporate bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Home Multifamily residential Commercial Farm Consumer credit NONFEDERAL BY SECTOR Household sector Nonfinancial business Corporate Nonfarm noncorporate Farm State and local governments FOREIGN BORROWING IN THE UNITED STATES Commercial paper Bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances NONFINANCIAL DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN BORROWING FINANCIAL SECTORS BY INSTRUMENT Federal Government related Government-sponsored enterprise securities Mortgage pool securities U.S. Government loans Private financial sectors Open market paper Corporate bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages BY SECTOR Commercial banking Savings institutions Government-sponsored enterprises Federally related mortgage pools Asset-backed securities issuers Finance companies Funding corporations Other BY INSTRUMENT Open market paper U.S. Government securities Municipal securities and loans Corporate and foreign bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Consumer credit ALL SECTORS Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B74.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional Government underwritten End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Total Multifamily properties to 4family houses Commercial properties Total to 4-family houses Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III p Includes Derived FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately figures. Total includes commercial properties and multifamily properties not shown separately Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B75.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter Total : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III p Savings institutions Commercial banks Total Other holders Life insurance companies Federal and related agencies Individuals and others Includes savings banks and savings and loan associations. Data reported by Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation-insured institutions include loans in process for and exclude loans in process beginning Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Farmers Home Administration ( FmHA ) Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Resolution Trust Corporation ( through ) and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation and Public Housing Administration. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) Federal Land Banks Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( FHLMC ) Federal Home Loan Banks ( beginning ) and mortgage pass-through securities issued or guaranteed by GNMA FHLMC FNMA or FmHA. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with individuals and others. Includes private mortgage pools Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B76.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Consumer credit outstanding [ Amount outstanding ( end of month ) ; millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Total consumer credit Year and month December : Nonrevolving Revolving : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals. Credit secured by real estate is excluded Includes automobile loans and all other loans not included in revolving credit such as loans for mobile homes education boats trailers or vacations. These loans may be secured or unsecured Data newly available in January result in breaks in many series between December and subsequent months Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B77.ER3 ECONO GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt selected fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Total Fiscal year or period Receipts On-budget Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Off-budget Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Federal debt ( end of period ) Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Gross Federal Held by the public Addendum : Gross domestic product Transition quarter Estimates Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The transition quarter is the 3-month period from July through September Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year for additional information Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B78.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years [ Percent ; fiscal years ] Outlays Fiscal year or period Receipts Federal debt ( end of period ) Surplus or deficit ( ) National defense Total Gross Federal Held by public Transition quarter Estimates Note. See Note Table B-78 Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B79.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Receipts ( on-budget and off-budget ) Fiscal year or period Total Individual income taxes Social Cor- insurpora- ance tion and in- retire- Other come ment taxes receipts Outlays ( on-budget and off-budget ) National defense Total Department of Total Defense military InternaInNet tion- Health Medi- come Social inter- Other al care secu- secu- est rity afrity fairs Surplus or deficit ( ) ( onbudget and offbudget ) Transition quarter Estimates Note. See Note Table B-78 Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B80.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Estimates Description RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Total outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts Off-budget outlays Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Federal Government accounts Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other RECEIPTS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance and retirement receipts On-budget Off-budget Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties and fees Miscellaneous receipts Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System All other Adjustment for revenue uncertainty OUTLAYS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit On-budget Off-budget Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Medicare Income security Social security On-budget Off-budget Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off-budget Beginning includes universal service fund receipts Note. See Note Table B-78 Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B81.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Federal Government Current receipts : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Current receipts Current expenditures : I II III IV Current receipts Current expenditures Current expenditures Current surplus or deficit ( ) ( NIPA ) Addendum : Grantsin-aid to State and local governments Current surplus or deficit ( ) ( NIPA ) Year or quarter Current surplus or deficit ( ) ( NIPA ) State and local government Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal current expenditures and State and local current receipts. Total government current receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B82.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) by major type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts Indirect Per- Corpo- busisonal rate ness tax Total tax and profits and nontax tax reacnonceipts cruals tax accruals Year or quarter Current expenditures Subsidies Less : less DiviCon- TransLess : curdends sumpInterrent fer retion est surpayceived plus of expend- ments Total Interreest ceived by itures paid govern- governby ment govern- ment enterment prises Net interest paid Contributions for social Total insurance Addendum : Current Grantssurplus in-aid or to deficit State ( ) and ( NIPA ) local governments : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B83.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Federal Government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts Current expenditures Consumption expenditures Year or quarter PerCor- Indirect Contrisonal porate busi- butions ness tax and profits tax and for nontax tax nontax social reaccru- accru- insurceipts als ance als Total Total Total Transfer payments National defense To persons GrantsSubsiin-aid dies less to Net current To State inter- surplus of rest and est governof the local paid ment world goventer ( net ) ernprises ments Current surplus or deficit ( ) ( NIPA ) : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B84.ER3 ECONO TABLE B State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts Year or quarter Total Personal tax and nontax receipts Corporate profits tax accruals Indirect business tax and nontax accruals Current expenditures Contributions for social Insurance Federal grantsin-aid Total Consumption expenditures Transfer payments to persons Net interest paid less dividends received Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises Current surplus or deficit ( ) ( NIPA ) : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B85.ER3 ECONO TABLE B State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year Sales Indiand Property gross vidual taxes income receipts taxes taxes Total General expenditures by function Corporation net income taxes Revenue from Federal Government All other Total Education Highways Public welfare All other Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans services air transportation water transport and terminals parking facilities transit subsidies police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development solid waste management financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other government administration interest on general debt and general expenditures n.e.c Note. Except for States listed data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregation of data for government fiscal years that ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years ( Texas used August and Alabama and Michigan used September ) Data for and earlier years include data for governments fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Data are not available for intervening years Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B86.ER3 ECONO TABLE B U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] Total Treasury securities outstanding End of year or month Fiscal year : Marketable Total Treasury bills Treasury notes Nonmarketable Treasury bonds Treasury inflationindexed Total Notes Bonds U.S Forsavings eign securi- seties ries Government account series Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Data beginning January are interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing securities ; prior data are interest-bearing securities only Federal Financing Bank securities not shown separately in the amount of $ billion series is U.S. savings bonds. Beginning includes U.S. retirement plan bonds U.S. individual retirement bonds and U.S. savings notes previously included in other nonmarketable securities Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds and special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Includes Through Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B87.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors Amount outstanding privately held End of year or month Maturity class Within year to years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Average length Years Months : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept In the average length calculation was revised to include Treasury inflation-indexed notes ( first offered in ) and bonds ( first offered in ) Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B88.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities [ Billions of dollars ] Held by private investors Total public debt Federal Reserve Deand posiGovernTotal tory ment privately instiacheld tucounts tions : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept End of month Pension funds U.S savings bonds Private State and local governments Insurance companies Mutual funds State Foreign and and interlocal nationgovernal ments Other investors Face value Reserve holdings exclude Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements commercial banks savings institutions and credit unions Current accrual value Includes Treasury securities held by the Federal Employees Retirement System Thrift Savings Plan G Fund. Includes money market mutual funds mutual funds and closed-end investment companies Includes nonmarketable foreign series Treasury securities and Treasury deposit funds. Excludes Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements in custody accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Estimates reflect the benchmark to December the benchmark to March and the benchmark to date Includes individuals Government-sponsored enterprises brokers and dealers bank personal trusts and estates corporate and noncorporate businesses and other investors Federal Includes Note. Data shown in this table are as of November Source : Department of the Treasury VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B89.ER3 ECONO CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits tax liability Total Dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B90.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Financial Year or quarter Total Total : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Nonfinancial Total Federal Reserve banks Other Total Manufacturing Transportation and public utilities Wholesale trade Retail trade Rest of the world Other Consists of the following industries : Depository institutions ; nondepository credit institutions ; security and commodity brokers ; insurance carriers ; regulated investment companies ; small business investment companies ; and real estate investment trusts See Table B-92 for industry detail Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC for earlier years shown Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B91.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Durable goods Year or quarter Total manufacturing Total Primary metal industries Fabricated metal products Industrial machinery and equipment Nondurable goods Electronic and other electric equipment Motor vehicles and equipment Other Total Food and kindred products Chemicals and allied products Petroleum and coal products Other : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Note. The industry classification is on a company basis and is based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) beginning and on the SIC for earlier years shown. In the SIC the categories shown here as industrial machinery and equipment and electronic and other electric equipment were identified as machinery except electrical and electric and electronic equipment respectively Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B92.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Sales profits and stockholders equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Durable goods industries Profits Sales ( net ) Nondurable goods industries Profits Before income taxes After income taxes Stockholders equity Sales ( net ) Profits Before income taxes After income taxes Stockholders equity Sales ( net ) Before income taxes After income taxes Stockholders equity : IV New series : : IV : IV NAICS : : IV : I II III IV : I II III In the old series income taxes refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted. In the new series no income taxes have been deducted Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Beginning profits before and after income taxes reflect inclusion of minority stockholders interest in net income before and after income taxes Data for ( most significantly : I ) reflect the early adoption of Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement ( Employer s Accounting for Post-Retirement Benefits Other Than Pensions ) by a large number of companies during the fourth quarter of Data for ( : I ) also reflect adoption of Statement Corporations must show the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle in the first quarter of the year in which the change is adopted Data based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Other data shown are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting principles industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B93.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders equity percent Year or quarter Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries : IV New series : : IV : IV NAICS : : IV : I II III IV : I II III Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter footnote Table B-93 footnote Table B-93 See footnote Table B-93 Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See Note Table B-93 Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census See See VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B94.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Common stock prices and yields Common stock prices Composite : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Dow Jones industrial average New York Stock Exchange indexes ( Dec. = ) Year or month Common stock yields ( S&P ) ( percent ) Industrial Transportation Utility Finance Standard & Poor s composite index ( = ) Nasdaq composite index ( Feb. = ) Dividendprice ratio Earningsprice ratio Averages of daily closing prices Includes stocks as follows : for NYSE all stocks listed ( nearly ) ; for Dow Jones industrial average stocks ; for S&P composite index stocks ; and for Nasdaq composite index over Effective April the NYSE doubled the value of the utility index to facilitate trading of options and futures on the index. Annual indexes prior to reflect the doubling Based on stocks in the S&P composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter Annual data are averages of quarterly ratios Note. Data shown are as of December On January the New York Stock Exchange issued a revised composite index using new methodology definitions and base value Sources : New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) Dow Jones & Co. Inc. Standard & Poor s ( S&P ) and Nasdaq Stock Market VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B95.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Business formation and business failures Business failures Year or month Index of net business formation ( = ) New business incorporations ( number ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Number of failures Business failure rate Amount of current liabilities ( millions of dollars ) Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Liability size class Total Under $ $ and over Commercial and industrial failures only through excluding failures of banks railroads real estate insurance holding and financial companies steamship lines travel agencies etc Data beginning are based on expanded coverage and new methodology and are therefore not generally comparable with earlier data Failure rate per listed enterprises Series discontinued in Note. Data are no longer published Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and The Dun & Bradstreet Corporation VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B96.ER3 ECONO AGRICULTURE TABLE B Farm income [ Billions of dollars ] Income of farm operators from farming Gross farm income Year Cash marketing receipts Total Total p Livestock and products Crops Value of inventory changes Direct Government payments Production expenses Net farm income Cash marketing receipts Government payments value of changes in inventories other farm related cash income and nonmoney income produced by farms including imputed rent of operator residences Crop receipts include proceeds received from commodities placed under Commodity Credit Corporation loans Physical changes in beginning and ending year inventories of crop and livestock commodities valued at weighted average market prices during the year Includes only Government payments made directly to farmers Note. Data for are forecasts Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B97.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Farm business balance sheet [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Physical assets End of year Total assets Real estate Livestock and poultry Financial assets Nonreal estate Investments MachinPur4 in ery and Crops chased cooper- Other motor inatives vehicles puts Total claims Real estate debt Nonreal estate debt Proprietors equity Excludes commercial broilers ; excludes horses and mules beginning ; excludes turkeys beginning Credit Corporation ( CCC ) crops held on farms plus value above loan rate for crops held under CCC fertilizer chemicals fuels parts feed seed and other supplies Currency and demand deposits Includes CCC storage and drying facilities loans Does not include CCC crop loans Beginning data are for farms included in the new farm definition that is places with sales of $ or more annually Non-Commodity Includes Note. Data exclude operator households Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B98.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Farm output Productivity indicators Primary output Year Total Livestock and products Crops Secondary output Farm output per unit of total factor input Farm output per unit of labor input Note. Farm output includes primary agricultural activities and certain secondary activities that are closely linked to agricultural production for which information on production and input use can not be separately observed See Table B for farm inputs Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B99.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Farm input use selected inputs Farm population April Farm employment ( thousands ) Selected indexes of input use ( = ) Selfemployed Hired and unpaid workers workers Number ( thousands ) As percent of total population Crops harvested ( millions of acres ) Year p Farm Durable Enerreal equipgy estate ment Agricultural chemicals Feed seed and purchased livestock Other purchased inputs Total Farm labor Total Farm population as defined by Department of Agriculture and Department of Commerce i.e. civilian population living on farms in rural areas regardless of occupation. Series discontinued in Total population of United States including Armed Forces overseas as of July Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-35 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected Prior to this category was termed family workers and did not include nonfamily unpaid workers. Series discontinued in Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and vegetables and minor crops Based on new definition of a farm. Under old definition of a farm farm population ( in thousands and as percent of total population ) for and is and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and ; and respectively Basis for farm employment series was discontinued for through Employment is estimated for these years Note. Population includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Sources : Department of Agriculture ( Economic Research Service ) and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B100.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Agricultural price indexes and farm real estate value [ = except as noted ] Prices received by farmers Year or month All farm products Crops Livestock and products Prices paid by farmers All commodities services interest taxes Total and wage rates Production items Feed Livestock and poultry AgriculFertil- tural izer chemicals Fuels Farm machinery Farm services Rent Wage rates Addendum : Average farm real estate value per acre ( dollars ) : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes items used for family living not shown separately other production items not shown separately for States. Annual data are : March for February for April for February for and January for Includes Average Note. Data on a base prior to have not been calculated by Department of Agriculture Source : Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics Service VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B101.ER3 ECONO TABLE B U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] Exports Total Feed grains Food grains Oilseeds and products Year Imports Tobacco Cotton Animals and products Total Crops fruits and vegetables Animals and products Coffee Cocoa beans and products Agricultural trade balance ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Jan-Nov : Total includes items not shown separately wheat and wheat flour nuts fruits and vegetable preparations Less than $ million Rice Includes Note. Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural commodities are defined as ( ) nonmarine food products and ( ) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex processes of manufacture. Export value at U.S. port of exportation is based on the selling price and includes inland freight insurance and other charges to the port. Import value defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excludes import duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B102.ER3 ECONO INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Goods Year or quarter Exports Imports Balance on goods Services Income receipts and payments Balance Net Net on goods travel Other Balance military and and on transac- transpor- services services Receipts Payments income net tions tation Unilateral current transfers net Balance on current account : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III p Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing ; excludes military transfers of goods and services under U.S. military grant programs See next page for continuation of table Includes VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B103.ER3 ECONO TABLE B U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Financial account Year or quarter U.S.-owned assets abroad net [ increase/financial outflow ( ) ] Capital account transactions net Total U.S official reserve assets Statistical discrepancy Foreign-owned assets in the U.S. net [ increase/financial inflow ( ) ] Other U.S Government assets U.S private assets Total Foreign official assets Other foreign assets Total ( sum of the items with sign reversed ) Of which : Seasonal adjustment discrepancy : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III p Consists of gold special drawing rights foreign currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B103.ER3 ECONO TABLE B U.S. international trade in goods by principal end-use category [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports Imports Nonagricultural products Year or quarter Total Agricultural products Total Indus- Capital trial goods supplies except Autoand auto- motive mate- motive rials Nonpetroleum products Total Other Petroleum and products Total Indus- Capital trial goods supplies except Auto- Other and auto- motive mate- motive rials : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III p End-use commodity classifications beginning and are not strictly comparable with data for earlier periods. See Survey of Current Business June and July Note. Data are on a balance of payments basis and exclude military In June end-use categories for goods exports were redefined to include reexports ; beginning with data for reexports ( exports of foreign goods ) are assigned to detailed end-use categories in the same manner as exports of domestic goods Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B104.ER3 ECONO TABLE B U.S. international trade in goods by area [ Billions of dollars ] Item first quarters at annual rate EXPORTS Industrial countries Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC Other Eastern Europe International organizations and unallocated IMPORTS Industrial countries Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC Other Eastern Europe International organizations and unallocated BALANCE ( excess of exports ) Industrial countries Canada Japan Western Europe Australia New Zealand and South Africa Australia Other countries except Eastern Europe OPEC Other International organizations and unallocated Eastern Europe Preliminary ; seasonally adjusted The former German Democratic Republic ( East Germany ) included in Western Europe beginning fourth quarter and in Eastern Europe prior to that time Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries consisting of Algeria Ecuador ( through ) Gabon ( through ) Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela Latin America other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less members of OPEC Note. Data are on a balance of payments basis and exclude military Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B105.ER3 ECONO TABLE B U.S. international trade in goods on balance of payments ( BOP ) and Census basis and trade in services on BOP basis [ Billions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Goods : Exports ( f.a.s. value ) Goods : Imports ( customs value except as noted ) Census basis ( by end-use category ) Year or month Foods Total BOP Total feeds and basis Census bevbasis erages Industrial supplies and materials Capital goods except automotive Automotive vehicles parts and engines Services ( BOP basis ) Census basis ( by end-use category ) Consumer goods ( nonfood ) except automotive Total BOP basis Foods Total feeds and Census bevbasis erages F.a.s. value Industrial supplies and materials Capital goods except automotive Automotive vehicles parts and engines Consumer goods ( nonfood ) except automotive Exports Imports F.a.s. value : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Customs value Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded from total exports through and included beginning F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Beginning exports have been adjusted for undocumented exports to Canada and are included in the appropriate end-use categories For prior years only total exports include this adjustment Total includes other exports or imports not shown separately Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments Total includes revisions not reflected in detail Total exports are on a revised statistical month basis ; end-use categories are on a statistical month basis Note. Goods on a Census basis are adjusted to a BOP basis by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in line with concepts and definitions used to prepare international and national accounts. The adjustments are necessary to supplement coverage of Census data to eliminate duplication of transactions recorded elsewhere in international accounts and to value transactions according to a standard definition Data include trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands Puerto Rico and U.S. Foreign Trade Zones Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Economic Analysis ) VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B106.ER3 ECONO TABLE B International investment position of the United States at year-end [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment p With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value NET INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value U.S.-OWNED ASSETS ABROAD : U.S. official reserve assets Gold Special drawing rights Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund Foreign currencies U.S. private assets : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value U.S. Government assets other than official reserves U.S. credits and other long-term assets Repayable in dollars Other U.S. foreign currency holdings and U.S short-term assets Direct investment abroad : At current cost At market value Foreign securities Bonds Corporate stocks U.S. claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns U.S. claims reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value FOREIGN-OWNED STATES : ASSETS IN THE UNITED Foreign official assets in the United States U.S. Government securities U.S. Treasury securities Other Other U.S. Government liabilities U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Other foreign official assets Other foreign assets in the United States : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Direct investment in the United States : At current cost At market value U.S. Treasury securities U.S. securities other than U.S. Treasury securities Corporate and other bonds Corporate stocks U.S. currency U.S. liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Valued at market price Note. For details regarding these data see Survey of Current Business July Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B107.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries United States Year or quarter Canada European Union Japan France Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( Index = ) p : I II III IV : I II III IV p p : I II III IV : I II III IV p Consumer prices ( Index = ) See Note Table B for information on U.S. industrial production series Consists of Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal Spain Sweden and United Kingdom Prior to data are for West Germany only All data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted Sources : National sources as reported by Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration Office of Trade and Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B108.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] United States Year or quarter Canada Japan France Germany United Kingdom Italy Civilian unemployment rate ( Percent ) : I II III IV : I II III IV Manufacturing hourly compensation in U.S. dollars ( Index = ) Prior to data are for West Germany only Civilian unemployment rates approximating U.S. concepts. Quarterly data for France and Germany should be viewed as less precise indicators of unemployment under U.S. concepts than the annual data There are breaks in the series for Germany ( and ) France ( ) Italy ( and ) and United States ( and ) Also for Italy data reflect new estimation procedures and updated population data introduced in July For details on break in series in and for United States see footnote Table B-35. For details on break in series for other countries see U.S. Department of Labor Comparative Civilian Labor Force Statistics Ten Countries : March Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis. Data relate to all employed persons ( employees and self-employed workers ) in the United States Canada Japan France Germany and United Kingdom and to employees ( wage and salary earners ) in Italy. For Canada France and United Kingdom compensation adjusted to include changes in employment taxes that are not compensation to employees but are labor costs to employers Data are as available as of August Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B109.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Foreign exchange rates [ Foreign currency units per U.S. dollar except as noted ; certified noon buying rates in New York ] Period Canada ( dollar ) EMU Members ( euro ) Belgium ( franc ) France ( franc ) Germany ( mark ) Netherlands ( guilder ) Italy ( lira ) Japan ( yen ) Switzerland ( franc ) Sweden ( krona ) United Kingdom ( pound ) March : I II III IV : I II III IV Trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar Real Nominal G index ( March = ) : I II III IV : I II III IV Broad index ( January = ) Major currencies index ( March = ) OITP index ( January = ) Broad index ( March = ) Major currencies index ( March = ) OITP index ( March = ) European Economic and Monetary Union members include Austria Belgium Finland France Germany Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal Spain and beginning in Greece U.S. dollars per foreign currency unit G-10 comprises the individual countries shown in this table. Discontinued after December Weighted average of the foreign exchange value of the dollar against the currencies of a broad group of U.S. trading partners Subset of the broad index. Includes currencies of the euro area Australia Canada Japan Sweden Switzerland and the United Kingdom Subset of the broad index. Includes other important U.S. trading partners ( OITP ) whose currencies are not heavily traded outside their home markets Adjusted for changes in the consumer price index Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B110.ER3 ECONO TABLE B International reserves selected years [ Millions of SDRs ; end of period ] Area and country Aug All countries Industrial countries United States Canada Sept Euro area : Austria Belgium Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal Spain Australia Japan New Zealand Denmark Iceland Norway Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Developing countries : Total By area : Africa Asia Europe Middle East Western Hemisphere Memo : Oil-exporting countries Non-oil developing countries Includes data for Luxembourg Includes data for European Central Bank ( ECB ) beginning Detail does not add to totals shown Includes data for Taiwan Province of China Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities holdings of gold ( at SDR per ounce ) special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange U.S. dollars per SDR ( end of period ) are : ; ; ; ; ; ; August ; and September Source : International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B111.ER3 ECONO TABLE B Growth rates in real gross domestic product [ Percent change at annual rate ] Area and country World Advanced economies Major advanced economies United States Japan Germany France Italy United Kingdom Canada Other advanced economies Memorandum : European Union Euro area Newly industrialized Asian economies Developing countries Africa Developing Asia Middle East and Turkey Western Hemisphere Countries in transition Central and eastern Europe CIS and Mongolia Russia All figures are forecasts as published by the International Monetary Fund Malta of Independent States Includes CIS Commonwealth Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and International Monetary Fund VerDate Dec : Jan Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2003_EOP \ B112.ER3 ECONO