Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February Together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February together with THE ANNUAL REPORT of the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Internet : bookstore.gpo.gov Phone : ( ) Fax : ( ) Mail Stop : SSOP Washington DC ISBN Economic Report of the President | i C O N T E N T S Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT.............................................. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER THE YEAR IN REVIEW AND THE YEARS AHEAD CHAPTER EXPANSIONS PAST AND PRESENT CHAPTER OPTIONS FOR TAX REFORM CHAPTER IMMIGRATION CHAPTER EXPANDING INDIVIDUAL CHOICE AND CONTROL...... CHAPTER INNOVATION AND THE INFORMATION ECONOMY CHAPTER THE GLOBAL HIV/AIDS EPIDEMIC CHAPTER MODERN INTERNATIONAL TRADE APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION.......................................................... * For a detailed table of contents of the Council s Report see page Economic Report of the President | iii ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Economic Report of the President | v ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : The United States is enjoying a robust economic expansion because of the good policies we have put in place and the strong efforts of America s workers and entrepreneurs. Four years ago our economy was sliding into recession The bursting of the high-tech bubble revelations of corporate scandals and terrorist attacks hurt our economy leading to falling incomes and rising unemployment We acted by passing tax relief so American families could keep more of their own money. At the same time we gave businesses incentives to invest and create jobs. Last year we gained over million new jobs and the economy s production of goods and services rose by percent. The unemployment rate is now percent which is lower than the average of each of the past three decades and the lowest since the attacks of September Our pro-growth policies are taking us in the right direction As I start my second term we must take action to keep our economy growing. I will not be satisfied until every American who wants to work can find a job. I have laid out a comprehensive strategy to sustain growth create jobs and confront the challenges of a changing America I am committed to restraining spending by eliminating government programs that do not work and by making government provide important services more efficiently. I have pledged to cut the deficit in half by and we are on track to do so The greatest fiscal challenges we face arise from the aging of our society Because Americans are having fewer children and living longer seniors are becoming a larger proportion of the population. This change has important implications for the Social Security system because the benefits paid to retirees come from taxes on today s workers. In there were workers paying into Social Security for every person receiving benefits. Now there are just over and that number will fall to by the time today s young workers Economic Report of the President | retire. We will not change Social Security for those now retired or nearing retirement. We need to permanently fix the Social Security system for our children and grandchildren. I will work with the Congress to fix Social Security for generations to come The current tax code is a drag on the economy. It discourages saving and investment and it requires individuals and businesses to spend billions of dollars and millions of hours each year to comply with the complicated system. I will lead a bipartisan effort to reform our tax code to make it simpler fairer and more pro-growth We are working to make health care more affordable and accessible for American families. The Medicare modernization bill I signed gives seniors more choices and helps them get the benefits of modern medicine and prescription drug coverage. We have created health savings accounts which give workers and families more control over their health care decisions. We will open or expand more community health centers for those in need. To help control health costs and make health care more accessible we must let small businesses pool risks across states so they can get the same discounts for health insurance that big companies get. We will increase the use of health information technology that will make health care more efficient cut down on mistakes and control costs Our litigation system encourages junk lawsuits and harms our economy and the system must be reformed. I support medical liability reform to control the cost of health care keep good medical professionals from being driven out of practice and ensure that patient care not avoidance of lawsuits is the central concern in all medical decisions. I support class action reform to eliminate the waste inefficiency and unfairness of the class-action system And I support reforms to the asbestos litigation system in order to protect victims with asbestos-related injuries and prevent frivolous lawsuits that harm our economy and cost jobs I will continue to push for energy legislation to help keep our economy strong. We must modernize our electricity system to make it more reliable To make our energy supply more secure we must explore for more energy in environmentally friendly ways in our own country develop alternative sources of energy and encourage conservation I will work to further simplify and streamline federal regulations that hinder growth and encumber our job creators. Our economy needs to allow entrepreneurs to spend more time doing business and less time with their lawyers and accountants I believe that Americans benefit from open markets and free and fair trade and I am working to open up markets around the world and make sure that | Economic Report of the President the playing field is level for our workers farmers manufacturers and other job creators. In the past four years we concluded free-trade agreements with Singapore Chile Australia Morocco Bahrain Jordan and six countries in Central America and the Caribbean. My Administration will continue to work to expand trade on a multilateral regional and bilateral basis and to enforce our trade laws to help ensure a level playing field I have a plan to prepare our young people for the jobs of the 21st century We have brought greater accountability to our public schools and are working to improve our high schools. We have made Pell grants available to one million more students and we will work to make college more affordable by increasing the size of Pell grants for low-income students. We are reforming our workforce training programs to help Americans obtain the skills needed for the jobs that our economy is creating I have an ambitious agenda for the next four years. During my first term working with the Congress I put policies in place to ensure a rapid recovery and to support strong growth. In my second term together we will cut the budget deficit in half fix Social Security reform the tax code reduce the burden of junk lawsuits ensure a reliable and affordable energy supply continue to promote free and fair trade help make health care affordable and accessible for American families and expand the quality and availability of educational opportunities These policies will produce an economic environment that continues to unleash the creativity and energy of the American people THE WHITE HOUSE FEBRUARY Economic Report of the President | THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Economic Report of the President | LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. February MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely N. Gregory Mankiw Chairman Kristin J. Forbes Member Harvey S. Rosen Member Economic Report of the President | C O N T E N T S Page overview chapter the year in review and the years ahead...................... Developments in and the Near-Term Outlook....................... Consumer Spending................................................................... Residential Investment Business Fixed Investment.......................................................... Business Inventories Government Purchases Exports and Imports Employment Productivity................................................................................ Wages and Prices Financial Markets....................................................................... The Long-Term Outlook Through Growth in GDP over the Long Term Interest Rates over the Long Term.............................................. The Composition of Income over the Long Term Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter expansions past and present Overview of the Current Expansion Consumption Investment Exports....................................................................................... Labor Market Summary.................................................................................... Symmetry in Recessions and Expansions......................................... Real GDP Components of Real GDP The Labor Market...................................................................... A Possible Explanation : The Financial Accelerator Summary.................................................................................... Stabilization Policy Business Cycles : Causes Economic Policy......................................................................... Policy Design : Challenges Fiscal Policy................................................................................ Monetary Policy Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter options for tax reform Why Do We Need Tax Reform ? The Direct Burden of the Tax System : Taxes Paid High Compliance Costs Effects on Behavior and Excess Burden Income Taxation Versus Consumption Taxation.............................. Fairness Effects on Growth of the Economy Simplification............................................................................. Tax Reform Prototypes.................................................................... Consumption Tax Prototypes Reform Within the Current System Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter immigration.................................................................... Immigration and Economic Growth Immigrants and Employment Growth Immigrants and Regional Growth How Many Immigrants ? Legal and Illegal Immigrants From Which Tempest-Tossed Shores ? Immigrant Education and Earnings The Role of Labor Market Institutions............................................ Institutions and Immigrant Unemployment............................... Benefits and Costs of Immigration.................................................. Labor Market Impact of Immigration Fiscal Impact of Immigration Immigrants and Public Assistance Immigrants and Social Security Additional Benefits to Immigration............................................ Immigration Policy.......................................................................... Current U.S. Immigration Policy Employment-Based Immigration................................................ Undocumented Immigration...................................................... Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter expanding individual choice and control The Meaning of Property Rights The Economic Effects of Property Rights........................................ The Success of Property Rights in Addressing Policy Issues | Economic Report of the President Addressing Air Pollution Through Tradable Permits................... Addressing Overfishing Through Property Rights School Voucher Programs........................................................... The Application of Property Rights to Current Policy Issues........... Personal Retirement Accounts Health Savings Accounts Millennium Challenge Accounts Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter innovation and the information economy Growth of the Information Economy.............................................. Growth in Computer and Internet Use Illegal Acts on the Internet Competition Versus Economic Regulation Telephone Service : A Natural Monopoly ? Long-Distance Services............................................................... Mobile Wireless Telephone Services Talking on the Internet : Voice over Internet Protocol................. Realizing the Promise of Broadband................................................ Universal Affordable Access to Broadband Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter the global hiv/aids epidemic A Global Crisis................................................................................ Disease Characteristics and Treatments............................................ The Economic Impact of HIV/AIDS.............................................. Direct Economic Impacts on Households Indirect Economic Impacts on Households................................ Macroeconomic Impacts Getting Prevention Treatment and Care to the Field A Role for Differential Pricing Humanitarian Aid Development of New Treatments and Vaccines Incentives for Innovation Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter modern international trade Free Trade : Beyond the Basics Globalization and the Terms of Trade......................................... The Impact of Trade on Labor Markets...................................... The U.S. Advantage in Services Trade Foreign Direct Investment : An Increasingly Important Part of Trade The Global Supply Chain and FDI............................................ How Inward FDI Strengthens Domestic Firms Contents | Encouraging FDI Achievements in Trade Negotiations................................................ Trade with China Intellectual Property Rights Trade Liberalization.................................................................... Conclusion...................................................................................... appendixes A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production list of tables Administration Forecast Accounting for Growth in Real GDP Sources of Federal Revenues Fiscal Year Comparison of Tax Revenues : United States G-7 and OECD Foreign-Born Share of Employment Growth by Occupational Category to Median Weekly Earnings by Educational Attainment list of charts Real and Nominal Price of West Texas Intermediate Crude Oil Investment Growth and the Acceleration of Nonfarm Business Output....................................................................... Saving Investment and the Current Account Balance............. Labor Productivity Nonfarm Business Sector Inflation and Inflation Expectations......................................... Okun s Law Estimation of Potential GDP Growth Real Gross Domestic Product................................................... Real Personal Consumption Expenditures................................ Real Nonresidential Investment Real Residential Investment Real Exports of Goods and Services Nonfarm Payroll Employment Nonfarm Business Productivity Recessions and Expansions : Real GDP..................................... Recessions and Expansons : Nonfarm Payroll Employment | Economic Report of the President Growth in Personal Income During Expansion Years Before and After Taxes Real Government Spending ( Consumption and Gross Investment ) The Real and Nominal Federal Funds Rate.............................. Real GDP Growth Share of Federal Taxes With and Without Tax Cuts Effective Federal Tax Rates With and Without Tax Cuts Percent Reductions in Total Federal Taxes Foreign-Born Share of Employment Growth by Census Division to Number and Share of Foreign-Born in U.S. Population Foreign-Born Population by Immigrant Status Foreign-Born Population by World Region of Birth Educational Attainment Male Unemployment Rate by Nativity Youth Unemployment Rate by Nativity Growth in Gross Domestic Product Due to the Information Technology Sector.................................................................... Business-to-Consumer E-Commerce........................................ Business-to-Business E-Commerce........................................... U.S. Wireline and Mobile Wireless Telephone Service Average Price Per Minute of Mobile Wireless Telephone Service...................................................................................... Estimated HIV Infection Levels Changes in Life Expectancy to Agricultural Labor Force Loss Due to HIV/AIDS and Imports and the Unemployment Rate Trade in Business Professional and Technical Services U.S. Imports of Goods............................................................. list of boxes Oil Prices and the Economy..................................................... Okun s Law Is the Economy More Stable ? Complexity of the Current System........................................... The Initial Effects of the Reductions in Tax Rates on Dividends................................................................................. What Is the Current Distribution of the Tax Burden ? Contents | The Equivalence of Sales Taxes and Value Added Taxes............ Wage Impacts of Immigration.................................................. The Benefits of Homeownership.............................................. The Benefits of Land Titles...................................................... Airline Computer Reservation Systems Satellite Television Uganda s Success Story Creative Ways to Encourage Innovation................................... | Economic Report of the President Overview I n the U.S. economic recovery blossomed into a full-fledged expansion with strong output growth and steady improvement in the labor market. Real gross domestic product ( GDP ) grew by percent in for the year as a whole. About million new payroll jobs were created during the largest annual gain since The unemployment rate fell to percent by year s end below the average of each of the past three decades. Inflation remained moderate especially excluding volatile energy prices. The U.S economy is on a solid footing for sustained growth in the years to come This is a marked reversal from the economic situation the Nation faced when President Bush came into office. Four years ago the economy was sliding into recession after the bursting of the high-tech bubble of the 1990s The economy was then affected by revelations of corporate scandals slow growth among our major trading partners and the terrorist attacks of September Business investment slowed sharply in late and remained soft for more than two years. The economy lost over jobs from December to September and then almost another jobs in the three months after the 9/11 attacks Prompt and decisive policy actions helped to counteract the effects of these adverse shocks to the economy. Substantial tax relief together with expansionary monetary policy provided stimulus to aggregate demand that softened the recession and helped put the economy on the path to recovery. In addition to providing timely short-term stimulus the President s pro-growth tax policies have improved incentives for work and capital accumulation thereby fostering an environment conducive to long-term economic growth This Report discusses macroeconomic developments of the past year the Administration s forecast for the years to come and several topics related to salient economic issues The Year in Review and the Years Ahead Chapter The Year in Review and the Years Ahead reviews economic developments in and discusses the Administration s forecast for to Solid economic growth continued in and the Administration s forecast calls for further expansion in with real GDP growing faster than its historical average and the unemployment rate continuing to decline The economy is expected to continue on a path of strong sustainable growth Real GDP expanded by percent during the four quarters of and by percent for the year as a whole compared with The solid advance in real GDP during was supported by gains in consumer spending business fixed investment and to a lesser extent housing investment inventory accumulation and government spending. Net exports ( exports less imports ) held down growth in all four quarters as the trade deficit rose in the third quarter to a record high as a percentage of GDP. Progress toward strengthened economic growth among U.S. trading partners led to an increase in exports but imports continued to outpace exports as U.S. domestic demand and demand for imported oil remained strong. The economy s strong growth performance came about in the face of higher oil prices which likely reduced growth somewhat during the year. The Administration expects real GDP to grow percent during the four quarters of in line with the consensus of professional forecasters. This growth is expected to be driven by continued gains in consumer spending investment growth and stronger net exports The labor market strengthened during the year. The unemployment rate which declined percentage point to percent by the end of is projected to edge down further to percent by the fourth quarter of Nonfarm payroll employment which grew about per month during is projected to grow about per month in in line with other professional forecasts Inflation increased from the extremely low levels of partly because of rapid increases in energy prices. Inflation as measured by the consumer price index excluding food and energy remained in the moderate percent range and inflation expectations remain low The economy made these advances even as energy prices soared the Federal Reserve raised interest rates and the demand-side effects of fiscal policy stimulus began to recede in the second half of This continued growth indicates that the economy has shifted from a policy-supported recovery to a self-sustaining expansion Expansions Past and Present Chapter Expansions Past and Present compares the current economic expansion to previous expansions. The current expansion and the previous one that started in followed especially shallow recessions and both exhibited relatively moderate overall growth in key economic variables Shallow recessions typically are followed by shallow recoveries and deep recessions by robust recoveries. The recent recession stands out in that there were no consecutive quarters of decline with revised data showing that real GDP dropped in the third quarter of and the first and third quarters of but grew in the intervening quarters | Economic Report of the President Consumption and residential investment continued to grow throughout the recession while business investment fell sharply in the recession and continued to decline for five quarters after the overall economy had bottomed out. Both of these developments likely reflect the important role of fiscal and monetary stimulus in supporting household demand and the unusual extent to which the recession resulted from a collapse in investment following the bubble of the late 1990s. The relationship between firms abilities to invest and the state of economic activity has been deemed the financial accelerator in that changes in activity affect firms ability to invest and this in turn further affects activity in a way that tends to accentuate economic fluctuations. Fiscal and monetary policy actions have counterbalanced these forces. Without the boost to disposable income from tax relief the recession would have been deeper and longer The relatively weak payroll employment growth in the initial stages of the current expansion likely reflects both the shallowness of the recession and the unusually strong growth of productivity in the recession and expansion. In an average expansion before the 1990s employment recovered along with output at the start of the expansion and regained its previous peak about three quarters after the trough. In the expansion of the 1990s however employment continued to fall for two quarters after the expansion had commenced and did not reach its previous peak value until another six quarters had passed. In the most recent expansion employment continued to fall for seven quarters after the recession had ended and regained its prerecession level only at the beginning of some quarters after the end of the recession The moderate employment growth reflects especially strong productivity growth during the current expansion. Productivity growth has averaged percent per year at an annual rate in the most recent expansion up substantially from the percent growth rate seen on average from to In the short run greater productivity growth sets the bar higher for employment growth. With increased productivity a given amount of output can be produced with fewer hours worked so real GDP must grow more quickly for employment to grow. In the long run however higher productivity growth leads to higher income per person and will thus be expected to be positive for employment growth That the recent recessions and expansions have been especially moderate suggests the possibility that the economy has become more stable in general If so then part of this stability is likely attributable to more active and timelier stabilization policy. Other factors possibly contributing to a more stable economy include improved inventory management that lessens the volatility of production changes and the ongoing shift in the U.S. economy toward the service sector the output of which has typically been more stable than the production of goods Overview | Options for Tax Reform Chapter Options for Tax Reform discusses why tax reform is vital to a stronger economy and examines several basic prototypes for reform. The President has not endorsed any specific proposal and the chapter does not advocate the adoption of any particular prototype for reform The current Federal tax system is unnecessarily complex and distorts incentives for work saving and investment. In addition to the dollar amounts of taxes paid the tax system imposes two indirect burdens on taxpayers and on the U.S economy as a whole : the costs ( in time and money ) of complying with tax rules and the costs ( including slower economic growth ) of taxinduced distortions of economic activity. The Internal Revenue Service estimated that for tax year individual taxpayers spent billion hours on tax compliance an average of hours per return and spent $ billion on tax preparers computer software and similar expenses High tax rates reduce incentives for work saving and investment distort economic decisions and divert resources from productive activity into tax avoidance ultimately reducing economic growth and lowering living standards. High tax rates lead people to work less to take their compensation in nontaxable forms such as health insurance and to alter their portfolios to focus on tax-favored investments. The current tax system also distorts many business decisions resulting in inefficient use of resources and reduced economic output. Double taxation of corporate income raises the cost of capital and would therefore be expected to have an adverse effect on investment. Double taxation further leads firms to finance investment with debt instead of equity creates a bias in favor of using business forms such as partnerships and subchapter S corporations that are not subject to the double tax and discourages paying dividends. The Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of ( JGTRRA ) reduced this double tax by reducing the individual income tax rates for both dividends and capital gains and appears to have led to a sizable increase in dividend payments by firms Tax reform proposals generally follow either the principle of taxing consumption or the principle of reforming the existing system to conform more closely to a pure income tax Most proposals for tax reform involve variations on a few basic types of taxes. The main types of consumption taxes are the retail sales tax the value added tax the flat tax and the consumed income tax. The retail sales tax imposes tax liability when an individual purchases goods or services for consumption whereas the value added tax levies tax on the same base but the tax is collected instead on the value added to the good or service at each stage of its production. The flat tax consists of a business tax and an individual-level tax both with a single flat tax rate in which wages are taxed at the individual | Economic Report of the President level rather than being included in the business tax base. This allows for building progressivity into the system by providing an exemption of say $ for a family of four. While these taxes appear to be quite different they are equivalent from an economic standpoint because consumption is the overall tax base in each case Important benefits could also be obtained through simplification and reform of the current tax system. A reformed version of the current system would reduce transition and adjustment costs and considerable benefits could be obtained by simplifying and rationalizing tax provisions that overlap or are otherwise overly complex The Administration s tax program has already significantly reformed the tax system. Achievements include lowering marginal tax rates reducing the double tax on corporate income simplification and improved fairness for families. The tax relief passed during the President s first term also increased the overall progressivity of the Federal tax system. The bottom percent of the population in terms of income received the largest percentage reductions in total Federal taxes and the share of taxes paid by the top percent in terms of income increased as a result of the tax cuts enacted since Possible additional reforms would be to lower tax rates further and broaden the base ; rationalize the current multitude of saving incentives ; further reduce or eliminate the remaining double taxation of corporate income ; and simplify the complex system of depreciation rules. Reform within the current system would also address the Alternative Minimum Tax ( AMT ) which adds considerable complexity and which under current law is expected to affect a rapidly growing number of taxpayers over the next five years Although tax reform has been discussed for many years it is a particularly pressing need at the current time. Increasing numbers of taxpayers will be affected by the Alternative Minimum Tax which will be a major source of frustration and complexity. In addition the tax reductions enacted since will expire in a few years unless they are extended or a new reformed tax system is adopted. If these provisions are allowed to expire the result will be substantial increases in taxes on taxpayers in all income groups with the largest percentage increases being imposed on lower- and middle-income households Immigration Chapter Immigration examines the economic impact and implications of immigration. In recent decades the United States has experienced a surge in immigration not seen in over a century. Immigration has touched every facet of the U.S. economy and as the President has said America is a stronger Overview | and better Nation for it. A comprehensive accounting of the benefits and costs of immigration shows that the benefits of immigration exceed the costs Immigrants have settled in all parts of our Nation and have generally succeeded in finding jobs quickly helped in large measure by the flexibility of the U.S. labor market. One indicator of this success is that foreign-born workers in the United States have a higher labor force participation rate and a lower unemployment rate than foreign workers in most major immigrantreceiving countries While flexible institutions may speed the economic integration of the foreign-born the distribution of the gains from immigration can be uneven Less-skilled U.S. workers who compete most closely with low-skilled immigrants have experienced downward pressure on their earnings as a result of immigration although most research suggests these effects are modest. Also communities contending with a large influx of low-skilled immigrants may experience an increased tax burden as immigrant families utilize publicly provided goods such as education and health care U.S. immigration policy faces a complicated set of challenges perhaps more so now than ever before. Policy should preserve America s traditional hospitality to lawful immigrants and promote their economic contributions Yet these goals must be balanced with the Nation s many needs including the imperative for orderly and secure borders. These challenges have only grown in a post-9/11 world. The persistence of undocumented immigration and problems with employment-based immigration suggest that current policy falls short in addressing the demand for immigrant workers and the need for national security. The President s proposed Temporary Worker Program recognizes these problems and would implement necessary reforms Expanding Individual Choice and Control Chapter Expanding Individual Choice and Control examines the role played by property rights in providing the link between people s effort and their reward. Having property rights allows people to know that they will reap the rewards of their efforts and entrepreneurship When used in economics the term resource refers not just to natural resources such as land or clean air but to anything of value such as skills. A property right refers broadly to the arrangements society uses to assign people control over resources. Property rights have a variety of names including deeds titles permits vouchers allowances or accounts. Patents and copyrights are also property rights establishing control over inventions books songs and other creative concepts. The essential idea is the same in each case : the owner of the property right controls how something valuable is used | Economic Report of the President That control is defined using a bundle of specific rights. The bundle is commonly thought to consist of three main elements : the right to exclusive use of the resource the right to income derived from the resource and the ability to transfer those rights. Property rights can include a range of those elements from weak rights ( which might only include the right to use the resource ) to strong rights in all three elements Property rights have a profound effect on the choices people make. In addition to giving them the incentive to maintain and invest in things people will use resources more prudently if they own them. Property rights are essential for markets to function. The lack of a clear title might prevent a car purchase. A home buyer is unlikely to sign on the dotted line if she is not sure that the seller actually owns the house. Without property rights would-be entrepreneurs can not secure loans they might need to help their businesses grow Property rights are essential to the efficient operation of markets which in turn allocate resources to their most highly valued use. Clearly defined rights are important in avoiding overuse of resources and in encouraging the improvement of resources. Property rights further provide incentives to invest in maintain and improve resources over time. The benefits of homeownership come about because individuals have control and responsibility over their property and their lives The thoughtful application of property rights has already brought about a number of policy improvements. Introducing a property-rights regime for air quality reduced emissions almost percent more than the required level and achieved annual cost savings estimated at hundreds of millions of dollars per year. The use of property rights for fisheries has mitigated overfishing while increasing commercial fishermen s profits and promoting a more stable industry. The application of property rights to education has facilitated greater school choice and improved student performance. These uses of property rights have given control to people with the best information and incentives to use the resources in question Providing people with ownership individual choice and control of assets could help address several current concerns. Giving families more control over their retirement by establishing personal retirement accounts they actually own would improve the Social Security system. Offering people greater control over the money used for their health care would reduce health care spending and increase the number of people with health care insurance Providing countries greater ownership ( that is more control ) over how they use the development assistance they receive will make them active partners in the programs funded Overview | Innovation and the Information Economy Chapter Innovation and the Information Economy provides an overview of recent developments in information technology and discusses some of the economic issues relevant to this especially dynamic sector of the economy Innovation and information technology are increasingly key contributors to economic growth and productivity. Our Nation s growing prosperity depends on fostering an environment in which innovation will flourish Information technology has made many workplace tasks easier boosting people s productivity. One recent study finds that labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector grew at an annual rate of percent from through and attributes nearly three-quarters of this growth to the accumulation of information technology capital together with improvements in how people use this capital. Of the percent growth in real gross domestic product ( GDP ) in some percentage point was attributable to information technology A key development of the growing information economy is that more people are using computers and communicating over the Internet. Usage of the Internet includes email and the rapid growth of e-commerce which includes transactions with consumers and transactions between businesses. Consumers have benefited from e-commerce through the greater variety of goods available online and through the additional competition and lower prices resulting from the spread of e-commerce. A downside is the rise of online theft vandalism and fraud. The Administration has taken actions to protect property rights and ensure that the Internet and other new technologies are safe venues for commerce The process by which innovations such as the Internet come about involves the invention commercialization and diffusion of new ideas. At each of these stages people are spurred to action by the prospect of reaping rewards from their investment. Government thus has an important role to play in defining and protecting property rights in intellectual and physical capital so that entrepreneurs will be spurred to innovate In a free market innovators vie to lower the cost of goods and services to improve their quality and usefulness and most importantly to develop new goods and services that promise benefits to customers. An innovation will succeed if it passes the market test by profitably delivering greater value to customers. Successful innovations blossom attracting capital and diffusing rapidly through the market while unsuccessful innovations can wither just as quickly. In this way markets allow capital to flow to its highest-valued uses Competition drives the broad diffusion of innovative low-cost high-quality information services. This has held true in markets for mobile wireless telephones satellite television and dial-up and broadband Internet services | Economic Report of the President This engine of growth can falter however if government policies distort the market signals that guide innovative activity. Well-meaning policies to promote the diffusion of a service or foster entry into new markets can have unintended consequences. A policy to subsidize an existing service so that more people will consume it can deter development of innovative new services that people might otherwise prefer. In addition potential pioneering investors forced to share the fruits of their investment with new entrants would find it less profitable to invest in the first place and a new market may never be developed. As circumstances change and industries evolve existing government regulations may need rethinking. In particular economic regulations aimed at correcting an absence of competition may lose their rationale when competition from new technologies emerges The Global HIV/AIDS Epidemic Chapter The Global HIV/AIDS Epidemic examines the economic issues posed by the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) epidemic. The disease has already killed over million people and currently over million people are living with the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) the virus that causes AIDS. The chapter discusses the nature of the crisis its consequences and what governments can do to create affordable access to existing treatments while encouraging research toward the development of new medical therapies to combat this disease The impact of HIV/AIDS varies across the world both in terms of the scale of the epidemic and the ability to treat infected individuals. Less-developed countries are particularly hard hit on both accounts. Almost two thirds of all people with HIV live in sub-Saharan Africa a region that makes up only one tenth of the world s population. At the same time few infected individuals in the region receive adequate treatment for the disease While the disease s impacts on human health and mortality are widely recognized the HIV/AIDS epidemic also has devastating economic consequences that exacerbate the humanitarian crisis. AIDS deepens poverty intensifies food shortages and in some cases erases decades of economic progress. HIV/AIDS-related illnesses directly decrease the income of an affected household. Even if an infected family member is able to work a sick worker is likely to be less productive than a healthy one. The disease predominantly affects the working-age population and thus can leave too few people to support the aging and young populations. AIDS can also impose debilitating costs on other members of a household for example as other family members may need to miss work or school to care for a patient. The disease can further change the way that affected families make long-term decisions Overview | because they do not expect family members to live as long and because their needs become more immediate due to pressing health concerns. As a result children may be pulled out of school in order to supplement the declining family income resulting in a loss in the children s future earning potential Impacts such as this can combine to create a vicious cycle of increased poverty in the short run and an inability of households to improve their condition in the long run The President has made fighting the worldwide HIV/AIDS epidemic a priority of U.S. foreign policy. He has taken bold action against the crisis through his Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. Understanding the unique challenges presented by this epidemic is essential to designing policies to prevent the spread of the disease and to treat those who are already infected. A comprehensive and integrated approach of prevention treatment and care is essential to quelling the epidemic. In poor countries treatment affordability and the lack of health care infrastructure are major concerns. Compassionate pricing policies and aid from developed nations can play an important role in expanding access to treatment To continue the development of better treatments and to work toward eradication of HIV/AIDS drug companies need to maintain the highest possible quality of research. Intellectual property laws are important to ensuring appropriate incentives for innovation to create the next generation of therapies and to develop a safe and effective vaccine Modern International Trade Chapter Modern International Trade examines the benefits of free trade and discusses the progress the Administration has made in opening global markets. Open markets and free trade raise living standards both at home and abroad. Any move toward economic isolationism would threaten the competitive gains made by U.S. exporters while harming U.S. consumers and firms that benefit from imports The President s policy of opening markets around the world is based on a long history of intellectual support for free trade starting with the nineteenth century theory of comparative advantage advanced by David Ricardo Ricardo illustrated the ways in which free trade allows countries to mutually benefit from specializing in producing products at which they are adept and then exchanging those products. This rationale remains the same even with advances in technology and new types of trade. The principle of comparative advantage applies to the burgeoning trade in services in which the performance of U.S. service workers and firms has been particularly strong. The United States exports more services than it imports and this surplus has been | Economic Report of the President growing in recent years. Moreover U.S. services exports tend to involve relatively highly skilled and highly paid occupations such as engineering financial services or architectural services Richer economic models that take into account the features of the modern world show that countries as a whole still gain from free trade. There are however differing impacts of trade on different parts of the economy and the labor force. Policies aimed at supporting individuals affected by trade are thus vital to ensuring that its gains are widely shared. To this end the Administration has proposed a reform of the overall workforce training system to help Americans obtain marketable skills needed to compete for jobs in emerging and innovative fields. The Administration recognizes that effective workforce training requires the cooperation of the private sector and community colleges and has worked to nurture these partnerships through the High Growth Job Training Initiative at the Department of Labor and through the recently enacted Community-based Job Training Grants. In addition the Administration has proposed the establishment of Personal Reemployment Accounts an innovative approach to worker retraining and has worked to enhance the long-standing Trade Adjustment Assistance program which provides training and income support to workers directly hurt by import competition. As part of the Trade Act of eligibility was extended to workers indirectly affected by trade such as workers employed by firms that supply goods and services to industries directly affected by trade competition. Benefits were enhanced to include a health insurance tax credit and a wage supplement for older workers who found new jobs that did not pay as well as their previous jobs. This assistance which will total $ billion over years will ease the adjustment for displaced workers and help them move into jobs for which their skills are most in demand Foreign direct investment is playing an increasingly important role in world trade as companies invest across borders to gain skills technology resources and market access. A good deal of evidence suggests that increased employment at the foreign subsidiaries of U.S. firms is associated with a corresponding increase in employment in the U.S. parent company. Similarly recent research shows that one dollar of spending on capital investments abroad by U.S. firms is associated with an additional three and a half dollars of spending on capital investment at home. The available evidence thus suggests that on the whole overseas expansion by U.S. firms goes hand-in-hand with expansion at home Subsidiaries of foreign firms operating in the United States make important positive contributions to the U.S. economy as well. Foreign direct investment into the United States is associated with the adoption of new technology techniques and skills by locally-owned companies. U.S. subsidiaries of foreign companies employed million U.S. workers in nearly percent of total private-sector employment. This is up from million workers in ( percent of total private employment at that time ) Overview | The Administration has pushed aggressively to open global markets to trade through multilateral talks under the auspices of the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) and through agreements to liberalize trade between the United States and various partners. The Administration has worked to ensure that the benefits promised under the agreements are realized for U.S. consumers workers manufacturers farmers and service providers. At the same time lower trade barriers benefit people in U.S. trading partner countries. When U.S. trading partners do not fulfill their obligations the Administration has sought their compliance through a practical problem-solving approach. When that fails however the Administration has utilized formal dispute-settlement mechanisms The integration of the Chinese economy into the global trading system has been an important development in recent years. The Administration has worked to ensure that China lives up to the agreements it has signed including lowering its barriers to trade addressing concerns about intellectual property protection and adopting and enforcing the rules of the multilateral trading regime. Trade between the United States and China has been growing rapidly. For goods trade through November China ranked as the thirdlargest trading partner of the United States. For most of the period since China s WTO accession U.S. exports to China have been growing at a rate faster than its imports from China but this export growth is occurring from a much smaller base The Administration s vigorous pursuit of trade liberalization has paid off in progress on the Doha Development Agenda. The United States played a leading role in the intensive negotiations that led to an agreement establishing a framework for the ongoing talks at the WTO. These talks which were launched in in Doha Qatar have focused on measures that will especially benefit developing nations including the elimination of agricultural export subsidies Trade agreements were also concluded in with Australia Morocco Bahrain and with the participants in the Central American Free Trade Agreement ( CAFTA ) including Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic. At the same time the United States continued negotiations with the five nations of the Southern African Customs Union ( Botswana Lesotho Namibia South Africa and Swaziland ) while launching new negotiations with Thailand Panama and the Andean nations Colombia Ecuador and Peru. The President has also announced to Congress his intention to begin free trade agreement negotiations with the United Arab Emirates and Oman. When combined with agreements already negotiated by the Administration partner countries accounting for almost $ billion in trade have committed to eventually eliminate tariffs on almost all U.S. exports. Tariffs that averaged as high as percent for U.S exports will be reduced to zero as a result of these agreements | Economic Report of the President Conclusion The last year has seen the U.S. economy strengthen from recovery into a solid and sustainable expansion. With the near-term outlook bright this provides an opportunity to put renewed focus on longer-term economic challenges. The President s agenda is focused on these challenges on taking the actions needed to bring about a better economic future shared by all Americans. The President s policies are designed to foster rising living standards at home while encouraging other nations to follow our lead Overview | C H A P T E R The Year in Review and the Years Ahead T he recovery of the U.S. economy blossomed into a full-fledged expansion in with solid output growth and steady improvement in the labor market. Payroll employment increased by about million jobs the largest annual gain since and the economy expanded percent during the four quarters of the year. The economy made these advances even as energy prices soared the Federal Reserve raised interest rates and the demand-side effects of fiscal policy stimulus began to recede in the second half. Such continued growth indicates that the economy has shifted from a policy-supported recovery to a self-sustaining healthy expansion This chapter reviews the economic developments of and discusses the Administration s forecast for the years ahead. The key points in this chapter are : Real gross domestic product ( GDP ) grew solidly during Business investment in equipment and software accelerated and consumer spending growth remained strong Labor markets strengthened during the year. The unemployment rate continued to decline and employers created more than million new jobs Inflation rose from the extremely low levels of partly because of rapid increases in energy prices. Nevertheless core consumer price index ( CPI ) inflation has remained in the moderate percent range and inflation expectations remain low The Administration s forecast calls for the economic expansion to continue this year with real GDP growing faster than its historical average and the unemployment rate continuing to decline. The economy is expected to continue on a path of strong sustainable growth Developments in and the Near-Term Outlook Real GDP grew a robust percent during the four quarters of above the average historical pace. ( Real GDP growth was percent on a year-over-year basis comparing GDP for as a whole with GDP for as a whole. ) Growth was supported by gains in consumer spending business fixed investment and to a lesser extent housing investment inventory accumulation and government spending. Net exports ( exports less imports ) held down growth in all four quarters as the trade deficit rose in the third quarter to a record high as a percentage of GDP. Strengthening economic growth among our trading partners led to an increase in exports but imports continued to outpace exports as U.S. domestic demand and demand for imported oil remained strong. The rise in crude oil prices reduced growth somewhat during the year ( Box ) The Administration expects real GDP to grow percent during the four quarters of in line with the consensus of professional forecasters. This growth is forecast to be driven by continued gains in consumer spending investment growth ( although slower than in ) and stronger net exports The unemployment rate which declined percentage point to percent during the four quarters of is projected to edge down further to percent by the fourth quarter of Nonfarm payroll employment which grew about per month during is projected to grow about per month in in line with other professional forecasts Box : Oil Prices and the Economy Rising oil prices hindered growth in Boosted by strong world demand and both domestic and foreign supply disruptions the price of crude oil purchased by refiners increased almost continuously from $ per barrel in December through October when it peaked at $ per barrel. A more-widely followed ( but less comprehensive ) measure the spot price of West Texas Intermediate crude oil peaked even higher at $ per barrel for the month of October. These prices were historical highs in nominal terms and were about percent of the all-time high in real terms ( Chart ) Crude oil prices then dropped off in November and December. For as a whole refiners acquisition cost was almost $ per barrel above its year-earlier level High oil prices are a headwind for the economy because they raise the cost of production thus weakening the supply side of the economy and absorb income that could have been used for other purchases thus weakening the demand side of the economy. The United States imports about two-thirds of its crude oil ( about million barrels per day ) and so the higher oil prices caused the bill for imported oil to increase by about $ billion ( or percent of GDP ) in This increase acted like a tax holding back aggregate demand One rule of thumb is that a $ per barrel increase in the price of oil reduces the level of real GDP by roughly percent after four quarters Thus the roughly $ per barrel increase in average oil prices for may have held back real GDP growth by or percentage point. If oil prices move as expected by the futures market average oil prices in will only slightly exceed the average so oil prices are expected to be only a minor impediment to growth | Economic Report of the President Consumer Spending Consumer spending continued its solid growth in Real personal consumption expenditures which account for percent of GDP rose percent during the four quarters of Consumer spending has been boosted by continued gains in disposable personal income and a rebound in household wealth. Real disposable personal income after-tax income adjusted for inflation rose by percent at an annual rate during the first months of Household net worth meanwhile grew at a percent annual rate in the first three quarters of ( on top of a 13-percent gain during ) as equity prices moved up and housing prices continued to increase Personal saving fell to percent of disposable personal income in the first months of the year down from an average of percent in The Administration forecast assumes that the saving rate will be roughly flat in the coming years. Consumer spending is projected to continue its solid growth in supported by solid consumer sentiment ( which was above average historical levels in December ) projected real compensation gains and the recent rebound in household wealth. Real consumer spending is projected to grow somewhat more slowly than overall real GDP during the projection period to Chapter | Residential Investment The housing sector remained strong through year-end Residential investment increased percent during the four quarters of following a percent gain during Demand for new housing has been stimulated by low mortgage rates. Rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages averaged percent in about the same as a year earlier but lower than at any other time in the past years. Sales of new single-family homes during were the highest since at least when the government began tracking this information and the homeownership rate was a record percent The strength in housing demand has been reflected in home prices. An index of prices for houses involved in repeat transactions ( that is sales prices of the same house over time ) increased by percent during the four quarters ended in the third quarter of the biggest four-quarter increase since the late 1970s. The rapid increase in demand and prices has further helped support gains in home construction. Housing starts totaled million units during making it the strongest year for housing starts since The growth of new housing starts will likely slow in Long-term Treasury rates are projected to increase leading mortgage rates to edge up as well. In addition demographics suggest that the formation of new households is unlikely to support additional increases in housing activity. Taken together these factors suggest that residential construction is likely to edge lower in the next couple of years and to remain roughly flat during the years through Business Fixed Investment Real business fixed investment ( firms outlays on equipment software and structures ) grew percent during following a percent gain during Growth was concentrated in equipment and software ( up percent ) while nonresidential construction edged lower. Within the equipment and software category growth during the four quarters of was particularly strong in computer equipment and software. Investment in transportation equipment also grew rapidly in overtaking its pre-9/11 level in the fourth quarter Nonresidential structures investment edged down during the four quarters of with a notable decline in investment in power and communications facilities. Real nonresidential construction has been stagnant since as vacancy rates in both office and industrial buildings have remained high Construction of shopping centers and other multi-merchant structures has been robust however Projections of future investment growth are based in part on the observation that growth in investment spending correlates well with the acceleration ( that is the change in the growth rate ) of business output ( Chart ) ; the | Economic Report of the President reasons for this correlation are discussed more fully in Chapter Expansions Past and Present. Equipment investment spending grew quite fast during and consistent with the rapid acceleration of nonfarm output growth from to The percent growth projected for real GDP during the four quarters of is solid but below the growth rates of and It follows therefore that the growth of investment is likely to be slower in than in In addition the termination of the special investment expensing provisions allowed under the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of ( JGTRRA ) is likely to have advanced into some investment spending that might have been planned for early The end of this policy could limit investment growth in the first quarter of Business Inventories Businesses rebuilt inventories in ; inventory investment was solidly positive during the year after being slightly negative in Inventory investment contributed an average of percentage point to real GDP growth during the four quarters of Inventories appear to be lean relative to economy-wide sales and shipments with the inventory-to-sales ratio for manufacturing and trade close to its historic low. Assessing just how lean these inventories are is difficult however Chapter | as ongoing improvements in supply-chain management ( such as just-in-time practices discussed in Chapter ) have reduced the need for inventory stocks Inventories grew almost as fast as sales in and the inventory-to-sales ratio for manufacturing and trade edged down only slightly last year Inventory investment in is projected to be sufficient to hold the inventory-to-sales ratio approximately constant and the pace of inventory investment is projected to contribute little to GDP growth in Government Purchases Real Federal purchases ( consumption expenditures and gross investment ) grew at a percent rate during the four quarters of with most of that growth accounted for by defense spending. Total nominal Federal expenditures ( including transfer and interest payments ) slowed to a percent rate of growth during from a percent rate in After several difficult years the budget position of states and localities improved recently due to a combination of spending restraint and renewed growth of revenues. The level of real state and local consumption and gross investment was little changed during the lowest growth in real spending since the early 1980s. State and local revenues have been boosted by increased household income and consumer spending as well as by additional federal grants authorized under JGTRRA. Spending restraint together with a pickup in revenues boosted the net saving of state and local governments to roughly $ billion during the first three quarters of roughly reversing the dissaving during the year-earlier period. Real state and local spending is projected to pick up from last year s slow growth to about percent per year during the projection period Exports and Imports The trade deficit expanded substantially during Real exports increased percent as economic growth strengthened among our major trading partners but real imports increased even faster ( at a percent rate ) partly due to the more robust recovery in the United States than abroad. The trade deficit on goods and services reached about percent of GDP in the third quarter of The rapid increases in real imports were widespread and included capital goods and industrial supplies petroleum and consumer goods All the major categories of real nonagricultural exports ( capital goods industrial supplies motor vehicles consumer goods and services ) contributed to the growth of overall exports. Agricultural exports declined however as exports of beef fell on concerns about mad cow disease. Due to the detection of the first known case of mad cow disease in the United States in late | Economic Report of the President a number of countries that together account for most U.S. beef exports have completely or partially halted purchases of American beef. As a result beef exports which were $ billion in have now fallen to about $ billion at an annual rate The rapid growth of imports relative to exports largely reflects faster growth in the United States than among our trading partners as U.S. demand for imports increases faster than foreigners demand for our exports. For example the U.S. economy grew faster than its trading partners in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) during the four quarters of ( percent versus percent ) and the OECD growth estimate for the four quarters of also shows slower growth elsewhere in the OECD ( percent ) than the percent official estimate of growth for the United States The current account deficit which primarily reflects the trade deficit but also includes net international flows of investment income and transfers widened to about percent of GDP in the second and third quarters. The current account deficit represents the inflow of capital that is needed to finance domestic U.S. investment in excess of domestic saving. Over the latter half of the 1990s and the early 2000s the U.S. current account deficit expanded as domestic investment grew faster than saving ( Chart ) More recently the current account deficit has expanded as the national saving rate has fallen Chapter | Looking ahead stronger growth in U.S. trading partners appears to favor continued gains in export growth. Growth among the non-U.S. members of the OECD is projected to increase from percent during the four quarters of to percent during the four quarters of This growth should support growth in U.S. exports. This effect will likely be augmented by an expected rise in the U.S. share of world exports owing in part to recent declines in the value of the dollar against other major currencies. Overall the Administration projects real exports to grow noticeably faster than GDP in The projected moderation of U.S. GDP growth in and together with the recent change in the exchange value of the dollar suggest that growth in real imports will slow in the future Employment Nonfarm payroll employment increased about million during the largest annual gain since The unemployment rate declined to percent in December well below the percent peak of June The unemployment rate in was below the averages of the 1970s the 1980s and the 1990s Job gains were spread broadly across major industry sectors in The service-providing sector accounted for percent of job growth during the year in line with its percent share of overall employment. The goodsproducing sector accounted for the remaining percent of the gains in line with its percent share of overall employment. Within the goods-producing sector employment growth was concentrated in construction ; manufacturing employment also increased the first such gain since These employment figures reflect the benchmark adjustment of the employment data in early February The employment data for will also be affected by next year s benchmarking process which will cover the period from March to March The Administration projects that employment will increase at a pace of about jobs per month on average during the months of a projection that is in line with the consensus of private forecasters. The unemployment rate is projected to edge down to percent by the fourth quarter of Employment growth is not expected to slow by as much as output growth because productivity ( output per hour ) is projected to increase at a slower pace than in and more of the projected output growth may be translated into labor demand and employment in than in | Economic Report of the President Productivity Recent productivity growth has been extraordinary. Nonfarm productivity has grown at a percent annual rate since the business-cycle peak in the first quarter of a period that includes both recession and recovery. This is a percentage point acceleration from the already rapid percent annual growth rate recorded from to ( Chart ) Although the cause of the acceleration is not well understood plausible explanations have been offered relating to capital deepening especially of informational and organizational capital. But none of these explanations helps to explain the post-2000 productivity acceleration which occurred despite a slowing of investment in both conventional capital goods and information technology ( IT ) Wages and Prices Following very low inflation during most measures of inflation increased during with the largest increases in those price indexes that include energy. For example the consumer price index ( CPI ) increased percent over the months of well above the percent rise Chapter | during the previous year. Excluding the volatile food and energy components core consumer prices increased percent during up from percent during About percentage point of the year-to-year acceleration in the core CPI is accounted for by used car prices which dropped sharply in before rebounding in Consumer energy prices increased percent in with particularly large ( percent ) increases in petroleum-based energy prices. Food prices increased percent during down slightly from their percent rise in Hourly compensation of workers grew solidly during the year mostly because of rising benefits. Private-sector hourly compensation as measured by the employment cost index ( ECI ) increased percent during the months of down slightly from its percent year-earlier pace. The wages and salaries component of this measure rose percent during the year while benefits increased by percent. The increase in hourly benefits was led by an increase in employer contributions to defined benefit programs which increased at a percent annual rate during the first three quarters of according to the employer costs for employee compensation index ( derived from the same survey as the ECI but with different weights ) This rapid increase occurred as employers made catch-up contributions to their pension plans to offset some of the underfunding that developed in recent years. Employer-paid health premiums rose percent during according to the ECI a smaller increase than the percent during The effects of these gains in hourly compensation on unit labor costs were mostly offset by the rapid growth rate of productivity during the first three quarters of Unit labor costs rose at only a percent annual rate during the first three quarters of after falling from through Most of the increase in prices during was attributable to widening gross profit margins rather than to increasing costs suggesting some tightness in product markets. Consistent with this product-market tightness delivery lags lengthened during the first half of as reported by manufacturing supply managers. These supply delivery lags increased much more slowly toward yearend however and the experience of the last two expansions suggests that these lags are likely to recede as the economy reconfigures itself for sustained growth Last year s increase in inflation appears likely to have been a temporary phenomenon rather than the beginning of a sustained increase. Inflation as measured by the CPI is expected to stabilize at a percent annual rate in future years up only slightly from the percent increase in the core CPI during In and the overall consumer price index is projected to be held down by anticipated declines in energy prices consistent with the declines implicit in the futures market for crude oil. The inflation fluctuations during the past year have not affected long-term inflation expectations which remain stable ( Chart ) | Economic Report of the President The projected path of inflation as measured by the GDP price index is similar but a bit lower. It is projected to fall to percent during the four quarters of down slightly from the percent annual rate of increase in the GDP price index excluding food and energy during During the next several years the GDP price index is projected to increase at a or percent annual rate a stable pace of inflation consistent with the projected unemployment rate of percent These inflation projections although revised up from a year ago are close to those of the consensus of professional economic forecasters The wedge between the CPI and the GDP measures of inflation has implications for Federal budget projections. A larger wedge would reduce the Federal budget surplus because cost-of-living adjustments for Social Security and other indexed programs rise with the CPI whereas Federal revenue tends to increase with the GDP price index. For a given level of nominal income increases in the CPI also cut Federal revenue because they raise income tax brackets and affect other inflation-indexed features of the tax code. Of the two indexes the CPI tends to increase faster in part because it measures the price of a fixed basket of goods and services. In contrast the GDP price index increases less rapidly because it reflects the choice of households and businesses to shift their purchases away from items with increasing relative prices Chapter | and toward items with decreasing relative prices. In addition the GDP price index includes investment goods such as computers whose relative prices have been falling rapidly. Computers in particular receive a much larger weight in the GDP price index ( percent ) than in the CPI ( percent ) During the years ended in the wedge between inflation in the CPI-U-RS ( a historical CPI series designed to be consistent with current CPI methods ) and the rate of change in the GDP price index averaged percentage point per year. The wedge was particularly high during when the CPI increased percentage point faster than the GDP price index reflecting the roughly percent increase in oil prices which have a much larger weight in consumption prices than in GDP as a whole. Since domestic production accounts for only about a third of U.S. oil consumption the weight of oil prices in GDP is roughly one-third of its weight in the consumption basket. As this boost from higher oil prices unwinds over the next couple of years the wedge between CPI and GDP inflation is likely to be lower than its recent average. During the entire to period the wedge is projected to average percentage point equal to the Administration estimate of the wedge in the long term Financial Markets Stock prices fluctuated within a relatively narrow range for the first eight months of the year and then increased during the last four months. Over the months of the Wilshire a broad index of stock prices rose percent. These gains built on the percent gains that were recorded during Long-term interest rates fluctuated substantially during but finished the year essentially unchanged. The yield on 10-year Treasury notes fell by percentage point from January through March to about percent. The yield then increased sharply in the next two months rising percentage point coinciding with a pickup in the core CPI and several months of strong job growth. Rates began to fall again in early June as monthly increases in the core CPI and job growth moderated. The 10-year rate declined during the second half of the year even as the Federal Reserve s Open Market Committee raised the ( overnight ) Federal funds rate at every meeting from June through December The 10-year rate ended the year at about the same level as it had begun The Long-Term Outlook Through The U.S. economy continues to be well-positioned for long-term growth The Administration projects that GDP will expand strongly through inflation will remain contained and labor markets will continue to | Economic Report of the President strengthen. The forecast is based on conservative economic assumptions that are close to the consensus of professional forecasters. These assumptions provide a prudent and cautious basis for the budget projections Growth in GDP over the Long Term The Administration projects that real GDP will grow at an average annual rate of percent during the four years of to ( Table ) roughly in line with the consensus forecast for those years. This pace is slightly above the expected percent annual growth in potential GDP ( a measure of productive capacity ) so the unemployment rate is projected to edge lower from percent at the end of to percent by the end of The unemployment rate is expected to remain flat thereafter as the economy grows at its potential rate of percent in and and percent in and As discussed below potential GDP growth is expected to slow somewhat after as labor force growth declines The projected growth of GDP is conservative relative to recent experience The economy grew more than percent during and is estimated to have grown percent during the four quarters of Moreover Okun s Law a well-known economic rule of thumb suggests that potential GDP growth has been about percent in recent years ( Box ) TABLE Administration Forecast Year Nominal GDP Real GDP ( chaintype ) GDP price index ( chaintype ) Consumer Unemployment price rate index ( percent ) ( CPI-U ) Percent change fourth quarter to fourth quarter Interest rate 91-day Treasury bills ( percent ) Interest rate 10-year Treasury notes ( percent ) Nonfarm payroll employment ( millions ) Level calendar year ( actual ) Based on data available as of December Figures cited in the text for are based on data available through January and so may differ from figures shown here Secondary market ( bank discount basis ) Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Chapter | Box : Okun s Law One way of estimating the economy s potential growth rate is through the empirical regularity known as Okun s Law which relates changes in the unemployment rate to GDP growth ( Chart ) The chart plots the four-quarter change in the unemployment rate ( which has been adjusted to account for demographic changes ) against the fourquarter growth rate of real output. According to Okun s Law the unemployment rate falls when output grows faster than its potential rate and rises when output growth falls short of that potential. The rate of real GDP growth consistent with a stable unemployment rate is then interpreted as the rate of potential growth ; this potential can be estimated as the rate at which the fitted line in Chart crosses the horizontal axis. As can be seen by the position of the two parallel lines the pace of potential real GDP growth appears to have picked up after The lower line which is drawn through data for suggests that potential real GDP grew at a percent annual rate during those years. The upper line which is drawn through data for and is estimated so as to be parallel to the lower line suggests that real potential GDP growth accelerated to a percent annual rate during the past nine years | Economic Report of the President The growth rate of the economy over the long run is determined by its supply-side components which include population labor force participation productivity and the workweek. The Administration s forecast for the contribution of different supply-side factors to real GDP growth is shown in Table As seen in the fourth column of the table the supply-side composition of real GDP growth has been unusual since the beginning of with exceptionally high productivity growth ( percent at an annual rate ) being partially offset by a large decline in the ratio of nonfarm business employment to household employment. This unusual pattern reflects the discrepancy between the slow growth of employment as measured by the employer survey and the more rapid growth of employment as measured by the household survey a disparity that has not been adequately explained. Declines in the labor force participation rate have also held down real GDP growth during the past four years although the reasons for these declines may be partly cyclical TABLE Accounting for Growth in Real GDP [ Average annual percent change ] Item Q2 Q4 Q2 Q1 Q3 to to to to to Q4 Q2 Q1 Q3 Q4 ) Civilian noninstitutional population aged and over ) Plus : Civilian labor force participation rate ) Equals : Civilian labor force ) Plus : Civilian employment rate ) Equals : Civilian employment ) Plus : Nonfarm business employment as a share of civilian employment ) Equals : Nonfarm business employment.................................. ) Plus : Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business ) ) Equals : Hours of all persons ( nonfarm business ) ) Plus : Output per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) ) Equals : Nonfarm business output........................................... ) Plus : Ratio of real GDP to nonfarm business output ) Equals : Real GDP..................................................................... Adjusted by Council of Economic Advisers to smooth discontinuities in the population series since Bureau of Labor Statistics research series adjusted to smooth irregularities in the population series since Line translates the civilian employment growth rate into the nonfarm business employment growth rate Line translates nonfarm business output back into output for all sectors ( GDP ) which includes the output of farms and general government Note : The periods Q2 Q4 and Q1 are NBER business-cycle peaks. Detail may not add to total because of rounding Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Chapter | The percent rate of productivity growth during the past three and a half years is remarkable particularly because this period included a recession and is well above the already strong percent productivity growth experienced from to The causes of the post-2001 productivity acceleration remain a mystery at this time and so it seems unwise to presume that the rapid growth of the last few years will be sustained indefinitely. The Administration expects nonfarm labor productivity to grow at a percent annual pace over the next six and a quarter years. This is a bit below the assumed percent trend rate of growth similar to the percent pace during the period and only modestly above the percent average pace since the data series began in Growth of the labor force ( also shown in Table ) is projected to contribute percentage point per year on average to growth of potential output through Labor force growth results from changes in the working-age population and the participation rate. The Bureau of the Census projects that the working-age population will grow at an average annual rate of percent through This pace is more rapid in the near future and then trails off after The last year in which the labor force participation rate increased was suggesting that the long-term trend of rising participation has ended. Since then the participation rate has fallen at an average percent annual pace Demographic factors will likely lead to yet lower participation in future years. Baby boomers are currently in their forties and fifties. Over the next several years they will move into older age brackets with lower participation rates. As a result the labor force participation rate is projected to edge down an average of percent per year through The decline may be greater however after which is the year that the first baby boomers reach the early-retirement age of Together with the expected deceleration of the growth of the working-age population the falling participation rate works to slow the growth rate of potential output to percent in An expanding workweek is projected to add percentage point to potential GDP growth during the projection period. Most of this increase occurs in the next couple of years during the period of strong cyclical labor demand rather than as a permanent feature of long-term growth. The ratio of nonfarm employment to household employment ( which as noted above subtracted a puzzling percentage point from real GDP growth during ) is projected to contribute nothing toward real GDP growth during the projection period. It is possible however that it might reverse course during the next few years offsetting its recent weakness. Such a development would add to real GDP growth | Economic Report of the President In sum potential real GDP is projected to grow at a percent annual pace through and then to slow to percent in and Actual real GDP growth during the six-year forecast period is projected to be slightly higher at percent as the unemployment rate declines and the workweek expands. The economy is forecast to grow at potential beginning in and the unemployment rate is projected to stabilize at percent Interest Rates over the Long Term The Administration forecast of interest rates is based on financial market data as well as a survey of economic forecasters. The yield curve which shows how the yield on Treasury securities rises with the maturity of those securities is currently steeper than usual. This steepness suggests that financial market participants expect short-term interest rates to rise. The Administration forecast thus projects gradual increases in the interest rate on 91-day Treasury bills to continue through with most of the increase expected during the next two years. This rate is expected to reach percent in at which point the real interest rate on 91-day Treasury bills will be close to its historical average. The projected path of the interest rate on 10-year Treasury notes is consistent with the path of short-term Treasury rates. By the 10-year rate is projected to be percent percentage points above expected CPI inflation a typical real rate by historical standards. By the projected term premium ( the difference between the 10-year interest rate and the 91-day rate ) of percentage points is in line with its historical average The Composition of Income over the Long Term A primary purpose of the Administration s economic forecast is to estimate future government revenues which requires a projection of the components of taxable income. The Administration s income-side projection is based on the historical stability of the long-run labor compensation and capital shares of gross domestic income ( GDI ) During the first three quarters of the labor compensation share of GDI was only percent well below its average of percent. From this jumping-off point the labor share is projected to slowly rise to percent by The labor compensation share consists of wages and salaries which are taxable employer contributions to employee pension and insurance funds ( that is fringe benefits ) which are not taxable and employer contributions for government social insurance. The Administration forecasts that the wage and salary share of compensation will be roughly stable during the projection period. One of the main factors boosting non-wage compensation during the Chapter | past two years has been employer contributions to defined-benefit pension plans and although these contributions are likely to remain high in the next few years they are not projected to rise as a share of compensation after The capital share of GDI is expected to fall from its currently high level before plateauing near its historical average. Within the capital share a nearterm decline in depreciation ( an echo of the decline in short-lived investment during and ) is expected to boost corporate profits which in the third quarter of were about percent of GDI ( excluding the temporary negative effects of hurricanes ) a figure well above its post-1959 average of percent. From forward the profit share is expected to slowly edge down toward its long-term average The projected pattern of book profits ( known in the national income accounts as profits before tax ) reflects the termination of the window for expensing of equipment investment allowed under the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act of and the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of These expensing provisions reduced taxable profits from the third quarter of through the fourth quarter of The expiration of the expensing provisions increases book profits from forward however because investment goods expensed during the three-year expensing window will have less remaining value to depreciate. The share of other taxable income ( the sum of rent dividends proprietors income and personal interest income ) is projected to fall in coming years mainly because of the delayed effects of past declines in long-term interest rates which reduce personal interest income during the projection period Conclusion Supported by expansionary fiscal and monetary policy the economy now appears to have shifted from a tentative recovery to a sustained expansion Consumer spending remains strong businesses are continuing to invest and employment growth has rebounded. Prospects remain bright for continued growth in the years ahead. And yet much work remains in making our economy as productive as possible. Later chapters of this Report explore how pro-growth policies such as reforming our tax system expanding the reach of property rights and encouraging innovation can enhance our economic performance | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R Expansions Past and Present T he U.S. economy began to expand rapidly in mid-2003 an expansion that carried through to Real gross domestic product ( GDP ) rose by percent from the third quarter of to the third quarter of Employment grew steadily in with more than million jobs created on net since the job market turned around in August The unemployment rate has declined from a high of percent in June to percent in December a rate below the average unemployment rate of the 1970s 1980s and 1990s. Inflation picked up modestly over the course of but remains low by historical standards with consumer prices having increased by percent during This state of affairs strong growth declining unemployment and moderate inflation is remarkable in light of the powerful contractionary forces at work since early : the bursting of the high-tech bubble of the 1990s revelations of corporate scandals weak growth in the United States major trading partners the war in Iraq and the impact of the terrorist attacks The recent recession and expansion took place against the backdrop of an economy undergoing fundamental changes. At the beginning of the twentieth century the agricultural sector was the biggest employer ; at the beginning of the twenty-first the service-providing sector employed the most people Technical progress has spurred productivity growth and raised living standards. The labor force increased enormously as the population grew and the labor force participation rate of women rose over the course of the last century. The development of new financial instruments helped people become financially secure and the expansion of the mortgage market has helped a record number of people own homes Given these large changes in the structure of the U.S. economy the nature of economic expansions has probably also changed over time. Enough time has now elapsed in the current expansion to allow fruitful comparisons with previous expansions. The key findings are : The last two expansions the one starting in and the current one are similar to each other but dissimilar to previous expansions Both have exhibited relatively moderate overall growth in key economic variables The last two expansions followed especially shallow recessions Generally shallow recessions are followed by shallow recoveries and deep recessions by robust recoveries Stabilization policy fiscal and monetary policy has been particularly active during the last recession and expansion. The boost to disposable income from fiscal policy has been especially strong. Without these strong policies the recession would have been deeper and longer Overview of the Current Expansion Chart plots the level of real GDP in the current expansion the expansion of the 1990s and the average of the five expansions from to The average provides a historical benchmark for the behavior of expansions ; the year is chosen as a starting point to balance the need to smooth behavior over multiple expansions with the need to recognize that changes in the nature of the economy over time make earlier expansions less comparable to current ones. In each expansion real GDP is normalized to at the trough of the preceding recession ( which is also the beginning of the expansion ) Dates of the troughs are determined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. In the chart each expansion begins at the vertical line at ; points to the left of that line occur during the preceding recessions. The slope of each line is related to GDP growth : steeper slopes imply bigger changes in the level of real GDP per quarter or faster growth | Economic Report of the President The behavior of real GDP is similar in the 1990s and current expansions but both are different from the average prior expansion. In particular real GDP has risen less robustly during the last two expansions than it did on average in the other expansions since In the average contraction prior to the level of real GDP reached its peak approximately four quarters before the eventual trough ; in the contraction GDP reached its peak two quarters before the trough There were no consecutive quarters of decline in the most recent contraction with revised data showing that real GDP dropped in the third quarter of and the first and third quarters of but grew in the intervening quarters Consumption The largest component of GDP real personal consumption expenditures shows a similar pattern ( Chart ) Consumption behavior during the last two expansions has been almost identical with the two recent expansions differing from prior expansions In the prior recessions on average consumption growth moderated starting six quarters before the recession s eventual trough did not actually fall until two quarters before the trough and began to rise in the quarter before the trough. In the recession consumption rose rapidly until two Chapter | quarters before the trough dropped sharply until the trough and mostly grew thereafter. The most recent recession stands out as different in that consumption continued to grow throughout. This likely reflects the important role of fiscal and monetary stimulus in supporting demand and the unusual extent to which the recession resulted from a collapse in investment following the bubble of the late 1990s Investment In an average expansion prior to total nonresidential investment started to rise at the business cycle trough but initially rose at a slower pace than consumption ( Chart ) In the expansion of the 1990s however investment continued to fall for four quarters after the trough and in the most recent expansion investment fell for five quarters after the overall economy had bottomed out Residential investment in the average of prior recessions began to drop eight quarters before the business cycle trough and rose quite sharply in the four quarters after the trough ( Chart ) The housing market has been strong in the current expansion though housing investment has been increasing at a more moderate pace than in expansions before This pattern is likely the result of the unusual circumstance in which residential investment did not falter along with the broader economy. In turn this lack | Economic Report of the President of faltering may be attributable to low mortgage rates and to the movement of households funds out of equities and into housing Real house prices have also behaved quite differently across the two most recent expansions. Real prices dropped throughout the expansion of the 1990s reaching a low in They have risen by a total of about percent since then. More than half of this increase about percent has occurred since The recent increases in house prices which have been particularly large in some urban markets have raised concerns that the housing market may be in a bubble. It is worth noting in this context that home equity as a share of net worth dropped during the 1990s as real stock prices rose rapidly while house prices fell for the first half of the decade. This share has been rising since the late 1990s but remains below its high of about percent reached in This rebalancing of portfolios pushing up the share of home equity in net worth closer to its historical norm raises the demand for housing. This increase in housing demand may thus be partly responsible for the recent run-up in house prices Exports At the beginning of the current expansion exports roughly matched the behavior of expansions prior to in which exports picked up relatively Chapter | slowly at the start of the expansion ( Chart ) An increase in the rate of growth of exports during the last year has moved their behavior closer to that of the 1990s expansion. The decline in exports during the most recent recession was particularly large relative to previous ones as economic growth among major U.S. trading partners slowed more than in most past business cycles ; in contrast exports continued to rise during the recession. Thus both recent recessions and expansions show anomalous behavior though in different ways Labor Market The behavior of the labor market was unusual in the most recent recession and the last two expansions. Before on average payroll employment started to decline about three quarters before a business cycle trough that is employment on average has continued to rise in the early part of recessions ( Chart ) In an average expansion employment begins to grow at the start of the expansion and reaches its previous peak three quarters after the trough. In the expansion of the 1990s however employment continued to fall for two quarters after the business cycle trough and did not reach its previous peak value until another six quarters had passed. In the most recent expansion employment continued to fall for seven quarters after the recession had ended and appears to be on track to reach its prerecession level by early Though both of the | Economic Report of the President most recent expansions have shown relatively weak employment growth they were also preceded by smaller declines in employment prior to the trough The recent behavior of productivity can account for much of the difference in employment growth ( Chart ) Productivity defined as output per hour worked had been growing in line with the rates seen in past expansions but then accelerated four to six quarters after the most recent trough. At quarters after a business cycle trough productivity is usually about percent above its value at the trough ; it is currently about percent above its trough value. During the most recent expansion productivity growth has averaged percent per year at an annual rate up substantially from the percent growth rate seen on average from to By contrast though the level of productivity growth was quite high during the 1990s at an annual growth rate of percent even three years after the trough the level of productivity was not as high relative to its trough value as had been the case in prior expansions. Hence current productivity growth particularly stands out In the short run greater productivity growth sets the bar higher for employment growth. With increased productivity a given amount of output can be produced with fewer hours worked so real GDP must grow more quickly for employment to grow. In the long run however higher productivity growth leads to higher income per person and will thus be expected to Chapter | be positive for employment growth. This is because part of the increase in output is distributed to workers in the form of higher real wages and benefits and part to owners of capital in the form of profits. The fraction of national income accorded to profits has risen in recent years with the share going to profits at percent in the third quarter of up from an average of percent during the 1980s and 1990s. The fraction accorded to wage payments and benefits has been approximately constant over longer periods of time. A return to the historical pattern would result in rising real wages The behavior of unemployment during the recent expansion though atypical when compared with expansions from the 1960s through the 1980s roughly matches the behavior of unemployment during the 1990s : a continued rise in unemployment after the beginning of the expansion followed by a gradual decline about a year later Summary The beginnings of the last two expansions have been characterized by moderate growth in key macroeconomic variables : real GDP consumption investment employment and unemployment. The beginning of the most recent expansion has seen slower growth in investment and employment than the last one. The pace of economic expansion picked up however in the | Economic Report of the President middle of The more moderate rate of employment growth is at least partly explained by unusually robust growth in productivity which further indicates higher future real wage growth. Unemployment rose by less than in the last recession and expansion. Both of the most recent expansions were preceded by relatively mild recessions : the drop in real GDP was relatively small and consumption did not drop at all in the most recent recession Symmetry in Recessions and Expansions The last two expansions though moderate were preceded by shallow recessions. Past recessions were deeper and subsequent expansions more rapid Together the two sets of observations suggest that the rate of expansion may be related to the rate of contraction. This section evaluates that hypothesis Real GDP Chart plots the total percent contraction in real GDP during all recessions since against the percent expansion in real GDP in the four quarters following the trough. The latter time period is chosen to allow a uniform standard of comparison across expansions. Each point is labeled by Chapter | the year corresponding to the start of the recession as dated by the National Bureau of Economic Research. A regression line is drawn through the points ; the position of the line is determined by a statistical procedure known as linear regression which tries to determine the best possible line by minimizing the squares of the sums of the vertical distances between each point and the line. The line provides the best estimate for how much of an increase in real GDP at the beginning of an expansion can be expected for a given decline in real GDP during a recession The graph confirms the hypothesis. For example the recession and its aftermath saw a sharp drop in real GDP followed by a sharp rise while the recession saw a shallow drop in real GDP followed by a shallow rise. The regression line is upward-sloping providing statistical evidence that shallow recessions were followed by initially shallow expansions and sharp recessions by initially sharp expansions. An inset on the graph indicates a correlation of about A correlation measures how closely two variables are related : a value of indicates that the variables move together perfectly indicates that the variables are unrelated and indicates that the variables move in opposite directions. A value of indicates a fairly strong relationship The most recent recessions and expansions have been fairly moderate Indeed real GDP actually rose over the course of the most recent recession ; this is true whether the last recession is dated to have started in the fourth quarter of or the first quarter of Components of Real GDP Given the symmetry in contractions and expansions of real GDP one would expect some if not all of GDP s components consumption investment government spending ( on consumption and investment ) and net exports to show a similar pattern. The behavior of two major parts of overall investment real investment in equipment and software and inventory investment most strongly matches that of real GDP The Labor Market The relationship between the drops in employment during contractions and the initial rises in employment during the subsequent expansions is even stronger than the relationship between GDP declines during recessions and GDP increases during expansions ( Chart ) Drops in employment during contractions and rises during expansions are smaller than many of the other variables we have seen ranging between a decline of percent and an increase of percent. The most recent contractions saw especially small declines in employment between percent and | Economic Report of the President percent. Employment continued to decline into the beginning of the expansions though by less than percent in each case. As noted above given the rises in GDP of over percent during the first year of each expansion the difference reflects strong productivity growth A Possible Explanation : The Financial Accelerator The charts above provide evidence that moderate recessions are followed at least initially by moderate expansions and sharp recessions by initially rapid expansions. This is seen most strongly in the behavior of real GDP and employment The largest component of GDP to follow the same pattern investment suggests a possible explanation for this relationship. Investment is positively correlated with GDP growth rising when GDP growth is rising and falling when GDP growth is falling. This relationship is known as the accelerator model of investment : higher GDP growth leads to more investment which in turn leads to even faster GDP growth. A shock that leads to a large decline in investment will thus cause an even larger decline in GDP growth. When that shock disappears and investment rebounds to its previous level GDP growth will also show a similar rebound Research over the past two decades on the role of financial markets in investment has provided an explanation for the relationship between investment and Chapter | GDP growth. To buy new capital goods firms rely on several sources of financing. These include internal funds such as retained earnings or capital infusions from firm owners and external funds such as the proceeds from loans and the sales of stocks and bonds. The amount of internal funds is related to the firm s cash flow. In response to a slowdown in sales cash flow will likely decline reducing the amount of internal funds and therefore increasing the amount a firm needs to obtain from external finance. But lenders will be less willing to loan funds to firms with smaller cash flow and the value of firms collateral is also likely to have decreased further reducing their ability to obtain loans. Hence firms might be forced to reduce their investment. This reduction in turn will lead to lower output lower cash flow and yet again lower investment leading to a further deceleration in output. The effect can work in reverse during economic expansions with rising GDP making it easier for firms to get financing for new investment projects. This theory provides a possible explanation for why changes in the amount of investment can have a multiplier impact on the broader economy The financial accelerator effect is roughly proportional to the size of the decline in GDP since the change in cash flow and the value of collateral would be expected to be roughly proportional to the decline in output. There is no consensus however about the magnitude of the accelerator effect. One study assessing the response of investment by firms to a monetary policy tightening both with and without a financial accelerator showed that the presence of an accelerator can cause the decline in investment to double compared to a situation in which there is no accelerator effect. Another study noted that small firms which are likely to be more limited in their ability to borrow than large firms show much larger declines in inventory and sales growth during recessions than do large firms. This finding further suggests an important role for the financial accelerator The accelerator theory can also provide a link between asset price bubbles and recessions and expansions. When the prices of equities or real estate rise the resulting increases in asset values raise the value of collateral making it easier for firms to obtain financing for investment thus further raising output growth. Conversely declines in asset values from the bursting of asset price bubbles can discourage investment Although the financial accelerator theory helps explain why on average the depth of the recession corresponds to the initial strength of the expansion the theory will not explain the behavior of all recessions and expansions Investment is affected by things other than output growth and as will be discussed more fully later in the chapter economic shocks can affect other components of GDP. In the most recent recession for example investment fell more rapidly than in the average recession but the fall in output was not particularly large. The solid growth in consumption boosted by expansionary monetary and fiscal policy helped reduce the fall in output | Economic Report of the President Summary Moderate recessions are followed by moderate expansions and sharp contractions by rapid recoveries. This may be a consequence of the financial accelerator model of investment in which firms ability to borrow is related to the growth rate of output Seen in this context the unusually moderate growth experienced at the beginning of the two most recent expansions seems less unusual since the preceding recessions were also relatively mild. This observation begs the question of why the most recent recessions were mild. One possibility is that stabilization policy may have been more active and more effective during the last two recessions and subsequent expansions. This hypothesis can be assessed by looking at the two components of fiscal policy taxes and spending and at monetary policy Stabilization Policy Before discussing specific details of stabilization policy it will be useful to review what is known about the causes of business cycles the effects of policy on economic activity and the resulting challenges to the development and implementation of effective policy Business Cycles : Causes Standard economic models suggest that long-run growth of real GDP is an outcome of technological progress the accumulation of capital and growth in the labor force. The models also suggest that either a larger labor force with a fixed capital stock or a larger capital stock with a fixed labor force will produce smaller and smaller additional amounts of output a phenomenon known as diminishing returns. Hence capital accumulation alone and increases in the labor force alone will eventually result in higher levels of output but slower rates of output growth In the very long run output will grow only if technological progress enables the production of more output for a given amount of capital and labor. In the short run various shocks unexpected events that cause large changes in the demand or supply of goods can lead to recessions and expansions. The recessions and expansions can be seen as deviations from the long-run growth path Economic shocks can be divided into disturbances that affect aggregate demand and those that affect aggregate supply. Aggregate demand is the economy-wide demand for goods and services. It consists of consumer spending investment government purchases and net exports ( exports less Chapter | imports ) Aggregate supply is the economy-wide supply of goods and services. Equilibrium in the economy occurs when aggregate demand equals aggregate supply Shocks that depress aggregate demand tend to lower output lower employment ( that is raise unemployment ) and put downward pressure on prices. For example a decline in stock prices could lead to lower consumption spending. Shocks that raise aggregate demand have the opposite effect ; they raise output raise employment ( lowering unemployment ) and put upward pressure on prices. For example greater optimism by firms about the state of the economy could lead to higher investment spending. Research has found that shocks to aggregate demand tend to affect output first rather than prices but that these effects are temporary lasting only a few years. However such disturbances have long-lasting effects on the levels of prices and wages. That is an increase in demand will lead to a temporary boost for output but a permanent rise in the price level ( though not necessarily the inflation rate ) Shocks to aggregate supply in contrast tend to move output and prices in opposite directions. A beneficial shock to aggregate supply such as a rise in productivity raises output lowers unemployment and puts downward pressure on prices. An adverse shock to aggregate supply such as an increase in the price of energy has the opposite effects. To the extent that aggregate supply disturbances influence the determinants of long-run growth the accumulation of capital the supply of labor and technological progress supply shocks can also have long-lasting even permanent effects on the level and growth rate of output Economic Policy The tools available to policymakers to affect the economy over a short horizon ( up to a few years ) can be divided into fiscal policy and monetary policy. Fiscal policy involves decisions about taxes transfers ( such as unemployment insurance Social Security or Medicare payments ) and government purchases of goods and services. Changes in all of these affect aggregate demand. In the short run lower taxes or higher transfer payments can lead to higher disposable incomes and thereby boost consumption spending Government purchases directly affect spending and support aggregate demand The effects of tax cuts may depend on the expected duration of the cut. A prominent theory of consumption the life-cycle/permanent-income hypothesis argues that people choose their consumption to be in line with their expected lifetime resources. To the extent they are able people keep their consumption constant over drops in income that are expected to be temporary by borrowing or using their savings. Expected temporary increases in income should be saved rather than consumed. Only sustained changes in income would translate into equal-sized changes in consumption. Under this theory | Economic Report of the President permanent cuts should permanently raise consumer spending as consumers would view disposable income as permanently higher while temporary tax cuts should only be saved. But even temporary cuts could boost spending however if people can not spend as much as they would like or need to due to constraints on their ability to borrow Tax changes can also increase the incentives for investment boosting the investment part of aggregate demand. Some tax changes can also raise aggregate supply by for example boosting incentives for labor supply or permanently increasing the incentives to accumulate capital or by removing distortions. These changes would be expected to augment the long-run growth rate of the economy Monetary policy in the United States is conducted by the Federal Reserve Board s Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) The FOMC targets a short-term interest rate the Federal Funds rate the rate at which banks make overnight loans to one another. This interest rate in turn influences other short-term and long-term nominal and real ( inflation-adjusted ) interest rates in the economy. In turn these interest rates affect interest-sensitive components of aggregate demand such as investment and consumption of durable goods ( goods used for long periods such as refrigerators and cars ) These components of demand are especially affected by changes in interest rates because firms often need to borrow to make investments and consumers need to borrow to purchase durable goods. Low real interest rates raise aggregate demand by boosting consumption and investment ; high real rates reduce aggregate demand. The effects of monetary policy on output and other real variables will generally be temporary. In the long run the output effects of the changes in aggregate demand caused by monetary policy largely disappear leaving effects only on the level of prices Research suggests that price stability a low and stable rate of inflation may have important effects on aggregate supply and might therefore be conducive to GDP growth. High and widely-varying rates of inflation create substantial amounts of uncertainty about real rates of return making it difficult for people to make decisions about investment Policy Design : Challenges Policymakers use the elements of monetary and fiscal policy to try to reduce the size of economic fluctuations. Making recessions more moderate helps people by decreasing the amount of unemployment and limiting the amount of real income loss. Restraining expansions to sustainable levels reduces the risks of high inflation. Such policy is often called countercyclical since the aim of the policy is to moderate the business cycle There is a broad consensus on the mechanisms by which fiscal and monetary policy affect the macroeconomy but less agreement about the timing and Chapter | magnitude of their effects. Fiscal policy changes especially tax policy changes can work fairly rapidly. For example a temporary investment incentive can cause firms to move investment forward and undertake projects now instead of in the future. But enacting such a policy through the legislative and executive branches of the government can take time. Monetary policy can be changed more quickly as the FOMC has eight scheduled meetings per year and can meet more often if economic conditions warrant. In contrast to fiscal policy however it takes time for interest-rate changes to affect spending because investment plans take time to adjust to changing financial conditions This uncertainty about the duration and magnitude of policy effects means that policymakers considering changes in fiscal or monetary policy must forecast future aggregate demand and supply disturbances and their impact. For example a policymaker considering a tax cut must think about the state of the economy in six months and beyond when the tax cut will have its initial impact. The same is true for monetary policy in which it can take even more time for policy changes to have an impact. Economic forecasting is inherently difficult. It is not easy to determine the state of the economy even six months out. Economic shocks are by definition unexpected. New kinds of shocks can make predictions even more difficult. For example the oil-price shocks of the 1970s were likely hard to forecast since such sharp increases had not been observed in the past Successful execution of policy requires not only choices about the type and extent of policy but also about timing and duration. While these are all difficult decisions to make there is evidence that there has been improvement over time. Technological improvements and economic research have allowed economists and policymakers to get more and better data more quickly on the state of the economy. Economic models have improved as new ideas are developed and some older ideas fail the test of time. Computers have allowed the simulation of more alternative policy scenarios. Policymakers learn from the past The following sections compare the behavior of fiscal and monetary policy across recessions and expansions since to assess differences in the application and effects of policy over time Fiscal Policy The two components of short-run fiscal policy taxes and government spending ( consumption and gross investment ) show different behavior across economic expansions. The following subsections consider each in turn Taxes The President signed three major tax bills into law between and : the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act ( EGTRRA ) in June the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act ( JCWAA ) in March | Economic Report of the President and the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act ( JGTRRA ) in May A fourth bill the Working Families Tax Relief Act ( WFTRA ) signed in October extends some provisions of the previous bills These bills described in further detail in Chapter Options for Tax Reform and in the Economic Report of the President were designed to boost both aggregate demand and aggregate supply. The aggregate demand effects came in several parts. First tax cuts to individuals raised real disposable income ( real income less taxes ) and thereby supported consumption Second the tax cuts provided incentives for investment both by lowering tax rates on personal capital income and by increasing the amount of investment allowed to be expensed by businesses. The investment incentives were also designed to have long-term effects on aggregate supply by increasing the amount of capital accumulation The impact of the boost to aggregate demand can be assessed by plotting the growth of real income and real disposable income across expansions ( Chart ) During the first three years of an average expansion disposable income growth is only slightly larger than personal income growth suggesting that tax policy provides only a small boost. In the 1990s expansion there was essentially no difference between real income growth and real disposable Chapter | income growth. Tax policy neither stimulated nor contracted demand. In contrast the difference has been quite large in the most recent expansion After-tax income has grown at a much faster rate than before-tax income The timing of policy also likely helped stabilize the economy which was facing multiple contractionary forces in and The first tax relief act was passed in the middle of the recession so households received tax-cut checks at an opportune time. Indeed the decline in the personal saving rate as a fraction of income indicates that on average people were spending boosting aggregate demand. The incentives for investment also included in the tax relief act were important in light of the particularly sharp drop in investment during the last recession Government Spending ( Consumption and Gross Investment ) Government spending ( consumption and gross investment ) ( Chart ) on average tends to rise as the economy goes into recession and continues to rise during the beginning of the subsequent expansion. In the 1990s expansion however government spending flattened out and began to decline. In the most recent expansion government spending rose at a faster rate than average providing a bigger boost to aggregate demand. A significant portion of this additional spending is attributable to increased defense and homeland security spending | Economic Report of the President Federal government revenues had been affected by both the recession which had been under way for some time before the terrorist attacks of 9/11 and the subsequent moderate growth of output during the initial phase of the expansion. About half of the change in the Federal government s fiscal position from a surplus in fiscal year to a deficit in fiscal year was attributable to the weaker economy and related factors. Just under a quarter of the decline is attributable to increased spending principally related to defense and homeland security and a little more than a quarter of the decline is attributable to the tax cuts While it is undesirable to have government deficits they are sometimes a prudent price to pay for stimulating economic growth. Without aggressive fiscal policy during the most recent recession and recovery the large number of severe shocks facing the economy might well have caused the recession to have been much longer and deeper than it actually was possibly further exacerbating the deficit. In contrast reducing the deficit by reversing the tax cuts would have caused growth to slow even further Fiscal policy provided significant stimulus during the most recent recession and recovery through both lower taxes and increased spending Real government spending increased during the recession and then remained at roughly its trough level for the next year before beginning to decline. Hence spending provided only modest stimulus at the beginning of the 1990s expansion Monetary Policy Low real interest rates help stimulate real GDP growth by boosting investment and purchases of consumer durables thereby raising aggregate demand ; high real rates likewise reduce real GDP growth. The Federal Reserve s principal policy tool the Federal Funds rate influences other nominal and real interest rates. When the real ( inflation-adjusted ) Federal Funds rate is low monetary policy will be stimulative ( sometimes referred to as accommodative or loose policy ) When this rate is high monetary policy will restrain real GDP growth ( sometimes referred to as tight monetary policy ) Low and high are both relative terms. In principle it would be best to compare the real Federal Funds rate with whatever interest rate would make policy neither loose nor tight. This rate can be thought of as the long-run equilibrium rate the economy would tend to move toward as the effects of economic shocks wear off. In practice this equilibrium rate is not observed. But over long periods of time the economy tends to drift back to its long-run equilibrium ; hence the average level of the real Federal Funds rate over a long period of time can provide a useful though necessarily imperfect approximation for the equilibrium rate Chapter | In Chart the solid line plots the nominal Federal Funds rate ; the dots plot the expected real Federal Funds rate obtained by subtracting a biannual survey measure of inflation expectations ( the Livingston survey ) from the nominal rate. The chart suggests that the real Federal Funds rate tends to fall during recessions and rise during expansions exactly what would be expected from countercyclical monetary policy. But the timing of interest-rate changes relative to the recessions and expansions has changed over time. First declines in the real Federal Funds rate have occurred longer before the beginning of the last two recessions than before the other recessions after In some prior recessions real rates began to decline only after the recession began. Since it can take time for real interest rate changes to affect spending earlier actions by the Federal Reserve can reduce the depth of recessions. Second real rates have remained low during the last two expansions for longer than during previous expansions. The real Federal Funds rate has been well below its long-run average since the beginning of This would be expected to have provided additional stimulus at the beginning of the recovery and into the expansion During the course of the Federal Reserve raised its target for the nominal Federal Funds rate from percent to percent. Although these increases in the nominal rate also meant an increase in the real rate the real rate still remains well below its long-term average | Economic Report of the President Fiscal policy played an especially important role in moderating the last recession and in supporting the subsequent economic expansion. During the most recent set of interest-rate cuts the nominal Federal Funds rate was reduced to percent possibly leaving the Federal Reserve with reduced ability to provide additional stimulus. The Federal Reserve could have used other means of further easing policy. For example it could have tried to target a long-term interest rate by buying or selling long-term bonds. Since long-term rates remained well above zero such a policy would have given the Federal Reserve additional room to carry out further easing. The efficacy of this and other nontraditional policy methods is unproven In sum monetary and fiscal policy together likely explain a significant part of the relative stability of the economy over the last two recessions and expansions ( see Box for further discussion ) Box : Is the Economy More Stable ? The relative moderation of the last two business cycles raises the possibility that the economy may be becoming more stable generally In the years since World War II a visible shift in the volatility of the growth rate of real GDP occurred in the early 1980s ( Chart ) Does this indicate a change in the nature of the business cycle and if so what caused the change ? Chapter | Box continued A variety of reasons have been offered to explain this shift. One possibility is that more active and more effective stabilization policy had moderated economic fluctuations. Another is that the economy has had a run of good luck ; it has not experienced the same kinds of macroeconomic disturbances seen in earlier years such as the oil-price shocks seen in the 1970s and 1980s. Events of the past few years such as the terrorist attacks of 9/11 and the bursting of the high-tech bubble of the 1990s however were significant shocks. The decline in volatility could also be largely attributable to better inventory management. This could be the result of the adoption of just in time methods in which goods are manufactured and supplied on demand. Yet another possibility is that an increasing proportion of the economy is now in the service sector which has tended to be more stable than the goodsproducing sector. It is likely that all of these effects have worked together to reduce volatility Conclusion Since the late 1980s recessions and the initial stages of expansions have become more moderate. Some of this change reflects the general positive relationship between the size of recessions and size of expansions which is caused at least in part by the relationship between firms abilities to invest and the state of economic activity ( the financial accelerator ) The recent recessions and expansions have been especially moderate suggesting the economy has become more stable in general. Part of this stability is likely attributable to more active and timelier stabilization policy | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R Options for Tax Reform T he current Federal tax system is unnecessarily complex and distorts incentives for work saving and investment. As a result it imposes large burdens on taxpayers and on the U.S economy as a whole in the form of high compliance costs and distortions in economic decisions Tax reform could make the tax system simpler and fairer and promote growth of the economy. Various tax reform proposals have been made to replace the current tax system. Most of these proposals are variations on a few basic types of taxes. This chapter discusses these basic prototypes for reform The President has not endorsed any specific proposal and this chapter does not advocate the adoption of any particular prototype for reform The key points in this chapter are : The current tax system imposes high costs on society in addition to the taxes actually collected Income taxes and consumption taxes are the primary alternatives for raising government revenues The main types of consumption taxes are the retail sales tax the value added tax the flat tax and the consumed income tax While the tax system could be completely redesigned important benefits could also be obtained through simplification and reform of the current tax system Why Do We Need Tax Reform ? People often think of the tax burden in terms of the dollar amounts of taxes paid but this is only part of the total burden. The tax system also imposes two indirect burdens : the costs ( in time and money ) of complying with tax rules and the costs ( including slower economic growth ) of tax-induced distortions of economic activity. Although all tax systems impose direct and indirect costs such costs are unduly high under the current system The Direct Burden of the Tax System : Taxes Paid As measured by the revenues collected the direct burden of Federal taxes is estimated to be $ trillion or percent of GDP in fiscal year ( Table ) This percentage is less than the average of about percent for the last years because of the effects of the recession and of temporary TABLE Sources of Federal Revenues Fiscal Year Billions of dollars Source Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance receipts........................................... Excise taxes................................................................ Estate and gift taxes Customs duties Miscellaneous receipts............................................... Total Percent of total revenues Percent of GDP Note : Detail may not add to totals because of rounding Source : Office of Management and Budget Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year economic stimulus provisions that expired at the end of December but is projected to return to the historical average under proposed policies. The largest share of revenues ( over percent ) comes from taxes on income and its components : the individual income tax ( percent ) payroll taxes for Social Security and other social insurance programs ( nearly percent ) and the corporate income tax ( percent ) Even when state and local taxes are included the United States relies more on taxes on income than most other developed countries ( Table ) Over percent of taxes imposed by all levels of government in the United States are individual income corporate profit and payroll taxes compared to the percent average for all Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) countries. The United States relies much less on taxes on consumer goods and services ( under percent ) than other countries ( percent average ) Much of this difference reflects higher total tax burdens in other OECD countries which generally impose value added taxes ( VATs ) on sales of goods and services in addition to income and payroll taxes TABLE Comparison of Tax Revenues : United States G-7 and OECD [ Includes subnational governments ] Revenue source United Canada States France Germany Italy Japan United OECD Kingdom average Percent Total revenue as percent of GDP Revenue by type as percent of total : Income and profit.............................. Social security and payroll................ Property and wealth Goods and services Other Includes taxes on real estate net worth estates inheritances and gifts Note : Detail by type may not add to percent because of rounding Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) Revenue Statistics | Economic Report of the President High Compliance Costs The complexity of the U.S. income tax is legendary ( Box ) and it leads to high compliance costs for taxpayers and the government The costs of the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) administering the tax system and monitoring compliance are about percent of revenues. But these are just a small part of the compliance costs associated with the tax system which are estimated to be as much as percent of revenues. The complexity of the current system imposes substantial burdens on taxpayers in time and money spent to prepare and file tax returns maintain tax-related records read and understand instructions engage in tax planning and for more than half of individual taxpayers pay a tax preparer. The IRS estimated that for tax year individual taxpayers spent billion hours on tax compliance an average of hours per return. Assuming a value of $ to $ per hour for Box : Complexity of the Current System The current tax system includes many provisions that duplicate or conflict with each other and that are unnecessarily complicated. Some examples of complexity affecting large numbers of taxpayers are : There are approximately different kinds of special retirement or special purpose savings accounts under the tax system. Each has its own rules and participation in one of them can affect whether an individual can participate in another Numerous phaseout provisions intended to limit tax benefits to lower-income taxpayers require additional calculations and create high marginal tax rates in the phaseout range. Two such provisions apply to the taxation of Social Security benefits Tax complexity is not just the bane of the wealthy. The Earned Income Tax Credit which provides a subsidy to the working poor and is a basic element of our national income support system has pages of instructions and complex eligibility requirements The Alternative Minimum Tax ( AMT ) requires taxpayers to calculate their income taxes twice once under regular tax rules and a second time under AMT tax rates and rules. By more than one in five taxpayers will have to calculate the AMT and pay it if it is higher than their regular tax Over million dependents have to file income tax returns each year. Many of them are teenagers with jobs or young children who have modest amounts of investment income. The so-called Kiddie Tax applies to a much smaller number of dependent filers but involves complex rules and can result in very high marginal tax rates in certain cases Chapter | taxpayers time and adding the $ billion spent on tax preparers computer software and similar expenses results in a total estimated individual compliance cost between $ billion and $ billion. Burdens vary substantially among taxpayers. For example taxpayers with self-employment income spent almost hours preparing returns. Other taxpayers spent an average of hours but more hours if they filed the Alternative Minimum Tax ( AMT ) form Effects on Behavior and Excess Burden The third type of burden imposed by the tax system called excess burden arises when high tax rates reduce incentives for work saving and investment distort economic decisions and divert resources from productive activity into tax avoidance. Excess burden means that it costs the economy more than one dollar to raise one dollar in revenue. High excess burden ultimately reduces economic growth and lowers living standards. This section examines the evidence of the effects of high tax rates on economic behavior and how these effects translate into measures of excess burden Tax Effects on Individual Behavior An individual s after-tax return from increased work effort saving or investment depends on the individual s marginal tax rate the tax rate that applies to the last dollar of the individual s income. For example the after-tax return from earning one additional dollar is $ for a taxpayer in the percent tax bracket. By reducing after-tax returns high marginal tax rates reduce incentives for additional work effort. The same principle applies to saving and other economic activities A variety of statistical studies have found that high income tax rates adversely affect labor supply particularly for certain segments of the population. The income tax rate reductions in the 1980s significantly increased the labor force participation and hours of work of high-income married women with a total increase in labor supply of as much as percent. The effects were much smaller for men ( up to percent ) and for female heads of households ( up to percent ) Some economists argue that these studies understate the effects of taxes on labor supply because they do not include tax effects on the intensity of work effort career choice and investments in human capital ( such as education ) which are more difficult to measure In addition to reducing the numbers of hours they work taxpayers respond in many other ways to avoid the effects of high tax rates. For example taxpayers take their compensation in nontaxable forms such as health insurance and alter their portfolios to focus on tax-favored investments. The total effect of such responses is summarized by the responsiveness of taxable income to changes in marginal tax rates. While the results vary among studies | Economic Report of the President a reasonable estimate is that a percent decrease in after-tax returns leads to about a percent decrease in taxable income. Thus for example if the marginal tax rate was increased from percent to percent this would reduce after-tax returns by percent. Taxpayers behavioral responses would reduce taxable income by percent ( times percent ) and this would reduce the addition to revenue by nearly percent Tax Effects on Business Behavior Businesses can respond to taxes in various ways including changing their level of investment and employment their method of finance and their organizational form. Current law distorts many business decisions resulting in inefficient use of resources and reduced economic output Some of the largest distortions are associated with the corporate income tax. This tax results in corporate income being taxed once under the corporate income tax and then a second time at the individual level when received as dividends or when reinvested earnings result in taxable capital gains. This double taxation of corporate income favors financing investment with debt instead of equity because interest paid by the corporation on its debt is deductible while dividend payments to shareholders are not Double taxation of corporate income also creates a bias in favor of using business forms not subject to the double tax such as partnerships sole proprietorships limited liability companies and subchapter S corporations. The double tax also discourages paying dividends. As a result prior to the reductions in dividend tax rates dividend payments by corporations had declined since the 1980s ( Box ) Current tax law also distorts decisions about investment in equipment and buildings. Under an income tax proper measurement of income requires that the cost of investment in new equipment be depreciated by deducting the decreases in economic value over the useful life of the investment sometimes called economic depreciation. Current depreciation rules however differ significantly from an ideal measure of economic depreciation leading to biases among investment choices. For example if a company chooses offices with plaster walls it would have to depreciate those walls over years. But because cubicle partitions are considered to be office furniture under IRS rules they can be depreciated over years. Thus the tax law favors the purchase of cubicle partitions because the faster tax write-off saves the company money Other research has shown the adverse effects of high tax rates on entrepreneurial activity. Several studies examined the response of small businesses to the tax reductions of the 1980s and found that when income tax rates were reduced entrepreneurial businesses grew faster were more likely to invest in new equipment and structures and were more likely to hire additional workers Chapter | Box : The Initial Effects of the Reductions in Tax Rates on Dividends Corporate income is taxed twice first under the corporate income tax and then a second time under the individual income tax as dividends or capital gains. Consequently the total Federal tax rate on corporate income can be very high. For example in the total Federal tax rate on a dollar of corporate income paid out as a dividend could be as high as percent ( calculated as the percent corporate rate plus an individual tax rate of up to percent on the cents of after-tax corporate income available for dividends ) State income taxes add to this total Economists are in broad agreement that this system creates serious economic distortions. Indeed historically the United States was almost alone among advanced countries in failing to provide some form of relief from double taxation of corporate income. A key provision of the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of ( JGTRRA ) reduced the double tax by reducing the individual income tax rates for both dividends and capital gains Proponents of JGTRRA argued that it would lead to more dividends being paid by corporations. Was this prediction correct ? One study reported that in the first three months after the law was passed corporate boards of directors increased dividends by percent at their first opportunity following enactment. A subsequent study found that the percentage of publicly traded firms paying dividends began to increase precisely when the new law became effective in This percentage had been declining for more than years. The study found that nearly firms started paying dividends after the tax cut adding more than $ billion to total quarterly dividends. The most notable example of a company initiating payments is Microsoft Corporation which previously had not paid dividends in spite of accumulating large cash reserves. Many firms already paying dividends raised their regular dividend payments and a smaller number of firms made special one-time dividend payments to shareholders Overall the response has been unprecedented in the recent history of tax changes. Based on statistical analysis of the historical relationships between dividends and tax rates another study estimated that over time dividends will increase by percent about $ billion in additional annual dividends at levels | Economic Report of the President Excess Burden Because taxes distort economic decisions and lead to inefficient use of resources they cause reductions in economic welfare that exceed the amount of tax collected. These costs above and beyond the revenues collected are called the excess burden of the tax system. Higher marginal tax rates lead to more distortion in behavior and therefore to greater excess burden. In addition the more responsive taxpayers are to higher marginal tax rates the greater the excess burden will be. A recent study estimated that the excess burden associated with increasing the individual income tax by one dollar is to cents In other words the total burden of collecting $ in additional income taxes is between $ and $ not counting compliance costs Income Taxation Versus Consumption Taxation The main bases available for Federal taxation are income and consumption Economists define income as the increase in an individual s ability to consume during a period of time. By this definition anything that allows a person to consume more is income including compensation for services interest rents royalties dividends alimony and pensions. This broad measure of income also includes noncash benefits such as health insurance provided by an employer and increases in the value of stock and other assets. While the base of an income tax is the increase in potential consumption ( i.e. income ) a consumption tax applies only to the portion of income that individuals actually consume Tax reform proposals generally follow either the principle of taxing consumption or the principle of reforming the existing system to conform more closely to a pure income tax. In thinking about this distinction it is important to note that the current system already has many features of a consumption tax : investment income is exempt from tax when it is saved in certain forms such as IRAs ; unrealized capital gains are not taxed ; and small businesses can immediately deduct the cost of a certain amount of new investment as would be the case under a consumption tax. Thus characterizing the current system as an income tax is something of a misnomer ; it is more of a hybrid between an income tax and a consumption tax Before turning to the main prototypes in the following section this section examines the choice between income and consumption taxation from the standpoint of key criteria for evaluating a tax system : fairness growth and simplification Chapter | Fairness A traditional standard for fairness is that taxes should be levied according to individuals ability to pay. Thus proponents of income taxation argue that it is fair because income best reflects the ability to pay taxes. In addition a common view is that individuals with higher incomes should pay a greater proportion of their income in taxes the tax system should be progressive. As shown in Box the current income tax system is highly progressive Box : What Is the Current Distribution of the Tax Burden ? A major criterion for judging a tax system is whether it is fair. One way to examine this question is to look at the shares of the tax burden borne by taxpayers in various parts of the income distribution. Nearly two-thirds of the total Federal tax burden is borne by the top percent of taxpayers. This includes individual and corporate income taxes payroll taxes and excise taxes but not the effects of temporary economic stimulus provisions that expired at the end of As shown in Chart the share of taxes of the top percent increased as a result of the tax cuts enacted since Another way to look at fairness is in terms of taxes as a percent of income. As shown in Chart Federal taxes take a larger share of income for higher-income groups both before and after the tax cuts | Economic Report of the President Box continued The bottom percent of the population received the largest percentage reductions in total Federal taxes ( Chart ) After the tax cuts the bottom percent of the population paid no income taxes and on balance received money back from the income tax system In summary the tax relief passed during the President s first term increased the overall progressivity of the Federal tax system Chapter | Critics of consumption taxes often argue that they are regressive that is they represent a higher proportion of the income of lower-income families Conventional analyses use an annual measure of income as a measure of ability to pay and assume that the burden is borne by consumers. They generally show that a proportional tax on consumption would be highly regressive Annual incomes however often vary substantially from year to year so one year s income may not be a good indicator of ability to pay. When a lifetime measure of income is used the regressivity of consumption taxes appears less pronounced Some studies question whether income is the most appropriate basis for measuring fairness. One reason for taxing consumption is the belief that it is a better measure of lifetime ability to pay than annual income. If so progressivity should be measured with respect to consumption rather than income and an inclusive flat rate consumption tax would be proportional by definition. In addition as discussed below there are ways to tax consumption while addressing concerns about distributional fairness. Furthermore increased economic activity from a more efficient tax system could be sufficient to improve the economic welfare of all income groups Finally when considering the fairness of taxes it is important to keep in mind that the ultimate burden of a tax is not necessarily borne by the taxpayer who writes the check to the government. In particular the burden of taxes paid by corporations is ultimately borne by individuals in their roles as stockholders workers and consumers. A common view of economists is that in the short run before there is time for economic adjustments the burden of increases in corporate income taxes is borne entirely by shareholders. Thus under this view most of the corporate income tax burden is borne in the short run by high-income households because the ownership of corporate stock is highly concentrated in high-income households. Over time however at least part of the burden of corporate taxes is likely to be shifted to owners of noncorporate businesses workers and consumers. Such shifting of tax burdens can significantly affect perceptions of the fairness of particular taxes For example the corporate income tax might be viewed as less fair if the burden is seen as resulting in lower long-run wages for workers rather than being incurred by well-to-do corporate shareholders Effects on Growth of the Economy Increasing economic efficiency and promoting growth of the economy are important goals for tax reform. A tax system that inflicts fewer distortions on economic decisions would improve the efficiency of the use of resources in the economy and thus improve the general welfare. One source of inefficiency is tax preferences that is provisions that provide more generous tax treatment of certain types of income and expenditures than would be accorded under a | Economic Report of the President more uniform or pure version of the tax. Such preferences cause investment funds to flow to tax-favored lines of business at the expense of potentially more productive investment and thus reduce the overall output of the economy Consumption tax proponents argue that a consumption tax would be more conducive to growth than an income tax even in the absence of tax preferences. A consumption tax would be more neutral with respect to investment decisions since new investments would be immediately deductible ( expensed ) As noted above the current income tax is not neutral among investments and it is inherently more difficult to achieve neutrality under an income tax. By removing the tax on the returns to saving and investment a consumption tax would increase saving and investment. Over time this would increase the stock of capital. With a larger stock of capital workers would be more productive and output and wages would rise. Some recent research estimates that changing to a tax on consumption could increase the net national saving rate by to percent after a year and by to percent after years depending on the type of tax adopted. National output per capita would decrease by percent or increase by up to percent after a year and increase by to percent after years. The research suggests that wages would increase by to percent after years Reform of the income tax could also promote economic growth. Income tax reform could lead to a more uniform broad-based low-rate income tax that would reduce distortions in economic decisions. The above research suggests that such an income tax reform would increase the saving rate by percent after one year and by percent after years and that national output per capita would increase by percent after one year and by percent after years However even if there are long-run economic gains from a tax reform proposal these must be weighed against the costs of transition from the current tax system to the new one. Taxpayers would incur costs adjusting to compliance under a new system and the IRS would incur start-up costs developing rules forms and administrative procedures. In addition major tax reform could result in significant gains or losses for some taxpayers when the prices of assets change. If losers were to be fully compensated for their losses the potential gains from reform would be reduced. None of the preceding analysis implies that tax reform should not be undertaken. Rather the key point is that transition issues need to be taken into account when assessing the costs and benefits of the various reform proposals Finally tax reform could impose large transition costs on state and local governments. Some tax reform proposals call for repeal of Federal income taxes. Since most state income taxes rely on the Federal tax as a starting point states would either have to find another source of revenue or administer their income taxes on their own. Other proposals would impinge on the traditional state reliance on sales taxes by adding a Federal tax on this base Chapter | Simplification Proponents of consumption taxes argue that they would be simpler than income taxes. Some consumption tax prototypes such as a national retail sales tax or a value added tax would be simpler for individuals because the point of collection would be shifted from individuals to businesses. This feature is not unique to consumption taxes however because it would be possible to design a comprehensive income tax that could be collected at the business level Consumption taxes would also be simpler because allowing immediate deduction for all purchases would eliminate the need to keep track of depreciation deductions over time and to make distinctions among various types of property. In addition the complexities associated with taxing capital gains would be eliminated since capital gains are not part of a consumption tax base Proponents of income taxes point out that the current income tax system could be greatly simplified and that starting from scratch one could design a much simpler system. They also note that it is unfair to compare an idealized consumption tax with the current system. Thus either a consumption tax or a reformed income tax could be much simpler than current law but there may be some additional simplification potential under a consumption tax Tax Reform Prototypes The previous section examined some general issues of tax reform. This section considers the most prominent consumption tax prototypes and potential reforms of the current system. The President has not endorsed any specific proposal and this chapter does not advocate the adoption of any particular prototype for reform Consumption Tax Prototypes If tax reform takes the path of taxing consumption rather than income there are four basic types of consumption taxes to consider : the retail sales tax the value added tax ( VAT ) the flat tax and the consumed income tax. This section begins with a brief description of the four taxes and then discusses each in more detail The simplest consumption tax to understand is the retail sales tax which imposes tax liability when an individual purchases goods or services for consumption. Retail sales taxes are levied by most states and many local governments The starting point for thinking about value added taxes is to note that most goods are produced in stages. For example a farmer grows wheat and sells it to a miller who grinds it into flour and sells it to a baker and so on until a loaf of bread is delivered to a grocery store to be sold to consumers. Instead | Economic Report of the President of being collected all at once at the final sale to consumers the value added tax is levied on the value added to the good or service at each stage of its production. At each stage the tax base is receipts for the sale of goods and services less purchases of goods and services from other firms ( Box ) Box : The Equivalence of Sales Taxes and Value Added Taxes The retail sales tax and value added tax provide different methods of taxing the consumption of goods and services. Consider a simple example of bread produced and sold to households. A farmer grows wheat and sells it to a miller for $ The miller grinds the wheat into flour and sells it to a baker for $ The baker transforms the flour into bread and sells it to the grocer for $ The grocer sells the bread to consumers for $ Business Farmer.................................................................... Miller...................................................................... Baker...................................................................... Grocer Total....................................................................... Purchases $ Sales $ Value added $ % value added tax $ % sales tax $ Now consider a percent tax on consumption. Under the retail sales tax the grocer would compute the tax as percent of sales and owe $ to the government. The farmer miller and baker would not pay sales tax because they sold only to other businesses for resale A percent value added tax collects the same total revenue one step at a time as value is added to the product at each stage. The miller pays a VAT of $ calculated by subtracting purchases of $ from $ of sales and paying the percent tax rate on the difference of $ The other businesses would compute their tax in the same way The total tax would add up to $ the same amount as under the retail sales tax A European VAT ( called a credit-invoice VAT ) is calculated by imposing the tax on the full value and then giving a credit for VAT paid at the previous stages. The grocer would compute the $ VAT as percent of sales of $ ( or $ ) less tax credits of $ shown on the receipts for purchases of $ from the baker. The other businesses would compute their tax in the same way Consider what happens if the grocer fails to file and pay the amount of tax that is owed. Under the sales tax the full amount of tax is lost to evasion. But under the VAT only the tax on the last stage would be lost In addition the invoices at each stage provide a paper trail that helps improve compliance Chapter | Because the sum of value added at each stage equals the value of the final product taxing value added at each stage gives the same overall result as taxing final products at the retail level. Therefore the VAT is just another way of taxing the same base as the retail sales tax. From an economic standpoint they are equivalent The flat tax consists of a business tax and an individual level tax both of which use a single flat tax rate. Calculation of the business tax base begins with a computation like that of the VAT receipts less purchases from other firms. Next wages are deducted from the business tax base. If wages are then taxed at the same flat rate under the individual tax the result is the same as the VAT and retail sales tax. Therefore the key difference is that wages are taxed at the individual level rather than being included in the business tax base. This difference allows for building progressivity into the system by providing an exemption of say $ for a family of four Under a consumed income tax taxpayers would first calculate their income as they do under the current income tax. Then they would be allowed a deduction for any saving during the year. Since consumption is equal to income minus saving this too is a consumption tax These seemingly quite different taxes are equivalent ways of taxing the same base : consumption. As discussed in the following sections the choice among them is affected by various administrative and compliance issues as well as the availability of mechanisms for obtaining distributional fairness National Retail Sales Tax Sales taxes are levied by all but five states and provide nearly percent of state tax revenues. Most state sales taxes are levied at rates between percent and percent. Many states however exempt or apply a lower rate to food purchases prescription drugs and certain other necessities to improve the perceived fairness of the tax and also exempt most services Under a retail sales tax individuals would no longer have to file tax returns because taxes are remitted to the government only by retail businesses. This is an important feature of retail sales taxes and other transactions-based taxes which shift the burden of complying with the tax system from individuals to businesses. Since there would be many fewer tax filers proponents argue that total compliance costs would be much lower than under the current system Under a retail sales tax only final sales to consumers should be taxed since the intent is to tax consumption. Taxing business-to-business sales can result in cascading a situation in which the tax is imposed multiple times before the consumer level. Nevertheless states currently obtain about percent of their sales tax revenues from business-to-business sales although many business-tobusiness sales are exempted. The economic distortions associated with cascading can be severe at higher tax rates and thus a national retail sales tax | Economic Report of the President would have to differ from state taxes by not taxing such sales. A related problem is that it is sometimes difficult to distinguish final sales for consumption from sales for use in production. For example how would a store selling a computer know for certain whether it is being purchased for resale ( exempt ) for use in another business ( exempt ) or for home entertainment ( taxable ) ? This issue would arise with many dual-use products and services To replace a significant portion of Federal tax revenues tax rates for a national retail sales tax would have to be much higher than current state and local rates. The exact rate would depend on which Federal taxes were to be replaced and on whether education expenses prescription drugs medical expenses and other necessary goods and services would be taxed. Some recent research suggests that to replace revenues from the individual and corporate income taxes a national sales tax rate would have to be at least percent if the tax base were that of a typical state and business-to-business sales were exempt. Such high rates could create strong incentives for tax evasion and avoidance. Some tax economists believe that sales tax rates over percent could be problematic because of the incentive for evasion and avoidance Concerns about the impact of sales taxes on lower-income households could be addressed by exempting certain necessary goods and services or by providing a refundable tax credit sufficient to cover a certain amount of tax Exemptions and preferential rates to address equity concerns however increase the complexity of sales taxes and lead to uneven taxation of consumption. Refundable credits could require the filing of some type of tax return by lower income households. However this would defeat one of the main goals of the retail sales tax which is reducing administrative burdens on households. In any case both solutions would require higher tax rates to achieve a given amount of revenue. Uneven taxation and high tax rates would undermine a principal potential benefit of this type of reform : reducing economic distortions and promoting growth Value Added Tax ( VAT ) Value added taxes are used in all European Union countries and in more than countries around the world. European countries which generally adopted VATs in the 1960s or early 1970s typically impose a standard rate of to percent and a lower to percent or zero rate on products such as food and drugs. It is important to note that countries adopting VATs have not used them to replace income taxes ; they are in addition to individual and corporate income taxes VATs avoid the problem of cascading taxes by allowing credit for the VAT paid on purchases. European VATs also create a paper trail that is believed to improve compliance. In spite of these advantages VATs have not received serious consideration in the United States. Similar to the sales tax VATs are Chapter | viewed as regressive at least when annual income is used as the measure of ability to pay. Critics of the VAT are not mollified by the fact that it is possible to impose lower VAT rates on commodities such as food. Another concern is that VAT tax rates would tend to increase over time as has occurred in Europe because the VAT is such an efficient and largely hidden tax The Flat Tax Reducing the tax burden for low-income households is cumbersome under the sales tax and VAT because they are collected at the business level. One of the advantages of the flat tax is that it allows for progressivity by providing a personal exemption based on family size The exemption leads to a fundamental trade-off in designing a flat tax. A higher exemption level means more families at the bottom of the income scale pay no tax and the distribution of the tax burden is more progressive. But the higher the exemption the higher the tax rate required to raise any given amount of revenue. A higher rate reduces the anticipated gains in economic efficiency. The Treasury Department estimated in that a percent tax rate would be required to raise as much revenue as the individual and corporate taxes while keeping the Earned Income Tax Credit and exempting $ income ( at levels ) for a family of four The flat tax would be simpler than the current tax system. The individual tax is simple because it applies only to compensation for labor services and tax liability varies only with family size. The business level tax is simpler than the current corporate income tax. For example since all purchases are deductible immediately there is no need to keep track of depreciation deductions over a period of years or to distinguish between current expenses and capital costs The flat tax would also reduce the costs of tax planning. Applying the same tax rate to all types of businesses and to both individual and business income is important because it eliminates many opportunities for avoiding taxes by changing the organizational form of a business or by shifting income to entities subject to lower tax rates and deductions to entities with higher rates. The double tax on corporate income and the associated distortions would also be eliminated A pure flat tax would eliminate many popular deductions including those for home mortgage interest and charitable contributions. Retaining these deductions would require a higher tax rate and more complicated tax forms and thus lose some of the gains in economic efficiency and simplification. In addition some critics argue that even with a large exemption the flat tax is likely to shift tax payments away from the highest income groups and toward lower- and middle-income groups. Finally there would still be many complexities and opportunities for tax avoidance and evasion. Suppose for example that a business owner bought a computer for personal use. If the | Economic Report of the President owner claimed it was for business he or she could deduct the entire cost of the computer There are many variants of the basic flat tax idea. For example some proposals would allow for greater progressivity by using multiple tax rates in the individual tax. Other proposals would retain some deductions such as those for charitable contributions or mortgage interest. Each variation sacrifices some of the efficiency gains and basic simplicity of the flat tax to achieve other goals Consumed Income Tax Under a consumed income tax taxpayers first compute income as they do under the income tax. Then taxpayers are allowed an unlimited deduction for net saving during the year. A consumed income tax is comparable to a traditional IRA for which contributions are deductible and withdrawals are subject to tax but would have no limits on contributions or penalties on withdrawals To prevent taxpayers from simply borrowing money and claiming a deduction for putting the proceeds into a savings account any borrowing would be added to income and thus be taxable The consumed income tax offers more flexibility than the flat tax in allocating the burden among income classes because the individual tax base is broader and most proposals include a progressive rate structure. The primary disadvantage is complexity. It retains the complexity of the current system because taxpayers start by computing income as they would under current law. Then a second procedure to compute saving net of borrowing adds an additional layer of complexity Reform Within the Current System A change to any of the consumption tax proposals would scrap the current tax system and replace much or all of it with a new one. Businesses and individuals would have to learn how to comply with and best arrange their affairs under the new system. A new administrative apparatus would be required for some proposals. While sales taxes have long been used in this country and VATs in many other countries these are imposed at lower rates than would be required to replace all Federal revenues and are used along with rather than as replacements for income taxes Given the costs of transition to an entirely new tax system some proposals focus on reform within the current structure. Starting from the current system would reduce transition and adjustment costs and considerable benefits could be obtained by simplifying and rationalizing tax provisions that overlap or are otherwise overly complex. Advantages of the prototypes and the tax principles discussed above could guide the direction of reform Chapter | The Administration s tax program has already achieved significant reforms within the current system. Achievements include lowering marginal tax rates reducing the double tax on corporate income simplification and improved fairness for families. This section discusses possible additional reforms that would provide simplification improve fairness or promote economic growth Lower Tax Rates and Broader Base The principle behind the Reagan Administration s major tax reform in was to reduce tax rates and broaden the tax base by eliminating deductions and tax credits. The Tax Reform Act of was largely successful in this effort Individual income tax rates were collapsed into two rates percent and percent with the top rate falling from percent to percent. The corporate tax rate was reduced from percent to percent. Lowering rates reduced the distortions of the tax system and is often credited with increasing work effort and entrepreneurial activity and reducing tax avoidance activities The overall reform was revenue neutral and slightly progressive. Even though the top marginal tax rates were reduced progressivity was enhanced because high-income taxpayers lost many tax preferences While the achievements of the reform have eroded over time the basic principles of lower rates and a broader base benefited the economy and could be useful in guiding reform within the current system Rationalizing Saving Incentives Income taxes create a bias against saving because taxpayers who choose to save for later consumption have a larger total lifetime tax burden than those who do not save. To offset this bias current law includes a variety of provisions that promote saving. Some are targeted at individual saving for retirement some at employer plans for employee retirement and some at saving for specific purposes such as education and medical expenses The multitude of special purpose saving options encourages taxpayers to establish small pools of savings that can only be used for one purpose Taxpayers have less flexibility since saving intended for one purpose can not be used for another ( except by paying a penalty ) Taxpayers are likely to be unaware of all the options available frustrated trying to decide which options are best for them and confused by the detailed requirements. Since many incentives are available only to certain taxpayers the multitude of options may add to perceptions that the tax system is unfair because some taxpayers are eligible but others are not. Moreover the large number of special accounts may be an impediment for lower-income and less sophisticated taxpayers concerned about making the wrong choices which can have sizable penalties associated with them | Economic Report of the President The current set of saving incentives could be combined into a simpler system with one type of account for individual retirement saving one for employer-sponsored retirement saving and one for lifetime saving for anticipated future education health home purchases or other expenses. The President s budgets have included proposals for Retirement Savings Accounts ( RSAs ) Employer Retirement Savings Accounts ( ERSAs ) and Lifetime Savings Accounts ( LSAs ) Under these proposals and after a transition period the savings incentives of over percent of households would no longer be adversely affected by the tax system Double Taxation of Corporate Income Corporate income is taxed first at the corporate level and then a second time under the individual income tax as dividends or capital gains. The tax relief enacted in reduced the double tax by lowering individual income tax rates for both dividends and capital gains. The current provisions expire after however. Thus tax reform could include a permanent extension of current provisions or go further and completely eliminate double taxation of corporate income Depreciation Rules As discussed above the logic of an income tax requires that firms be able to deduct the amount by which their physical investments depreciate in value each year. Current law allows deductions for different types of equipment and buildings over nine recovery periods from to years. A Treasury Department report on depreciation concluded that the current system is based on outdated recovery periods does not account for new industries and technologies and favors some assets while penalizing others. As a result the system distorts investment decisions and results in an inefficient allocation of capital in the economy There are several approaches that reform could take. One option is to rationalize the current depreciation system to make it more neutral in its effects on investment decisions. An effort to bring depreciation rules closer to economic depreciation would raise a number of difficult measurement issues however Another approach would simplify the current system by reducing the number of recovery periods and grouping investments into broader categories A third approach is to increase investment incentives and move part way toward a consumption tax by increasing the generosity of depreciation allowances. For example a temporary bonus depreciation provision in the tax bill allowed taxpayers to deduct percent of the cost of an investment in the first year with the remaining percent of the cost to be deducted over the life of the investment. That is percent of the cost was deducted immediately as under a consumption tax while percent was Chapter | depreciated as under an income tax. First-year bonus depreciation was increased to percent in and These approaches have the potential to improve the allocation of capital and increase incentives for investment. The cost of increased incentives would have to be balanced against other objectives such as keeping income tax rates low The Alternative Minimum Tax ( AMT ) The AMT is a separate tax system requiring taxpayers to compute their income tax liability a second time under different rules and then pay the AMT if it is higher than the regular tax. As a result the AMT adds considerable complexity and dealing with it must be an important element of any tax reform. The predecessor to the current AMT was enacted in to ensure that high-income taxpayers with substantial amounts of tax preferences would at least pay a moderate sum in taxes. Unlike many income tax provisions Congress did not index the AMT for inflation. Later Congress increased AMT tax rates from percent to percent in and to percent and percent in With higher rates and no indexing for inflation it was only a matter of time before large numbers of taxpayers would be affected During the last several years Congress has passed several temporary measures to keep the number of AMT taxpayers from growing too rapidly. However under current law the number of taxpayers paying the AMT is expected to grow rapidly from million in to million by Most of the newly-affected taxpayers will not be those with the highest incomes. One study projects that under current law over half of all taxpayers with incomes of $ to $ ( in $ ) and percent of married taxpayers with two children in that income range will be subject to the AMT by Because taxpayers have to compute their taxes twice to see if they have to pay the AMT it is a major source of complexity. Further the lowest rate under the AMT is percent a higher rate than would otherwise be faced by middle-income families. Finally while some tax preferences are added back into the tax base many features of the AMT are inconsistent with sensible tax principles. For example some costs of earning income are not deductible and personal exemptions are treated as a tax preference under the AMT Alternatives for AMT reform include repeal or limiting its effect to highincome taxpayers by increasing exemption levels and lowering AMT tax rates Significant changes to the AMT would be costly however as various estimates suggest that the 10-year cost of full repeal would be nearly $ trillion Simplification Many provisions in the current tax system overlap conflict or are otherwise overly complex. The Congressional Joint Committee on Taxation and others have produced lists of such provisions. Elimination or simplification of such provisions could substantially reduce compliance burdens and distortions of | Economic Report of the President the current system. In addition some would broaden the tax base thus allowing for further reductions in tax rates An example of the potential for simplification was provided when Congress recently enacted legislation similar to an Administration proposal for a single definition of a dependent child in determining when taxpayers can claim several widely-used tax benefits. Previously five different standards for a dependent child applied under different tax provisions leading to confusion and inadvertent errors. This reform will benefit many lower- and middleincome households by providing a single set of rules and reducing burdensome record-keeping requirements While there are many complex provisions among the prime candidates for simplification are the capital gains rates affecting certain special types of gains taxes on dependent children with small amounts of investment income and provisions that phase out certain tax benefits at higher income levels Conclusion This chapter has examined problems of the current tax system and examined some of the major options for tax reform. The President has not endorsed any specific proposal. Well-designed reforms however should be able to simplify the system and enhance both fairness and economic efficiency Although tax reform has been discussed for many years it is a particularly pressing need at the current time. Increasing numbers of taxpayers will be affected by the alternative minimum tax which will be a major source of frustration and complexity. In addition the tax reductions enacted since will expire in a few years unless they are extended or a new reformed tax system is adopted. If these provisions are allowed to expire the result will be substantial increases in taxes on taxpayers in all income groups with the largest percentage increases being imposed on lower- and middle-income households. Taken together these looming problems provide a natural opportunity to rethink the entire system of taxation Chapter | | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R Immigration I n recent decades the United States has experienced a surge in immigration not seen in over a century. Immigration has touched every facet of the U.S economy and as the President has said America is a stronger and better Nation for it. Immigrants today come from countries around the world and work in diverse occupations ranging from construction workers and cooks to computer programmers and medical doctors Immigrants have settled in all parts of our Nation and have generally succeeded in finding jobs quickly helped in large measure by the flexibility of the U.S. labor market. One indicator of this success is that foreign-born workers in the United States have a higher labor force participation rate and lower unemployment rate than foreign workers in most major immigrant-receiving countries While flexible institutions may speed the economic integration of the foreign-born the distribution of the gains from immigration can be uneven Less-skilled U.S. workers who compete most closely with low-skilled immigrants have experienced downward pressure on their earnings as a result of immigration although most research suggests these effects are modest. Also communities contending with a large influx of low-skilled immigrants may experience an increased tax burden as immigrant families utilize publicly provided goods such as education and health care U.S. immigration policy faces a complicated set of challenges perhaps more so now than ever before. Policy should preserve America s traditional hospitality to lawful immigrants and promote their economic contributions. Yet these goals must be balanced with the Nation s many needs including the imperative for orderly and secure borders. These challenges have only grown in a post-9/11 world. The persistence of undocumented immigration and problems with employment-based immigration suggest that the United States needs to better enforce immigration laws and do more to address the demand for immigrant workers and the need for national security. The President s proposed Temporary Worker Program and increased funding for internal enforcement recognize these problems and would implement necessary reforms The key points in this chapter are : The flexibility of the U.S. labor market helps immigrants succeed A comprehensive accounting of the benefits and costs of immigration shows that the benefits of immigration exceed the costs Much immigration occurs outside the realm of immigration law ; a temporary worker program and better enforcement of current laws would be expected to result in many improvements including a reduction in the number of undocumented immigrants Immigration and Economic Growth Immigrants have contributed enormously to U.S. population and employment growth. The foreign-born have grown among all occupations and regions of the country and have spread beyond traditional immigrant centers and into areas where previously few immigrants had lived. Following common practice this chapter uses the terms immigrant and foreign-born interchangeably and adopts the Census Bureau s definition of foreign-born to mean any person who is in the United States legally or illegally who was not a U.S citizen at birth ( not born in the United States or of U.S. parents ) This usage differs from that of the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services which uses the term immigrant to refer to a subset of the foreign-born population namely lawful permanent residents ( see below for an explanation of the different immigrant categories ) Immigrants and Employment Growth The foreign-born are associated with much of the employment growth in recent years. Between and when total employment grew by million percent of the net increase was among foreign-born workers. That immigrants contributed so much to net employment growth is not surprising : immigrants contributed almost as much to growth in the working-age population ( percent ) as they did to growth in employment. Almost all employment growth among immigrants was among those who arrived in the United States between and ( Employment growth in this chapter is based on the Current Population Survey or household survey because it provides information on place of birth and citizenship status see Box in Chapter of the Economic Report of the President for a discussion of the payroll versus household surveys. ) While employment of the foreign-born grew among all occupations immigrant contributions to job growth were especially large in the service occupations and precision production craft and repair ( a category that includes mechanics repairers and construction workers ) ( Table ) In some occupations natives were leaving even as the foreign-born were entering. For instance employment of natives as operators fabricators and laborers fell by million between and while employment in such occupations grew by among the foreign-born. This should not be taken as evidence that the foreign-born displace native workers ; rather it reflects the fact that immigrants have made up all of the growth in the low-skilled workforce. As education levels rise among younger U.S. workers and older U.S workers retire the number of low-skilled natives is declining | Economic Report of the President TABLE Foreign-Born Share of Employment Growth by Occupational Category to Occupational category Employment growth Foreign ( thousands ) born as Foreign- percent Total of total born Total Executive administrative and managerial Professional specialty Technicians and related support Sales Administrative support including clerical..... Service ( ) Precision production craft and repair.......... Operators fabricators and laborers.............. ( ) Farming forestry and fishing ( ) Occupation examples ( ) Managers administrators Doctors scientists teachers Health and science technicians Salespeople cashiers Clerks secretaries bookkeepers Janitors kitchen workers grounds workers Mechanics construction workers Machine operators bus and truck drivers Farmers farm workers Not applicable Note : Since data in this table end with total growth here is less than the million increase mentioned in the text which is measured from to Data relate to persons aged and over Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Immigrants and Regional Growth Immigrants are not spread evenly across the United States but instead are concentrated within certain states and cities. In percent of the foreign-born lived in just four states : California New York Texas and Florida compared with only percent of natives. Fully percent of the immigrant population lived in the metropolitan areas of New York and Los Angeles alone compared with percent of the native-born. The foreign-born are concentrated in certain areas not only because of the economic opportunities in these regions but also because new immigrants often prefer settling in cities in which their fellow countrymen already reside. This enables new immigrants to live among people who share their language and culture as well as to use ethnic networks to find jobs and learn about life in the United States While recent immigrants continue to settle disproportionately in cities and states with large immigrant populations both recent and earlier waves of immigrants have increasingly pursued economic opportunities in areas where few immigrants had lived previously. From to some of the fastest job growth among the foreign-born took place in regions of the country where few immigrants had worked at the beginning of the period ( Chart ) In the East North Central region ( Indiana Illinois Michigan Ohio and Wisconsin ) for example immigrants accounted for percent of employment growth between and even though the foreign-born were only percent of workers in this region in compared to percent nationwide. Even in the East South Central states ( Alabama Kentucky Mississippi and Tennessee ) immigrants were only percent of workers in but accounted for percent of job growth during this period Chapter | Chart Foreign-Born Share of Employment Growth by Census Division to The foreign-born contributed percent of growth in employment from to < % to % to % % and over Note : Data relate to persons aged and over Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau Labor Statistics ) How Many Immigrants ? The foreign-born have contributed to population growth almost as much as they have contributed to employment growth. Population growth is the combination of natural growth ( births minus deaths ) and net immigration ( immigrants minus emigrants ) Since immigrants have constituted an increasing share of the rise in population. The U.S. population grew by million between and with percent of that increase from immigration By million residents of the United States had been born in other countries and the foreign-born share of the population had risen from percent in to percent in ( Chart ) Nonetheless as a share of the population the foreign-born are still less prevalent than at their peak in when they accounted for percent of U.S. residents Legal and Illegal Immigrants The million immigrants living in the United States can be divided into four groups : naturalized American citizens immigrants who have become citizens by passing a citizenship test and fulfilling other requirements ; permanent residents immigrants who have green cards and the legal right to reside permanently in the United States but have not become naturalized citizens ; temporary residents people admitted to the United States temporarily for a specific purpose including visitors students and temporary workers ( referred to as nonimmigrants by immigration authorities ) ; and undocumented | Economic Report of the President immigrants ( also called illegal or unauthorized immigrants ) people residing in the United States illegally The number of foreign-born in the United States is measured primarily through the decennial Census and since updated annually using the American Community Survey. The Census is believed to undercount the number of foreign-born especially among undocumented immigrants Taking into consideration the undercount in the undocumented immigrant population and other factors a study estimates that the foreign-born population was million or million higher than the official estimate. Chart illustrates this study s estimated breakdown of immigrants by their immigration status. Legal non-citizens are about percent of immigrants with million permanent residents and million temporary residents. An additional percent are naturalized citizens and the remaining percent are undocumented immigrants From Which Tempest-Tossed Shores ? When Emma Lazarus wrote The New Colossus in immigrants were overwhelmingly from Europe. Only a handful of immigrants were from Asia or Latin America. The situation is reversed today. Over half of the foreignborn population was born in Latin America ( Chart ) Of those from Latin America over two-thirds are from Mexico or Central America. The next Chapter | | Economic Report of the President largest group of immigrants was born in Asia with China the Philippines and India the most prevalent Asian countries of birth. An additional percent of the foreign-born come from Europe and the remaining percent were born in other areas of the world ( mainly Africa Oceania and Canada ) Immigrant Education and Earnings The foreign-born are disproportionately represented among those with little schooling. Over one-fifth of immigrants have less than nine years of education compared with only percent of the U.S.-born population ( Chart ) The foreign-born are also slightly overrepresented among people with an advanced degree ( a master s professional or doctoral degree ) : percent of the foreign-born but only percent of U.S. natives hold an advanced degree. This difference in advanced degrees is greater for men Although native- and foreign-born women are equally likely to hold an advanced degree percent of foreign-born men but only percent of native men have an advanced degree Schooling levels are correlated with region of origin. Immigrants from certain world regions tend to be highly educated while those from other world regions tend to have little schooling. For example percent of Asian-born men in the United States hold advanced degrees whereas only percent Chapter | failed to graduate from high school. In contrast only percent of male immigrants from Mexico or Central America have a master s degree or higher while percent completed less than nine years of schooling and an additional percent attended high school but did not graduate Partly as a result of lower average education levels the typical immigrant earns less than the typical native. In median immigrant earnings were $ per week or percent of the median earnings of natives ( Table ) Within education groups immigrants earn to percent of natives wages with the smallest earnings gap among college graduates. This earnings gap narrows over time as most immigrant cohorts experience faster earnings growth than natives with similar education TABLE Median Weekly Earnings by Educational Attainment Educational attainment Native-born Foreign-born Foreign-born as percent of native-born $ $ All levels............................................................................................. Less than a high school diploma High school graduate no college....................................................... Some college no degree College graduate................................................................................ Note : Data relate to full-time wage and salary workers aged and older Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) As a result of lower education levels and earnings and larger families immigrants are more likely than natives to be poor. In percent of immigrants were poor compared to percent of U.S. natives. Despite higher poverty rates immigrants are more likely to participate in the workforce than natives with percent of male immigrants with less than a high school education participating in the labor force compared to percent of their native counterparts. Among undocumented male immigrants percent are estimated to participate in the labor force The Role of Labor Market Institutions U.S. immigrants are much more likely to work than immigrants in most other industrialized nations a distinction which may in part be due to labor market institutions. Labor market institutions refer to the constraints that govern the employer-employee relationship including the policies that influence the firm s decision to hire and the worker s decision to work The demand for workers is influenced by the regulations that determine | Economic Report of the President employment costs including wage floors set by unions or the government non-wage costs such as payroll taxes and laws that limit turnover such as rules against firing workers. The supply of workers is likely affected by the institutions that provide welfare and unemployment benefits with more generous programs associated with fewer incentives to work and hence a lower labor supply or more unemployment The United States is regarded as having relatively flexible labor markets which allow individual employers and workers greater discretion in setting working conditions. This contrasts with highly-regulated labor markets in which wage-setting and benefits determinations are often centralized. This section compares the United States with some other Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) countries to see whether there is a correlation between the extent of labor market regulations and the unemployment rate of immigrants relative to natives Institutions and Immigrant Unemployment Labor market regulations influence the level and flexibility of wages and affect new workers chances of finding employment. In standard economic analysis unemployment results when total worker compensation the sum of wages and benefits exceeds the market rate. This happens either when compensation is fixed and can not fall in response to increased labor supply or when wage floors and mandated benefits set worker compensation at a level above the market rate. In both cases immigrants may be more likely than natives to be unemployed as a result If immigrants are less productive than natives then regulations that increase compensation for entry-level workers would be expected to affect foreign workers more than natives. Immigrants may be less productive on their initial arrival because they may lack the language skills educational background or institutional knowledge that natives can draw upon to enhance their job performance. A lower entry-level wage could compensate for these shortcomings and would be expected to be followed by faster wage growth as the immigrant learns new skills and gains experience. Several studies have found that lower initial earnings among immigrants are in fact correlated with higher rates of earnings growth Rules against firing workers are common in more-regulated markets and can reduce new hiring especially of immigrant workers. Immigrants might initially be perceived as more risky hires because employers may not know how to evaluate immigrants educational backgrounds for example or may not be able to gauge their language proficiency. As a result immigrants may have to search longer for a job than would otherwise similar native workers Chapter | Immigrants may overcome communication cultural and other barriers ( including discrimination ) by starting their own businesses. Entrepreneurship however may be out-of-reach for some immigrants in highly-regulated markets which are often characterized by high business start-up costs and less access to capital. At the same time generous unemployment insurance in more-regulated economies and welfare programs for refugees and asylum seekers may discourage immigrants from looking for jobs in the first place The composition of employment growth is another important difference between the United States and some Western European countries that may influence immigrant unemployment rates. In the United States the fastgrowing U.S. service sector provides greater opportunities to new workers than does the service sector in many other countries. In Germany where immigrants are disproportionately employed in the service sector the sector s relatively slow growth may have limited immigrant job opportunities. The lack of growth in low-skill service jobs could simply be another consequence of high-cost and high-tax markets although some researchers point to cultural or lifestyle differences as limiting the demand for things like fast food Immigrants in countries with highly-regulated labor markets tend to have higher unemployment rates relative to natives than immigrants in countries with flexible labor markets such as the United States. Chart shows the average unemployment rates of native versus foreign males in major immigrant-receiving OECD nations during The countries are ranked according to the competitiveness of their labor markets with less-regulated countries at the top of the chart and more-regulated countries at the bottom Immigrant unemployment rates are generally lower and more similar to native unemployment rates in less-regulated labor markets such as in the United States than in highly-regulated labor markets such as those in Spain Sweden Germany and France. Male immigrants in France for example had a percent unemployment rate in percentage points higher than natives. Male immigrants in the United States meanwhile had a percent unemployment rate percentage points lower than U.S. natives Unemployment Rates Among Immigrant Youth Labor market inexperience may exacerbate the negative consequences of rigid labor market institutions perhaps more so for immigrants than natives Chart compares unemployment rates among foreign and native youth ( aged to ) for a subset of the countries above. Relative unemployment rates among immigrant youth ( both men and women ) are higher in heavily regulated labor markets. In Sweden immigrant youth have more than twice the unemployment rate of native youth. In France foreigners aged have a percent unemployment rate compared to percent for similarly aged natives | Economic Report of the President Chapter | Caveats to Consider Many other factors that vary across countries affect these statistics. While in the United States foreign implies that the person was born abroad that is not the case in Europe or Japan where foreigner refers only to those who are not citizens. Either group can be bigger depending on how much countries restrict access to citizenship ; in some countries even second- and third-generation immigrants are not citizens. In Germany and Japan for example relatively few immigrants become citizens while much larger shares of immigrants naturalize in the Netherlands and Sweden. As a result of these differences and holding all else equal foreigners in Germany would be more comparable to natives in Germany shrinking the difference in the unemployment rates as compared with foreigners in the Netherlands and Sweden who would tend to be made up of relatively new immigrants Differences in immigration policies across countries also affect the comparison of immigrants labor market outcomes. Australia for example admits the majority of its immigrants based on employment skills ; its immigrants would be expected to be better prepared for the job market than would immigrants in countries which prioritize foreigners who are refugees or asylum seekers or family members of natives and prior immigrants as in the United States Indeed Australian immigrants have similar unemployment rates as Australian natives ( Chart ) U.S. immigrants also have low unemployment rates however even though U.S. immigration policy is principally based on family ties. The last section of this chapter describes U.S. immigration policy in more detail Benefits and Costs of Immigration The gains from immigration are analogous to the gains from trade ( see Chapter Modern International Trade for a discussion explaining how countries gain from trade ) In classical trade theory countries benefit from trading when they differ in some way. Similarly the more different immigrants are from natives regardless of whether they have fewer or more skills the bigger are the economic gains from immigration. The skill composition of immigrants comes into play in other ways however. First it determines which native workers gain by immigration and which lose. Second it determines whether immigration positively or negatively affects government revenues and expenditures Labor Market Impact of Immigration Standard economic theory suggests that an increase in the supply of labor such as an influx of immigrant workers would be associated with lower wages other things being the same. Empirical estimates of how much native | Economic Report of the President wages fall in response to immigration however are typically small. The magnitude of the wage impact is mitigated by two factors : how substitutable immigrant workers are for natives and the response of existing factors of production such as capital and labor to the influx of immigrants If foreign workers are not substitutable for natives then immigration would be expected to have little impact on the wages of natives. For example an immigrant with unique skills such as a highly specialized scientist or an immigrant who speaks little or no English is unlikely to compete directly with most U.S. workers. Instead recent immigrants may be the most adversely affected by the inflow of more immigrants. A new immigrant with limited English skills for example will likely compete closely with other recent immigrants with poor English ability and in jobs that do not require institutional technical or advanced language skills such as janitorial services or child care. If immigrants become concentrated in certain states or cities natives might also respond by moving to locations with relatively less competition from immigrants. Although research findings suggest so-called native flight may have occurred in the 1980s the experience of the 1990s suggests the opposite that immigrants and natives were drawn together by economic growth The supply of capital might also change with immigration. An increase in the supply of labor means that each unit of capital becomes more productive and thus more valuable. As a result capital may flow into areas where there has been immigration even while output in those areas shifts toward production of goods and services that are relatively more labor intensive. This increased investment and production shift may in turn raise the demand for labor and push wages partially back up Several economic studies have attempted to measure the wage impact of immigration on natives and previous immigrants a challenging task because it is necessary to take into account all other factors that might plausibly affect wages such as the responses by capital and labor outlined above. Such studies also have to take into account that immigration itself is driven by favorable economic conditions such as high or rising wages. With those caveats in mind a typical finding is that on average immigration has little effect on native wages. Box reviews one of these studies in more detail. Generally estimates suggest that a percent increase in the share of foreign-born workers reduces native wages by less than one percent. Recent studies that look at wage effects by skill levels typically find larger negative effects on less-skilled than mediumor high-skilled native workers. Adverse wage effects on previous immigrants have been found to be on the order of to percent. It should be noted that these studies typically identify the effect of immigration on natives by comparing labor market outcomes of natives in response to differences in immigration across regions and over time. Analysis done at the national level relies primarily on variation in immigration over time and finds larger adverse effects Chapter | Box : Wage Impacts of Immigration The labor market effects of immigration can be identified by using real-world events in which immigration occurs suddenly and is not driven by economic factors. One such study measures native wages in Miami before and after the Mariel Boatlift in which approximately Cubans arrived between May and September of This influx added workers or percent to Miami s labor force in just a few months. Despite the fact that a relatively high fraction of the new immigrants were low-skilled these immigrants had virtually no effect on the wages or unemployment rates of less-skilled workers in Miami This result could have been driven by labor and capital responses For example natives and other immigrants who would otherwise have moved to Miami to fill low-skill jobs may have decided not to do so because of the rapid influx of Cuban immigrants over this period. In addition textile and apparel firms industries that are well-suited to utilize low-skilled labor expanded in Miami thereby cushioning the adverse wage impact on Miami workers Fiscal Impact of Immigration Immigrants like all natives affect the public finances the revenues and expenditures of local state and Federal governments. Immigrants contribute money to public coffers by paying sales and property taxes ( the latter are implicit in apartment rents ) Immigrants working on the books further contribute through income and payroll taxes. Immigrants consume publicly provided goods and services such as roads police and fire protection and public schools. If they are eligible some legal immigrants such as naturalized citizens and lawful permanent residents who have lived in the United States for five years or more may also receive assistance from programs such as food stamps Temporary Assistance to Needy Families ( TANF ) and Medicaid Supplemental Security Income ( SSI ) is generally restricted to citizens and to lawful permanent residents who have worked in the United States for at least years. The fiscal impact of immigration is the difference between how much immigrants pay in to the government and the value of the public services they consume Some studies have calculated the fiscal impact of immigrants on an annual basis and looked at whether the cost of providing public goods and services to immigrant households increases the tax burden on native households in a given year. Such studies have found that while immigrants do not impose a net higher tax burden at the Federal level natives in states with a heavy concentration of | Economic Report of the President immigrants from Latin America do realize an increased overall tax burden Another approach in estimating the fiscal impact of immigration is to compute the expected lifetime fiscal impact of immigrants who come to stay permanently and their children grandchildren and future descendants. A study found that the net present value of immigrants estimated future tax payments exceeded the cost of services they were expected to use by $ for the average immigrant and his or her descendants. Accounting for the welfare reform which restricted eligibility and imposed time limits this figure increased to $ The value of services slightly exceeded taxes paid by the original immigrant but the contributions of the immigrant s descendants more than made up the difference The average impact masks two facts. First immigrants typically do not impose a net cost at the Federal level where most of the proceeds from payroll taxes accrue but rather at the state and local level through their use of public schools and health care. Second the average fiscal impact also masks the fact that the fiscal effect of immigrants ( like that of natives ) varies by education level. How much immigrants pay in and how many services they utilize depend largely on whether they are families headed by skilled or unskilled workers. Immigrants with a high school degree or better and their descendants contribute more in taxes than they use in public services which produces the overall positive impact mentioned above. But the average net present value of the fiscal impact of an immigrant with less than a high school education is negative $ The impact of the original immigrant with no high school diploma is negative $ which is largely offset by the positive $ in contributions by the immigrant 's descendants Fiscal contributions and receipts are also a function of an immigrant s legal status and the same net present value would not apply to an undocumented immigrant or someone residing in the United States temporarily. More than half of undocumented immigrants are believed to be working on the books so they contribute to the tax rolls but are ineligible for almost all Federal public assistance programs and most major joint Federal-state programs. Over time however if low-income immigrants attain legal status they may become eligible for more welfare programs. The U.S.-born children of an immigrant legal or illegal are automatically citizens and eligible for government programs Immigrants and Public Assistance Immigrant households despite the restrictions on their eligibility are more likely than native households to participate in public assistance programs. In percent of native households used a major welfare program compared with percent of households with a foreign-born household head. Major welfare programs in this case include TANF SSI food stamps public housing and Medicaid. Immigrant families which includes families Chapter | with U.S.-born children are more likely to use welfare as a result of their higher poverty rates and lower rates of health insurance coverage. Medicaid alone accounts for almost all the difference in the rates of public assistance for these two groups. This is partly due to the fact that immigrants are more likely to work in jobs without health insurance. Only percent of immigrants have employment-based coverage compared to percent of natives Immigrants and Social Security While the number of immigrants with relatively low education levels tends to put a strain on government budgets several other immigrant characteristics have the opposite effect. First compared to native workers immigrants are relatively young when they arrive. Green card recipients are overrepresented in the age groups between and Immigrants also have higher fertility rates than natives. The influx of younger people and higher birth rates expand the labor force and slow the ongoing decline in the ratio of workers per retirees. This in turn contributes to the financing of pay-as-you-go entitlement programs such as Social Security and Medicare Many of these workers who have contributed to the Social Security system return to their home countries and never file for benefits. In the case of Mexico millions of Mexicans have worked in the United States and returned home but only non-U.S. citizens residing in Mexico received Social Security benefits in Undocumented immigrants without a valid Social Security number can not receive Social Security benefits but as long as the employer reports their earnings to the Social Security Administration ( SSA ) their earnings are subject to withholding of Social Security taxes. The SSA can not identify undocumented workers but keeps track of the earnings of all workers who have mismatched or invalid Social Security numbers in the so-called Earnings Suspense File ( ESF ) The ESF was valued at $ billion in Totalization agreements are another way that foreign workers can affect Social Security. Totalization agreements are binational treaties where U.S workers earnings abroad count toward their Social Security contributions and similarly for foreign workers employed in the United States. Totalization agreements exist with countries Additional Benefits to Immigration Calculations of the net benefits of immigration are typically made from the natives point of view hence the focus on fiscal and labor market impacts. But immigration also benefits the immigrant and his or her family who enjoy increased income and improvements in their quality of life. Some of the increased income may be sent home in the form of remittances benefiting family members who remain behind in the immigrant s country of origin. In | Economic Report of the President addition as migrants leave the country-of-origin economic opportunities may arise for others who stay put. If there is enough emigration as in the case of Mexico the decrease in the supply of labor could even be enough to raise wages Migrant remittances can have important economic benefits in the origin country. In remittances from the United States to Latin America exceeded $ billion. Remittances raise income reduce poverty and lower income volatility in the recipient country an important consideration in countries where economic crises are more common. Studies of Mexican migrants have found that remittances are used for both day-to-day consumption such as food and housing as well as for investments in human and physical capital such as starting a business buying land or building a home. The United States has led efforts to facilitate remittances. At the G-8 Sea Island summit in Georgia in June the President secured support for a plan to help developing countries by improving data on remittance flows and by reducing the costs of international money transfers In the long run international migration can also lead to institutional change in the origin country. The fact that people are mobile means that countries facing high emigration may try to retain or lure their citizens back. For example according to news reports Mexico launched a crackdown on corrupt customs agents who preyed on migrants as they returned home. As part of the crackdown Mexico appointed a border czar in and strengthened the Paisano Program which helps Mexicans return home for the holidays without being harassed or extorted. The U.S. and Mexican governments also established Partnership for Prosperity a large-scale binational public-private economic development initiative. Meanwhile Federal and state government officials in Mexico launched programs such as Dos por Uno and Tres por Uno to match remittance money going to infrastructure projects such as paving roads in migrant communities Immigration Policy In a typical year about two-thirds of new lawful permanent residents are admitted into the United States or adjust immigration status based on their family relationship with a U.S. citizen or permanent resident. ( Adjustment of status refers to foreigners inside the United States who apply for green cards so they can stay here permanently. ) While family-based immigration is prioritized in U.S. immigration policy employment-based immigration has grown in importance in recent years largely through an increase in the number of skilled temporary workers. Nonetheless existing employment-based programs suffer from many problems including outdated processes for labor certification and inflexible numerical caps. Immigration systems are also strained by the need Chapter | for security measures such as more extensive background checks on applicants At the same time immigration continues to occur outside official channels in the form of undocumented immigration According to the most recent estimates there are about million undocumented immigrants in the United States the majority of whom are low-wage workers. More than one-half of undocumented immigrants are from Mexico. One of the most pervasive features of undocumented immigration is that it is overwhelmingly driven by supply and demand : immigrants want to work in the United States and many American employers want to hire them. Such a simple fact however has complex economic humanitarian and security-related implications Many undocumented immigrants endure a perilous journey to make it to the United States. To obtain work some undocumented immigrants resort to using false documents such as fake Social Security cards or green cards. They live in fear of deportation and may hesitate to contact law enforcement if they become victims of crime or abuse. Once workers are here additional undocumented immigration may take place as family members and friends join the workers. As families grow the children born in the United States to undocumented immigrants are U.S. citizens. Network-based migration and the natural rate of population increase have created hundreds of thousands of mixed status families in which children siblings and parents have a different immigration status Current U.S. Immigration Policy Throughout the nineteenth and into the early twentieth century the United States had a generally open door policy toward immigration. Most newcomers were admitted with the exception of those barred by the Chinese Exclusion Act of prohibitions against prostitutes and felons and a few other exclusions. World War I however ushered in an era of restricted immigration a policy that has persisted to the present day. The National Origins Act of allowed immigration under country quotas that heavily favored northern Europeans. The Immigration Act of which provides the framework for current policy abolished national-origins quotas and based immigration policy largely on family reunification. While the Immigration Act of increased the cap on employment-based green cards such green cards make up fewer than percent of the total number of green cards issued in a typical year Current immigration law provides for five major bases for obtaining permanent residency in the United States immediate relatives of citizens other family members employment immigrants diversity immigrants and refugees and persons granted political asylum. Immediate relatives include the parents spouses and minor children of citizens ; other family members | Economic Report of the President include siblings and adult children of citizens as well as spouses and children of permanent residents ; employment immigrants are workers brought in to work for U.S. employers ; diversity immigrants come into the United States or adjust status through the green card lottery where priority is given to persons from certain underrepresented countries such as many African nations ; and refugees and persons granted asylum ( also called asylees ) qualify for permanent residence because they face persecution in their home countries. Refugees and asylees differ only in their location : refugees apply for admission to the United States from abroad while asylees apply for asylum from within the United States All major permanent residence categories except immediate relatives of citizens are subject to numerical limits : approximately for other family members employment immigrants diversity immigrants and asylees. Uncapped immediate relatives of citizens averaged per year in While there is no explicit limit on the number of green cards allotted for refugees the number of refugees who can adjust status is limited by caps on refugee admissions that are set each year by the President in consultation with Congress. The cap on refugee admissions is in fiscal year Despite the overwhelming demand for permanent residence in all these categories thousands of allotted green cards are not being issued. Processing backlogs are keeping green card issuances below their numerical caps and contributed to a percent decline in the number of new lawful permanent residents in At the end of fiscal year there were million adjustment of status cases pending a decision As a result of numerical limits and backlogs green card applicants filing as other family members can expect to wait from years ( for unmarried adult children of citizens ) to over years ( for siblings of citizens ) Waits are longer for family-sponsored immigrants from certain overrepresented countries such as India Mexico and the Philippines because family-sponsored green card issuances to any single country can not comprise more than percent of the total. In February Filipinos who immigrated as siblings of U.S. citizens had waited years for their green cards Employment-Based Immigration Foreign workers come to the United States through employment-based green cards as described above or with temporary worker visas. For these purposes there are at least employment-based slots for permanent residency available each year ( the actual cap varies with the number of green cards issued in the family program ) and a variable number of temporary worker visas. Employment-based green cards typically require the worker to have at least a college degree or special skills ; only green cards are Chapter | reserved for less-skilled workers. The allotment for employment-based green cards includes the principal worker and any family members. Nevertheless for many years the number of green cards issued fell far short of the cap. During the height of the economic boom in the late 1990s average annual employment-based green cards numbered only about consisting of about workers and spouses and minor children The current situation is similar in that employment-based green card issuances are below their caps again although this time not for a lack of demand. As of January there were employment-based applications for adjustment of status pending with about of these backlogged by the Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) A multitude of factors contribute to difficulties within the employmentbased green card program. Background checks and the sheer volume of pending applications limit processing speed as do cumbersome requirements regarding the labor certification process. Labor certification for permanent employment requires a firm to undergo an extensive government-supervised search for U.S. workers before the petition to hire a foreign-born worker can be approved. Once the Department of Labor ( DOL ) certifies that no qualified U.S. worker is available for the position and the wages and working conditions of existing workers will not be harmed by bringing in an additional foreign worker then DHS and the Department of State can proceed with processing the green card application. In addition to the DHS backlogs mentioned above there is a backlog of over applications for labor certification at DOL. The labor certification process typically takes several years to complete and has been criticized as being time-consuming costly and complicated The problems with labor certification have resulted in calls for reforms and action by the Administration. In the Administration proposed to move to a streamlined application process under which the employer would recruit domestic workers before petitioning to hire a foreign worker. The final rule regarding the new labor certification system was published in the Federal Register on December Under the new system firms attest to appropriate recruitment procedures and DOL has the authority to audit all applications. DOL can order supervised recruitment for employers found to have abused the program DOL expects that this simplification of the recruitment process and other changes such as electronic filing and automated processing will greatly reduce the time needed to process labor certification applications The waits and costs associated with traditional processing for employmentbased permanent residency have likely prompted employers to make greater use of temporary worker visas. The number of visas issued to temporary workers has more than doubled in the last decade rising from in to in In contrast the number of employment-based green cards issued in was actually below the number issued in | Economic Report of the President despite the tremendous growth in the labor force during this time. Temporary worker programs include the H-1B program for skilled workers H-2A for agricultural workers and H-2B for other less-skilled workers. Skilled temporary workers can also be admitted as intra-company transferees ( L-1 visas ) and from Canada and Mexico as North American Free Trade Agreement ( or NAFTA ) workers ( TN visas ) There are many reasons for all parties employer employee and the government to prefer temporary worker visas. Temporary work visas are issued for a limited period of time and are typically restricted to one employer so both employee and employer make a short-term commitment. The application process is simpler and thus generally less costly and timelier. In contrast to permanent residents who can apply to be naturalized after five years residence in the United States temporary work visa holders are not eligible to apply for citizenship. They are also ineligible for most forms of public assistance. Temporary workers can apply for a green card however if they qualify and their employer agrees to support their application The unprecedented number of pending applications for employment-based green cards is believed to stem from the high number of temporary workers that came in under the H-1B program for skilled personnel in the late 1990s. In fiscal year the cap on H-1B workers in the private sector reverted from a temporary cap of to the permanent cap of workers per year This quantity has proven insufficient to meet demand. In the government ran out of H-1B visas in February seven months before the end of the fiscal year. In fiscal year the cap of H-1Bs was reached in one day In light of the shortage of H-1B visas legislation was passed as part of the November Omnibus spending bill to provide an additional H-1B visas per year to foreign students graduating from U.S. universities Undocumented Immigration The influx of low-wage workers many of whom come illegally is partly a result of an immigration policy which while having several employmentbased immigration programs to address the need for skilled workers has relatively few slots for low-skilled workers. The supply of green cards and temporary worker visas typically allows fewer than low-skilled workers to come in each year. The sum is made up of green cards and H-2B visas for other low-skilled workers. In addition about agricultural workers were admitted with H-2A visas in In contrast according to the Current Population Survey the number of low-skilled foreign workers workers who lack a high school degree increased by about per year between and Moreover while H-2B visas for less-skilled workers have run out in both fiscal years and no increase or exemptions to the H-2B cap have been passed Chapter | The demand for foreign labor is not new. When the railroads were being built in the nineteenth century Mexican workers were recruited to expand the workforce in the Southwest and Chinese workers immigrated to work in the West. During World War II labor shortages arose as U.S. men left their jobs to join the armed forces. In the U.S. and Mexican governments initiated the Bracero Program which allowed Mexican workers to come in and fill seasonal jobs in agriculture. The need for workers did not end with the war however and the Bracero Program was kept in place until bringing in an average of about workers per year. European countries such as France and Germany faced similar increases in labor demand following the war and instituted guest-worker programs around that time The end of the Bracero Program in and the imposition of quotas on legal immigration from the Western Hemisphere in eliminated many of the legal avenues by which to enter the United States from Latin America. The ensuing flow of undocumented immigration continues to this day. The Immigration Reform and Control Act ( IRCA ) of was an attempt to deal with this problem by providing for legalization of undocumented immigrants increasing funding for the Border Patrol and making it illegal to hire undocumented workers. To allow for additional worker inflows IRCA also established the H-2A visa program for temporary agricultural workers. However H-2A visas require employers to undergo a burdensome labor certification process and follow extensive rules and as a result the program is little used The passage of IRCA failed to stop illegal immigration. Undocumented immigration surged with U.S. growth in the early to mid-1990s Contributing factors were likely the forces of network migration which may have intensified following IRCA and the Mexican economic crisis. In response to the resurgence of undocumented immigrant inflows border enforcement along the U.S. Mexico border was dramatically increased starting in The President s proposed Temporary Worker Program ( TWP ) announced on January seeks to address the economic and security issues surrounding the flow of undocumented workers into the United States as well as the associated humanitarian concerns. The TWP would give temporary visas to foreign workers who fill jobs for which employers can show they are unable to hire Americans. This would create an additional legal avenue to match workers including low-skilled workers with U.S. employers. The visas would last three years and as long as the worker is employed could be renewed at least once. The program would also offer incentives for workers to return home by setting up tax-preferred savings accounts where money could be withdrawn for use in the home country. The U.S. government would also work toward developing agreements with foreign nations to ensure TWP workers U.S. earnings would be recognized by the public retirement programs in their respective countries | Economic Report of the President The TWP would allow new foreign workers to come in each year in accordance with labor market demand. In addition TWP eligibility would be extended to undocumented workers who were present and working in the United States on January when the President made his announcement. The President also stated that there would continue to be increases in border security and under TWP tough penalties would be imposed on employers who continued to hire undocumented workers The President has proposed to more than double the funding dedicated to worksite investigations. In this multi-pronged approach TWP has many advantages. It recognizes that an orderly and legal flow of workers will likely increase national security and brings employers and undocumented workers into compliance with the law. Employers will be able to legally hire the workers they need once they demonstrate that no willing and able American worker is available. Workers will be less likely to lie about their immigration status rely on false documentation or work under assumed names. Workers who abide by the rules of the program will not have to fear deportation. They will be able to return home for visits to their families and have their U.S. earnings count toward their future retirement benefits The challenges for a program such as this are twofold : to ensure that undocumented immigration does not continue either in its current form or as temporary workers overstay once the temporary worker program is implemented and to minimize administrative burdens on employers who participate. If the goals of the program are achieved there should be reduced demand for undocumented workers leading to less illegal immigration Conclusion Immigrant workers range from the seasonal agricultural laborer to the Nobel prize-winning scientist. They are the doctors and nurses who serve inner cities and rural areas the professors who teach in our universities and the taxi drivers and hotel workers that travelers rely upon. Immigrants also fill jobs that simply allow Americans to go to work every day such as housekeeping and child care From an economic standpoint one important lesson to take away from how the Nation has dealt with the unprecedented surge in immigration over the last decade is the role of U.S. labor market institutions. Flexible labor markets are important in generating job opportunities for workers and immigrants are no exception. The work ethic of U.S. immigrants bolsters their economic contributions. Summing up the economic benefits and costs of immigration shows that over time the benefits of immigration exceed the costs. Adjustment of the economy and native workers to immigration takes time however and the adjustment period can present challenges Chapter | The lessons learned from recent decades can guide immigration reform and make laws more consistent with economic realities and American values Under the President s proposed Temporary Worker Program employers who show they can not find an American worker to fill a job opening will be able to legally hire a foreign worker. This simple guiding principle combined with better enforcement of immigration laws has the potential to reduce undocumented immigration bolster national security and improve on the myriad employment-based immigration programs in effect | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R Expanding Individual Choice and Control A farmer prepares the soil plants seeds and tends her crops. Her wheat will not be ripe for months. How does she know she will reap the fruits of her hard work ? A businessman buys a factory hires engineers and purchases steel rubber and glass with the intention of manufacturing cars. How does he know he will enjoy the benefits of his effort and investment ? A pharmaceutical firm invests millions now to develop a new drug that may much later help to cure cancer. How does it know it will receive a return on its research expenditures ? Property rights provide the crucial link between people s effort and their reward. They are the instrument society uses to establish people s control over things. In practice these go by many names such as deeds titles permits vouchers allowances or accounts. Patents and copyrights are also property rights establishing control over inventions books songs and other creative concepts. The essential idea is the same in each case : the owner of the property right controls how something valuable is used Property rights have a profound effect on the choices people make. In addition to giving them the incentive to maintain and invest in things people will use resources more prudently if they own them. Property rights are essential for markets to function. The lack of a clear title might prevent a car purchase. A home buyer is unlikely to sign on the dotted line if she is not sure that the seller actually owns the house. Without property rights would-be entrepreneurs can not secure loans they might need to help their businesses grow The key points of this chapter are : Property rights are essential to the efficient operation of markets which in turn allocate resources to their most highly valued use. Clearly defined rights are important in avoiding overuse of resources and in encouraging the improvement of resources The thoughtful application of property rights has already brought about a number of policy improvements such as reducing air pollution in a low-cost way protecting fisheries from overexploitation and facilitating greater school choice Providing people with ownership and individual choice and control of assets could help address several current concerns including Social Security reform and the encouragement of international development The Meaning of Property Rights When used in economics the term resource refers not just to natural resources such as land or clean air but to anything of value such as skills. A property right refers broadly to the arrangements society uses to assign people control over resources. Property rights give a homeowner control over his house a farmer control over her land and an inventor control over his ideas That control is defined using a bundle of specific rights. The bundle is commonly thought to consist of three main elements : the right to exclusive use of the resource the right to income derived from the resource and the ability to transfer those rights. Property rights can include a range of those elements from weak rights ( which might only include the right to use the resource ) to strong rights in all three elements. For example someone living on a river might acquire the right to use the water flowing past her property but not the right to divert it and sell it to others. A car owner on the other hand acquires the right to use the car to sell the car and to realize any gain from the sale Even an exclusive right to control and use a resource however does not mean an unrestricted right to use it. A car buyer gets the keys and the title but does not acquire the right to drive it at any speed or park it anywhere he wishes ; the car must be driven within the limits of the law. Property rights typically come with restrictions on the use of the resource in question The Economic Effects of Property Rights Property rights have a host of economic effects. Three especially important effects are illustrated here. The first is the effect of property rights on the use of a resource at one point in time. The second is the effect of property rights on incentives to maintain and improve a resource over time. The third is the effect that property rights have as a prerequisite for exchange The classic illustration of the effect of property rights at one point in time involves numerous cows grazing on limited pastureland. If access to the pasture is open to any and all cattle ranchers then the pasture is an open access resource a resource no person or group of people has an exclusive right to use Individual property rights to the pasture are not established and all ranchers compete to use it. In this case each rancher might be expected to allow his cows to graze without limit because each rancher bears only a fraction of the cost of additional grazing. That added grazing however is costly to other ranchers because less grass is available for their cows. Any individual rancher does not directly bear the full cost imposed on other ranchers and will not take this cost into account when deciding how much to let his cows graze The common grazing pasture thus becomes overused | Economic Report of the President This phenomenon known as the tragedy of the commons is likely to occur for scarce resources for which access is open. A motorist entering a crowded freeway does not take into account the effect her car has on the space available for other cars so freeways become overused at peak times The commons problem would be solved if someone owned the pasture or had control over grazing. If the owner allowed only his cows to graze then he would have an incentive to consider the effect of one cow s overgrazing on his other cows. He would voluntarily restrict their grazing. The owner could also limit access to the pastureland and charge other ranchers for grazing their cows according to the amount of grass their cows ate. Because it was costly to them each rancher would then reduce the amount of time his cows grazed In either case ranchers conserve on the scarce resource of pastureland because someone owns the land. Assigning property rights to the owner of the pasture not only encourages conservation of the resource but also resolves the conflict among ranchers over the use of scarce land A second key effect of property rights is that they provide incentives to invest in maintain and improve resources over time. To appreciate this effect think of a farmer using land that is not owned but who nonetheless improves it by weeding reducing erosion and controlling pests. She then plants wheat and cultivates it. Without property rights she has no legal right to prevent someone else from harvesting her wheat crop when it ripens. If she knows in advance that this might happen she is unlikely to improve the land in the first place and is unlikely to work it in the future. Alternatively if she has property rights to the land she knows she will reap the benefit of her efforts and will invest in the land. Property rights provide an incentive to invest in resources over time and society will be better off as a result. Homeownership provides another example as discussed in Box Box : The Benefits of Homeownership Homeownership provides one illustration of how property rights promote investment that benefits society. Researchers have shown that homeownership has many benefits beyond the economic advantages of owning a home. For example the children of parents who are homeowners are less likely than children of renters to drop out of high school or to have children as teenagers. Both of those effects are largest for children of low-income households. Children living in homes that are owned by the resident attain math and reading achievement that is measurably higher. Additionally homeowners are more likely to be involved in their communities. Homeowners are more likely to know the identity of the head of their local school board to vote in local elections and to work to solve local problems. In short homeowners are Chapter | Box continued more likely to invest in their communities. The national homeownership rate set a record of percent in up percentage point from The minority homeownership rate was also at a record high of percent up percentage points from The President s policies have focused on dismantling barriers to homeownership especially among low-income and minority homeowners. On December the President signed into law the American Dream Downpayment Act of which helps low-income families with their downpayment and closing costs. His housing agenda includes increasing the supply of affordable homes through the Single-Family Affordable Housing Tax Credit increasing support for self-help homeownership programs like Habitat for Humanity simplifying the home-buying process and increasing home-buying education. These initiatives will further help to achieve the President s goal of increasing the number of minority homeowners by at least million before the end of the decade A third effect of property rights stems from their transferability Transferable property rights ( along with the enforcement of contracts ) underpin market exchange. Clearly defined property rights give people certainty about what they can trade and keep. A market exists when valuable items are exchanged or when money is given in exchange for an item Without clearly defined transferable property rights markets will operate either poorly or not at all Well-functioning markets are socially beneficial for several reasons. Markets ensure that transactions benefit both parties. People will voluntarily give up their right to a resource only when they receive something of greater benefit in return. Markets ensure that resources are allocated to those who value them the most Because markets generate prices they also play a central role in coordinating the behavior of buyers and sellers. Prices provide information about the strength of demand for a good or service and the cost of producing it. They also create incentives to act on that information. If the price of a good rises suppliers know to and have an incentive to shift scarce resources into | Economic Report of the President producing more of that good. Similarly demanders know to cut back on consumption of the good and have an incentive to do so. This process ensures that there is no enduring shortage or surplus of the good ; the correct amount is produced and consumed. This socially beneficial situation is based on a well-functioning system of private property rights The historical record over the last several centuries indicates the importance of strong property rights. The countries that are rich today are those that had sufficiently strong property rights in place to encourage industrialization Evidence suggests that societies that have protected property rights over time are more prosperous The different experiences of North and South Korea provide an example Prior to the division of the Korean peninsula in the North and the South were similar to one another economically geographically ethnically and culturally. Following the Korean War the North abolished private property in land and capital while the South maintained a system of private property South Korea enjoyed one of the fastest surges of economic growth in history and is considered an Asian miracle economy. South Korean gross domestic product grew from $ billion in to $ billion in an increase of more than sevenfold in only two decades. By South Korea s GDP per capita was estimated to be over times greater than North Korea s Although a number of factors contributed to South Korea s superior growth its stronger protection of property rights is recognized as a key factor. As the next section illustrates even countries with relatively strong property rights systems benefit by extending them into new domains The Success of Property Rights in Addressing Policy Issues The property rights concept has been creatively expanded and applied to help solve vexing policy issues. The use of property rights in practice illustrates the economic effects discussed earlier. Although there are many examples of how property rights help solve policy problems three are offered here : pollution permits to help reduce air pollution in an efficient manner individual transferable quotas that help conserve fisheries and school voucher programs to help improve school performance. Each case is an example of assigning property rights to people with the best information and incentives to use the resources in question Chapter | Addressing Air Pollution Through Tradable Permits Clean air is another example of an open access resource ; overuse manifests itself as air pollution. In the absence of government regulation firms do not pay for the air they pollute. This problem can be addressed by defining property rights Title IV of the Clean Air Act Amendments introduced a property rights regime for air quality by establishing a national cap-and-trade system for sulfur dioxide ( SO2 ) emissions. SO2 is a pollutant produced when a fuel containing sulfur such as coal or oil is burned as is done to create electricity for example. These emissions are not only associated with a wide array of health concerns but are also a key component of acid rain. Title IV s cap-andtrade program works by capping the total amount of allowable SO2 emissions from power plants nationwide and requiring that an emitting facility own a permit for each unit of pollution emitted. The cap sets the total level of allowable emissions of SO2 from the power sector. The government also creates a system of rigorous emissions measurement and enforcement Under the Title IV program SO2 permits can be bought and sold by emitting facilities and by third parties. Trading allows firms with a high cost of reducing pollution to purchase credits from firms whose emissions can be reduced at lower cost giving the industry an incentive to consider cleanup cost differences both across and within firms. The air cleanup will be accomplished at a lower cost than if all plants were directly required to meet an emissions standard that leads to the same overall level of pollution reduction Using permits or allowances the government does not need to tell firms how to lower pollution it simply decides how much pollution needs to be reduced in the aggregate and leaves it to the firms to decide how best to achieve that goal This example illustrates an additional benefit of pollution permits : they not only create valuable incentives but also give control over decisions to the party that has the best information on how to clean up at the lowest cost Individual firms are likely to have much better information than regulators about the idiosyncrasies of each plant. Pollution permits decentralize decision making give control to the party with the best information and provide incentives to act on that information The SO2 trading program has been successful both at reducing emissions and at achieving those reductions at a lower cost than direct plant-level emissions standards. Emissions were initially reduced almost percent more than the required level compliance has been over percent and the annual cost savings from this approach has been estimated at hundreds of millions of dollars per year. A similar program exists in the eastern United States to control nitrogen oxide emissions which contribute to regional ozone and smog problems | Economic Report of the President In the President proposed Clear Skies air quality legislation that would expand the use of this approach to achieve additional control of SO2 and nitrogen oxides and to control mercury emissions. The mandatory program would establish caps on power plant emissions of sulfur dioxide nitrogen oxides and mercury in that are roughly percent below levels Consistent with this legislative approach in December the EPA proposed the Clean Air Interstate Rule for states in the eastern half of the United States whose sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions contribute to fine particle and ozone pollution in downwind states. The proposal would require states to regulate power plant emissions and provides states with a model cap-and-trade system similar to the regional nitrogen oxide program described above. The rule would reduce emissions of sulfur dioxide from power plants in those states by approximately percent and nitrogen oxide to approximately percent below levels. Additionally under the Clean Air Mercury Rule the EPA proposed the first-ever regulatory action to reduce mercury emissions from coal-fired power plants and proposed a cap-andtrade approach as a way of achieving these reductions. The program would cut mercury emissions by nearly percent when fully implemented. Both the Clean Air Interstate Rule and the Clean Air Mercury Rule are based on an approach of establishing tradable emissions allowances in order to reduce pollution in an effective and cost-efficient manner Addressing Overfishing Through Property Rights Another industry that benefits from the creation of well-defined property rights is commercial fishing. In the absence of regulation fisheries are an open access resource. Because fishermen do not own the stock of fish in the sea the fish they leave in the water may be caught by others and there is no guarantee that they will be there to catch in the future. Even though many fishermen desire healthy fish populations for future use individual conservation efforts are less effective due to this tragedy of the commons. Consequently some fish stocks have declined worldwide and fishermen must expend more effort and resources to catch the remaining fish. Today an estimated percent of the world s fish species are either fully exploited or depleted. In the North Atlantic region populations of cod hake haddock and flounder have fallen by as much as percent Overfishing leads to an array of economic problems. Because fish are less able to reach maturity and reproduce fish that are caught tend to be of lower value. Fish become harder to catch as their stocks are depleted and intense competition for the remaining fish creates additional waste. In the United Nations estimated that $ billion was spent attempting to harvest $ billion worth of fish. When a fishery collapses many fishermen lose their jobs and their communities suffer. The collapse of the Atlantic cod stocks in Chapter | the mid-1990s left more than people unemployed in the Canadian Maritime Provinces Governments have traditionally regulated fisheries with command-andcontrol approaches which mandate many aspects of fishing by law. The requirements govern various aspects of the fishing industry such as the technology used the length of fishing seasons and fishing locations. These approaches are not only difficult to enforce but they do not provide incentives for fishermen to curb their fishing efforts. Command-and-control approaches also require constant government intervention in order to set new specifications for technological innovations while fishermen are prevented from shifting to lower-cost fishing methods by taking advantage of these innovations A property rights approach to fisheries management can effectively prevent overfishing while increasing the profits of fishermen. One such system is to issue individual transferable quotas ( ITQs ) to fishermen which grant them exclusive rights to harvest fixed percentages of the total allowable catch. ( While ITQs may be considered to create property rights they are not property interests for purposes of the takings clause of the Fifth Amendment of the Constitution. ) Like pollution permits ITQs are transferable ensuring that the fish will be caught by the most efficient and least wasteful boats while all owners of a fishery can reap the benefits of a healthy and profitable fish stock Unlike command-and-control approaches ITQ programs end the incentive for fishermen to race to fish. This observation is well demonstrated by Alaska s sablefish and halibut fisheries where prior to the introduction of property rights the fishing season was progressively shortened to prevent the annual catch from exceeding its cap. Fishermen responded to the shortened season by increasing the number of vessels in their fleets and using more gear in an all-out effort to catch as much as possible before the overall cap was reached. These frantic derbies led fishermen to take undue risks by heading out in dangerous weather and led to a glut of fresh fish on the market during the few short weeks of harvest and scarcity the rest of the year. Alaska s halibut and sablefish ITQ programs implemented in ended the race for fish and increased season length from less than days per year to days per year. Commercial fishermen have since enjoyed increased profits decreased costs of gear and fishing crews and a safer and more stable industry. The availability of high-quality halibut year-round has benefited consumers and environmental benefits have been realized in connection with decreased halibut mortality ITQs have also been adopted in New Zealand Iceland Australia Canada and Papua New Guinea among other countries. They have improved fish stocks while also increasing the profitability of many fisheries. New Zealand s extensive system of ITQs was introduced in and as of it accounted for more than percent of that country s total commercial catch New Zealand fish stocks are now healthy and increases in quota prices | Economic Report of the President provide evidence of increased profitability. There is evidence that New Zealand s ITQs have also encouraged investment in scientific research Testimony to the ability of ITQs to mitigate overfishing and change the fishers approach came when a New Zealand Ministry of Agriculture official commented It s the first group of fishers I ve ever encountered who turned down the chance to take more fish. One challenge in designing an ITQ program is determining the initial allocation of shares. To make the system politically viable some areas have provided shares to the current users of the fishery in proportion to their recent catch levels. An alternative is to auction off the initial shares which would raise money for the public and ensure that from the start the shares go to fishermen who value them the most Despite practical issues in designing ITQ programs they hold tremendous promise for managing our Nation s fisheries in a manner that allows for increased efficiency in fishing fewer economic and safety risks for fishermen and fresher and higher quality seafood for consumers. The President supports the further adoption of ITQ systems to manage our Nation s fisheries and the Administration has called for new national guidelines to facilitate the implementation of these programs while maintaining regional flexibility and ensuring fair and equitable quota allocations School Voucher Programs The creation of property rights can be used to encourage better use of resources even when there is no tragedy of the commons problem. School voucher programs illustrate such benefits. Under many voucher systems eligible families receive money from their state or school district to pay for their children s education at a participating private school. Typically low-income families are eligible to receive vouchers When vouchers are not available choosing a different school may come at the high cost of paying the full tuition for a private school or physically moving to a new district if the district does not already offer a public school choice program. By lowering the cost of private sources of education vouchers produce two main benefits. Most directly families eligible for the vouchers are better off because they have greater ability to select the school they prefer most Second a well-designed voucher program can make all students in a school district better off. If the availability of vouchers increases competition then the school has an incentive to provide a better education so that fewer students leave. To the extent that schools then provide a higher quality education in a more cost-effective manner all the students who remain in the school are better off even those who are not eligible for a voucher The degree to which a voucher system benefits all the students in a school system depends on the share of students who are eligible for a voucher the Chapter | size of the voucher and the extent to which schools resources depend on the number of students who use a voucher. The number of eligible students and the amount of the voucher determine how many students will consider switching schools. When more students are eligible and when schools are competing for them the gains from competition will be realized more quickly. Few students actually need to switch schools to motivate schools to improve. Instead schools are motivated by the potential for competition which depends on the number of students who are seriously considering switching rather than the number who actually switch. The incentives involved and the potential for competition also depend on how much money is attached to the voucher Evidence indicates that voucher systems do indeed benefit both the students who use them and those who do not. A study of the voucher program in Milwaukee found that after several years the performance of students who used vouchers had risen percentile points in math and percentile points in reading relative to where they would have been if they had remained in their local public schools. A gain of percentile points means that the students performed better than an additional percent of the overall population of test takers The students who remain in the public schools also benefit significantly. As an example consider the case of the Milwaukee voucher program. The program has been in place since and was expanded in to allow up to percent of students to use a voucher. For the school year students from low-income families received a voucher for up to $ ( over percent of city per-pupil spending ) Since the voucher amount is sufficient to cover the cost of private elementary schools but not most secondary schools more than percent of all voucher users since the school year have been in grades one through seven. Consequently studies of the Milwaukee program have focused on elementary school students. After the introduction of vouchers test scores of fourth graders at schools where the largest proportion of students were eligible for vouchers improved by and percentile points in math science and English respectively over the students at comparison schools that were largely unaffected by vouchers This improved performance was not simply due to increases in school spending. The key measure of a school s efficiency student achievement divided by per-pupil spending increased significantly in the schools where the highest fraction of students were eligible for vouchers. In these schools student performance rose by between and percentile points per thousand dollars in per-pupil spending. By making public schools more efficient vouchers can help to close the efficiency gap between public and private schools. The private schools that accept voucher recipients usually have the same achievement levels as the public schools they draw students from but spend significantly less per student on average. Based on their lower costs voucher-accepting private | Economic Report of the President schools are four times as efficient as the local public schools from which they receive students. Drawing from five studies of voucher programs one researcher notes that while public schools spent an average of $ per student voucher-accepting private schools spent only $ While students on average are better off under a well-designed voucher program one might still be concerned that many students are worse off. A common worry with vouchers is that the most-motivated students will use them leaving the remaining students with a lower-quality peer group. One researcher of the Milwaukee system concludes that even if a student s peer group dropped from the 90th percentile of the district to the 10th percentile the student remaining in the school would still be at least as well off under the voucher program because the effect of the increased school performance would overwhelm this adverse change in the peer group. The decline in a student s peer group is merely hypothetical since studies of the Milwaukee system have found little evidence that the best students leave. In fact instead of being the best students at a school future voucher users performed moderately below average in math and reading before they switched schools Vouchers are only one form of school choice. Additional forms include charter schools and plans that allow students to attend other public schools When these programs are well designed they too can produce efficiency gains by causing schools to compete with one another for students Vouchers are consistent with expanding property rights because they provide families with additional control over resources financial resources in this case. The available evidence indicates that this change in property rights has produced positive outcomes for school systems that use well-designed voucher programs The Application of Property Rights to Current Policy Issues Areas of current concern in which property rights could be usefully applied or extended include personal retirement accounts health savings accounts and Millennium Challenge Accounts Personal Retirement Accounts Social Security is currently funded on a pay-as-you-go basis in which the present generation of workers funds current retirees benefits. Social Security s financial viability is thus linked to the Nation s demographics. Increased life expectancies and lower birthrates have gradually reduced the worker-to-beneficiary ratio from 16-to-1 in to 3.3-to-1 today with projections of 2-to-1 by Projecting future tax revenues and payouts Social Security will begin running Chapter | deficits instead of surpluses by and Social Security assets and reserves will be depleted by Social Security is no longer a bargain for younger workers. A single male worker with average earnings who was born in will receive a real return of only percent annually after Social Security pays what it is able to pay him. For workers earning the maximum amount taxed ( $ in ) the real annual return is minus percent on the benefits Social Security can actually pay The Social Security system can be less advantageous for divorced individuals who do not share in the benefits of a previous spouse. To qualify for spousal benefits under the current system a marriage must last ten years. Fully one-third of all marriages end prior to the ten-year eligibility requirement The President believes that personal retirement accounts must be part of a comprehensive solution to strengthen Social Security. He has proposed that younger workers be given the option to set aside part of their payroll taxes in a personal retirement account. A personal retirement account provides ownership and control and offers younger workers the opportunity to build a nest egg for retirement that the government can not take away. At retirement the money in an account would be available to the retiree to supplement traditional benefits under a reformed Social Secuity system. Procedures would be established to govern how account balances would be withdrawn at retirement. This would involve some combination of annuities to ensure a stream of monthly income phased withdrawals indexed to life expectancy and the ability to withdraw as a lump sum any funds above a poverty-protection threshold. At death any balance in the account could be passed on to loved ones including widows children and grandchildren. The ability to inherit personal accounts would enhance the financial security of many surviving spouses and children Personal retirement accounts give younger workers the opportunity to receive a higher rate of return than they receive under the current system Workers would have the flexibility to choose from several different low-cost broad-based investment funds and would be able to adjust investment allocations periodically. Account options and management would be similar to that of the Federal employee retirement program known as the Thrift Savings Plan ( TSP ) Money in personal retirement accounts would be invested in a mix of broadly diversified bond and stock funds. Workers could also choose a life cycle portfolio that would automatically adjust the level of risk as the individual aged by gradually shifting the allocation of investment funds to weight the portfolio more heavily toward bonds. To guard against sudden market swings on the eve of an individual s retirement investment in a life cycle portfolio would be automatic when a worker reaches age unless the worker and his or her spouse specifically opt out. Personal retirement accounts would have | Economic Report of the President low administrative costs estimated by the Social Security Administration actuaries as roughly basis points or percentage point. These costs are much lower than the average costs associated with investments in stock or bond mutual funds. Most of these fees would be for record keeping rather than investment management By giving citizens greater control over their retirement assets property rights can make an important contribution to improving the U.S. retirement system Health Savings Accounts Many employees currently have access to flexible spending accounts through their employers. Using these accounts employees can use before-tax dollars to pay for doctor co-payments medications dependent care costs or insurance deductibles that they otherwise would pay for with after-tax dollars With flexible spending accounts the employee must select a certain amount of money to put into the account before the start of the year during the enrollment period. The employer usually through a regular payroll deduction then deposits that amount into the account Flexible spending accounts are good for workers. Like employer contributions to health insurance coverage flexible spending account contributions are excluded from taxable income allowing workers to use pre-tax dollars to pay for uncovered medical costs. They also give employees added choice in obtaining and paying for health-related services that are not typically covered by insurance. They have a disadvantage however : if workers overestimate their health care needs and funds are not used before the end of the plan year the remaining money is lost. Most companies operate on a calendar year so the money typically must be used by December This can create a year-end rush to spend any remaining funds even if the purchases are of marginal value. Those who underestimate their spending will face a shortage of pre-tax funds if there is no money in the account The use-it-or-lose-it feature weakens employee property rights in flexible spending accounts. In December the President signed health savings accounts ( HSAs ) into law. HSAs are actual savings accounts owned by employees. Money in the account can accumulate tax-free and can be invested similar to an individual retirement account. Unlike flexible spending accounts HSAs do not expire at the end of the year. Because the account belongs to workers HSAs do not tie the tax-advantaged treatment of health care spending to a specific employer. They are portable. Workers own the accounts and can take them from job to job or into retirement. HSAs also can be passed on to heirs. These features which extend from enhanced property rights are important advantages of HSAs Chapter | Participants in HSAs must be covered by a high-deductible health insurance plan ( a minimum annual deductible of $ for individuals and $ for families ) Contributions can be made each year up to the amount of the policy s annual deductible. The maximum contribution is the lesser of the deductible amount under the high-deductible health insurance plan or ( for ) $ for individuals or $ for family coverage. These dollar limits will be adjusted for inflation each year. Individuals over age can make extra contributions with the same tax advantages. Participants can withdraw funds as needed for deductibles and co-payments as well as for over-the-counter drugs long-term care insurance and health insurance premiums when unemployed. Amounts withdrawn for any other purpose are subject to taxation plus a percent penalty. Once employees reach age they can take money out without penalty for any reason HSAs have major potential benefits. They can reduce health care spending because for amounts up to the deductible people will choose to consume the level of care that best suits their needs rather than consuming the amount of care provided by their health coverage. HSAs also are likely to increase the number of insured because using HSAs premiums are paid with pre-tax dollars. This effectively makes high-deductible health care plans less expensive for the individual purchasing them The benefits of HSAs can be extended in a number of ways. More than half of the uninsured are small-business employees and their families. The President has proposed giving small-business owners a refundable tax credit for contributions made to their employees HSAs. He also has proposed extending the benefits of HSAs to low-income Americans by providing a $ direct government contribution to their HSAs combined with a refundable tax credit up to $ to help purchase a high-deductible health plan Millennium Challenge Accounts Strengthening property rights systems creates a variety of benefits in the context of international development some of which are described in Box which discusses land titles in developing countries. To encourage economic growth and poverty reduction in the developing world the President established the Millennium Challenge Account ( MCA ) The MCA represents a significant change in the provision of economic development assistance to developing nations. The MCA is based on the insight that development assistance is most effective when funds flow to countries that have policies and institutions that promote growth. Only those countries that have taken concrete steps to improve their own economies and governance structures and thus ensure that aid will be effective are eligible for MCA assistance To receive grant assistance a country must abide by three key principles : economic freedom just governing and investment in people. Those principles | Economic Report of the President Box : The Benefits of Land Titles Well-defined land titles exist in the United States and other industrialized countries but they are lacking in many other countries. In Haiti for example percent of urban residents and percent of rural residents live in housing to which no one has clear title. By one calculation the total value of real estate occupied but not owned in the developing world and former communist countries is at least $ trillion. Many countries are trying to close this gap. The Peruvian government for instance awarded over million land titles to families in the 1990s When titles are clear and secure they can be transferred investment can be rewarded and houses can be rented or used as collateral. Both rural and urban property is worth more when ownership is well defined. After rural land was titled in Brazil Indonesia the Philippines and Thailand its value rose between and percent. When urban land was titled in the Philippines its value rose by percent in Manila and by percent in Davao. In both Guayaquil Ecuador and Lima Peru urban land values rose by about percent Secure land titles have profound effects on families. Adults can work at jobs outside the home because they no longer need to spend time physically guarding their informal claims. In Vietnam families with secure titles worked away from their farms nine weeks more on average than those without secure titles. In Peru adults in households with land titles worked outside the home hours more per week than those without titles Because adults were working more Peruvian children did not need to work as much. Land titling in Peru resulted in about a percent reduction in the probability of child labor. Argentine children living in titled parcels enjoyed better weight-to-height scores ( a measure of health status ) lower teenage-pregnancy rates and less repetition of school grades than children living in untitled parcels Families invest more in their homes and land when they have secure titles. A titling program in Argentina caused new property owners to improve the quality of their residences by percent. Argentine families holding clear titles had significantly better roofs walls and garden areas than those without clear titles. In Lima Peru almost half of families holding titles invested in improvements to their land compared with percent of those without titles Business people also invest more when they have titles. In Romania Russia Poland Slovakia and Ukraine entrepreneurs who believe their property rights are secure reinvest between and percent more of their profits back in their businesses. Farmers in Thailand holding titles invested so much more in their land that their output was to percent higher than those without titled land Chapter | Box continued Secure land titles also facilitate borrowing because the land can then be used as collateral for a loan. Farmers in Thailand borrowed between percent and five times more if they had title to their land. Farmers in Costa Rica Ecuador Honduras and Jamaica received larger loans on better terms if they held secure land titles. Residents of Lima Peru used secure land titles to obtain loans to purchase microbuses construct small factories and invest in other small businesses Finally secure land titles facilitate the renting and leasing of property Owners without a title may be reluctant to rent or lease their land for fear the tenant will assert an ownership claim. They may prefer to leave it vacant or rent it to family members only. The landless poor thus have better access to land when it is titled. When secure titles were created in the Dominican Republic the number of plots leased out increased by percent. Leasing also increased the access poor families had to land as percent more households gained access. The percentage of poor who are tenants increased by percent and the area rented to them grew by percent are in turn measured by a set of quantitative indicators including a measure of a country s civil and political liberties rule of law regulatory burden on businesses control of corruption and the number of days needed to complete any legal requirements to start a business. Such indicators are closely related to the strength of a country s property rights enforcement. Although the MCA has many goals it encourages and rewards property rights enforcement through focus on both governing justly and economic freedom The MCA is also consistent with a property rights approach to development assistance because it allows countries greater ownership ( that is more control ) over how they use the resources they receive. Countries receiving MCA assistance must be active partners in the development programs funded by the MCA. Each country that qualifies to receive aid constructs a detailed proposal of how the aid will be used and then negotiates and signs a compact with the Millennium Challenge Corporation ( MCC ) which administers the MCA on behalf of the U.S. government. Not surprisingly some countries are including property rights programs in compact proposals citing how important property rights are to sustained economic growth. The compact must specify a limited number of clear quantifiable goals with concrete benchmarks as well as the time needed to achieve those goals. Funding for all or part of a particular MCA compact may be scaled back or ended for failure to meet specific benchmarks. The MCA program does not impose a | Economic Report of the President development plan designed by others but instead recognizes that recipient countries themselves are in the best position to evaluate their own needs The MCA has the added advantage of encouraging countries to adopt growth-promoting policies and institutions in order to qualify for this type of aid. The MCC announced the selection of countries eligible for fiscal year and funding including Armenia Benin Bolivia Cape Verde Georgia Ghana Honduras Lesotho Madagascar Mali Mongolia Morocco Mozambique Nicaragua Senegal Sri Lanka and Yemen. Although the first compacts for development assistance are still in process the competitive process for selection has already prompted efforts by several countries to improve their institutions. For example one country has publicly stated that it passed anti-corruption legislation to help it qualify for MCA funding Conclusion In a society governed by the rule of law ownership of resources is determined by the assignment of property rights. The term property rights refers to a bundle of rights that include the right to use a resource to capture the income from the resource and to transfer those rights. The assignment of property rights determines who has control over resources. That is property rights determine who has the power to do what with which resources Using property rights to address policy problems is consistent with the principles of a free society because it assigns decision-making authority to individual decision-makers rather than to central authorities. By giving firms individuals and families the authority to make decisions about the use of their own resources property rights give control to those entities that have both the best information and the strongest incentives to use those resources efficiently Property rights solve the tragedy of the commons problem by encouraging owners to reduce the intensity of resource use. If an open access resource such as fisheries or the air is overused assigning property rights to that resource will encourage its conservation. Ownership of a resource also encourages owners to invest in and improve the resource Property rights have important economic effects because they underpin market operation. Markets are socially beneficial because they allocate resources to their highest valued use and because they provide valuable price signals to both buyers and sellers. Without well-defined and enforced property rights markets will work poorly or will not work at all Property rights analysis can illuminate similarities in policy solutions that may at first seem very different. There are numerous examples of the success of property rights in addressing policy problems including air pollution Chapter | overfishing and poorly performing public schools. Property rights have facilitated cleanup of the air at low cost have allowed fish stocks to recover and have improved the performance of schools in those areas where they have been used effectively. Property rights can be used to help address other policy issues | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R Innovation and the Information Economy I nnovation is a primary engine of economic growth. Many commonplace features of modern life such as personal computers the Internet e-mail and e-commerce have developed and diffused throughout the economy within a short span of years. Our Nation s growing prosperity depends on fostering an environment in which innovation will flourish The innovative process involves the invention commercialization and diffusion of new ideas. At each of these stages people are spurred to action by the prospect of reaping rewards from their investment. In a free market innovators vie to lower the cost of goods and services to improve their quality and usefulness and most importantly to develop new goods and services that promise benefits to customers. An innovation will succeed if it passes the market test by profitably delivering greater value to customers. Successful innovations blossom attracting capital and diffusing rapidly through the market while unsuccessful innovations can wither just as quickly. In this way markets allow capital to flow to its highest-valued uses This engine of growth can falter however if government policies distort the market signals that guide innovative activity. Well-meaning policies to promote the diffusion of a service or foster entry into new markets can have unintended consequences. A policy to subsidize an existing service so that more people will consume it can deter development of innovative new services that people might otherwise prefer. In addition pioneering investors forced to share the fruits of their investment with new entrants would find it less profitable to invest in the first place and a new market may never be developed. When government regulation instead of a competitive process picks the winners people tend to lose This chapter provides an overview of recent developments in one especially innovative sector of the economy : information technology. The main points in this chapter are : Information technology is a key contributor to economic growth and productivity and its importance to the economy is growing Competition drives the broad diffusion of innovative low-cost highquality information services. This has held true in markets for mobile wireless telephones satellite television and dial-up and broadband Internet services As circumstances change and industries evolve existing government regulations may need rethinking. In particular economic regulations aimed at correcting an absence of competition may lose their rationale when competition from new technologies emerges People are motivated to invest by the prospect of earning returns on their investment. Government thus has an important role to play in defining and protecting property rights in intellectual and physical capital so that entrepreneurs will be spurred to innovate Growth of the Information Economy Information technology ( IT ) has made enormous contributions to recent economic growth. IT comprises four categories of industry : ( ) hardware ( such as semiconductors and computers ) ( ) software/services ( such as prepackaged software and data processing ) ( ) communications equipment ( such as household audio and video equipment ) and ( ) communications services ( such as telephone services and cable and other pay television services ) IT has made many workplace tasks easier boosting people s productivity One recent study finds that labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector grew at an annual rate of percent from through and attributes nearly three-quarters of this growth to the accumulation of IT capital together with improvements in how people use this capital. IT has likewise contributed significantly to growth in our prosperity. Real gross domestic product ( GDP ) grew percent in of which percentage point was attributable to IT ( Chart ) Growth in Computer and Internet Use A key part of the growing information economy is that more people are using computers and communicating over the Internet. At the time of an October survey percent of households owned a computer. The corresponding figure for an October survey was percent. Internet use from home nearly tripled over these six years from percent of households in to percent in In the workplace recent growth in Internet and e-mail usage has also been dramatic. A survey found that in August percent of employed persons aged and over used the Internet and e-mail at work while an October survey found the figure to reach percent Explosive growth in Internet use has been a nationwide phenomenon. In only one state had more than percent of its population using the Internet from any location. In five more states had reached the percent level and only one state fell below the percent mark. At percent Internet use in among people living in rural areas was virtually on a par with the national average of percent. Demographically Internet use increases with both income and educational attainment | Economic Report of the President E-mail is the most common online activity with more than percent of Internet users aged and over sending and receiving e-mail in The next most popular online activity at more than percent of Internet users in is searching for information about products and services. Two-thirds of Internet users obtained news weather and sports information online and more than half made purchases online in E-Commerce Tops $ Trillion Transactions conducted online e-commerce exceeded $ trillion in Business-to-consumer e-commerce reckoned as the sum of transactions in retail trade and in selected service industries ( such as publishing broadcasting and telecommunications ) reached $ billion in ( Chart ) Retail trade e-commerce alone amounted to $ billion in with nonstore retailers those selling primarily through clicks rather than bricks accounting for nearly three-quarters of this total. Online retail sales have continued to grow rapidly. In the third quarter of retail trade e-commerce was more than percent higher than in the third quarter of Consumers have gained from shopping online in at least two ways. First comparison shopping has become quicker and easier online. A consumer can visit a succession of retail Web sites at virtually zero cost. Collecting a similar amount of information by visiting brick-and-mortar retail stores would be far Chapter | more time-consuming and costly. A consumer need not even canvass retail Web sites individually ; shopbot sites can gather such information on the consumer s behalf. As the cost of comparison shopping has fallen price competition has intensified both among Internet retailers and between Internet retailers and brick-and-mortar stores A number of recent studies have attempted to gauge the consumer benefits from such intensified competition. Studies of the markets for books automobiles and life insurance have generally found that comparison shopping online helps consumers obtain significantly lower prices resulting in savings estimated to be in the many hundreds of millions of dollars per year Intensified competition between online retailers and brick-and-mortar retailers means that even consumers who do not shop online may be reaping rewards from the spread of e-commerce A second way in which consumers have benefited from e-commerce is in the greater variety of goods available online. For example the number of book titles available at one major online bookseller is times greater than the number of titles stocked in a major chain retail superstore. Greater variety means that consumers can match purchases more closely to their individual tastes. A recent study of book sales suggests that the consumer gains from greater variety online are even larger than the gains from intensified price competition | Economic Report of the President Changed circumstances such as new retailing methods can pose challenges to existing regulatory frameworks or even undermine the original rationale for regulation. As the Internet changes how we live and work government should be attuned to these changes and adapt. The Internet is having an impact on regulation given the growth of e-commerce as illustrated in Box and the growth of broadband voice and data services as discussed in a later section Although business-to-consumer online sales have captured much popular attention these are dwarfed by business-to-business e-commerce which in accounted for more than percent of all online transaction volume Manufacturing shipments transacted online were $ billion in a percent increase over ( Chart ) Online merchant wholesale trade increased by percent from the level to reach $ billion in Box : Airline Computer Reservation Systems In the first half of the Administration deregulated airline computer reservation systems ( CRS ) which travel agents have used to book airline flights for travelers. Regulatory restrictions imposed in the 1980s became obsolete as people gained new information sources over the Internet. CRS centralize flight information across carriers and provide easy booking capabilities to travel agents. Following airline deregulation in the late 1970s travel agents came to depend on CRS for the latest schedule and fare information. At the time CRS were largely owned by individual airlines. This ownership raised concerns that CRSowning airlines might put rival airlines at a disadvantage in the system so that travel agents would book a greater share of flights with the CRSowning airline. CRS suppliers might also lock travel agents in by requiring long-term contracts and by structuring the programs to raise switching costs. To address these issues the Civil Aeronautics Board instituted a series of regulations in which prevented a CRSowning airline from setting up its systems in a way that disadvantaged other airlines or other CRS While the CRS rules may have been beneficial two decades ago subsequent industry changes have made the regulations largely anachronistic through ownership changes and the development of travel search engines on the Internet. The airlines have completely divested the CRS so concerns about discrimination against unaffiliated airlines are no longer warranted. Equally important the advent of the Internet has provided carriers with an alternative avenue for disseminating their fare and schedule information to consumers. The growth of the travel search engines has also enabled consumers to quickly compare rates across airlines. The development of these direct-toconsumer channels has reduced the need for travel agencies and has Chapter | Box continued reduced travel agencies need for CRS because they too can use the Internet. These changes work to place greater competitive pressure on the CRS vendors which reduces the concern about their market power In light of these changes the Administration acted to deregulate the CRS market in the first half of Deregulation already appears to be having a positive effect industry news reports indicate that CRS prices have fallen and are expected to continue to fall as old contracts expire and new ones are negotiated In online transactions among businesses were larger than business-toconsumer e-commerce not only in absolute terms but also as a fraction of total value. Only percent of retail trade revenues were transacted online in By contrast percent of all merchant wholesale trade and nearly one-fifth of all manufacturing shipments were transacted online in | Economic Report of the President Illegal Acts on the Internet The Internet provides tremendous opportunities to improve the way we communicate learn entertain ourselves and buy and sell goods and services Unfortunately theft vandalism and fraud are also moving online. From an economic perspective these activities are costly because they violate the property rights of people reducing their incentives to create new goods and diverting resources from productive uses as people spend time trying to undo the damage caused by computer viruses and Internet worms. More fundamentally the growth in such activity could threaten public confidence in using the Internet for productive purposes. As in the offline world where locks and inventory control tags deter property right violations private sector responses can make cybercrime more difficult. Government must also act to protect property rights and ensure that the Internet and other new technologies are safe venues for commerce Cybersecurity The growing reliance on the Internet means that computer users are exposed to new threats. Viruses and Internet worms impair computers and prevent authorized users from gaining timely reliable access to data or a system. Attacks in cyberspace can maliciously modify alter or destroy data or a computer system. Attackers access computers without authorization to view or copy proprietary or private information such as a credit card numbers or trade secrets. At a deeper level concerns have grown about how unauthorized control over large numbers of systems by those with malicious intent can pose threats to the security of sensitive information or to the functioning of critical infrastructures. In terms of prevention the private sector is best equipped to take steps against evolving cyber threats. The private sector owns most of the computer systems and networks and can in many cases capture the benefits from investments in improved security. Private sector surveys suggest that organizations are spending increasing amounts on IT security. The President s National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace also makes clear the Federal government s important role in promoting cybersecurity Fraudulent Spam and Spyware Scams to defraud people are another type of property rights violation. The Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) has found that spam ( unwanted typically commercial e-mail ) in addition to being a nuisance is mostly deceptive and fraudulent. Of pieces of spam examined by the Commission percent were deceptive on their face or advertised an illegitimate product or service. As in the offline world consumer awareness online is the first line of defense in combating fraud. The anonymity and scope of the Internet can make Chapter | it difficult for law enforcement agencies to track down sources of fraudulent spam and spyware ( which collects information from the victim s computer ) Such activity is growing quickly and posing significant costs to victims and companies. The President signed into law the Controlling the Assault of NonSolicited Pornography and Marketing Act of ( CAN-SPAM Act ) which establishes a framework of administrative civil and criminal tools to help America s consumers businesses and families combat unsolicited commercial email. The problems associated with spam can not be solved by Federal legislation alone but will require market responses in the development and adoption of new technologies. The Federal government has also stepped up the pursuit of purveyors of fraudulent spam and spyware. For example in a joint law enforcement initiative the FTC and the Department of Justice ( DOJ ) have brought actions to shut down operations that hijacked logos from online businesses to con hundreds of consumers into providing credit card and bank account numbers. December saw the formation of a new public-private consortium that includes financial services firms Internet service providers IT vendors and law enforcement to fight Internet-based fraud Copyright Infringement Copyrights encourage the development of goods such as books songs and videos that are much costlier to produce initially than to replicate. Digital technologies and the Internet have made possible high-quality reproduction of music and video at nearly zero cost and facilitated extensive unauthorized use through mechanisms such as file-sharing networks. Industry is exploring technological remedies to combat theft but the Federal government is also playing a role. The Attorney General has made enforcement of intellectual property laws a high priority of the DOJ. The DOJ has expanded its Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section and created the Cyber Division of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. In the DOJ launched Operation Digital Gridlock the first Federal enforcement action ever taken against criminal copyright theft on peer-to-peer networks ( that allow groups of computer users with the same networking program to interconnect and directly access files from one another s hard drives ) Competition Versus Economic Regulation An overly high price or low quality by a supplier opens the door to profit opportunities for the supplier s rivals. Rivals can expand their sales by undercutting price or offering superior quality or service. In this way competition drives suppliers to provide customers the greatest possible value consistent with covering costs. Pursuit of profit opportunities also draws firms to enter | Economic Report of the President or develop new markets which can lead to quantum leaps in consumer welfare. A pioneering firm that develops a new service for example may for a time reap high returns on its investment. But the high returns tend to draw other firms to enter and thus intensify competition in the new market. As competition drives down the innovative service s price the service will become more broadly adopted by consumers. This pattern has unfolded time and again in diverse sectors of the economy The promise of competition might not be fulfilled however if scale economies in an industry are so great that only a single firm can supply the market cost-effectively. A firm operates under economies of scale when its average cost of supplying a good falls as the firm expands its scale of operations Economies of scale can arise for example if the up-front costs of setting up a business are large. Once the groundwork of the business has been laid the incremental cost of the good the cost of supplying each additional unit may be low. Examples of industries in which suppliers compete in the midst of scale economies include automobiles software and pharmaceuticals. Prices in such markets can fall over time as firms enter the market and competition drives prices down toward the good s incremental cost. But a firm will only enter a market if it expects to earn enough of a margin above its incremental cost on enough sales to cover its ongoing overhead costs and recover its up-front costs of entry. In rare cases up-front costs may be so large and competition after entry so intense that no entrant could profitably challenge the incumbent supplier s monopoly. Such industries are called natural monopolies Natural monopolies are a rare exception to the competition that to a greater or lesser degree characterizes most markets. Industries commonly given the natural monopoly label have tended to have a highly capital-intensive infrastructure such as the telephone system cable television railroads and the electricity distribution grid. A rationale for the economic regulation of these industries has been that competition and its benefits would not naturally arise. A monopolist has an incentive to restrict output and raise price above the competitive level. In the absence of competition regulation may offer the prospect of a substitute although a poor one for the competitive process Ideally the aim of economic regulation would be an industry outcome of low prices and high quality that approaches what competition would have accomplished had competition been possible However natural monopoly does not necessarily mean economic regulation is needed to protect consumers from monopoly prices. While natural monopoly means that competition in the field is unlikely to arise there could still be vigorous competition for the field that is competition among firms to attain the position of monopolist. Municipalities can and do exploit competition for the field for example by auctioning a monopoly franchise to extract concessions from the winning monopoly provider Chapter | Traditional Rate-of-Return Regulation Under traditional rate-of-return regulation the regulator estimates the firm s capital base and incremental cost. This approach allows the firm to charge prices just high enough to yield a rate of return that would have attracted capital to the industry had the industry been open to competitive entry The traditional approach to regulation presents several difficulties. First measuring a firm s capital base and incremental cost involves substantial auditing effort and uncertainty for the regulator. Judging the appropriate rate of return is also difficult as it involves gauging the riskiness of capital investments in the industry. An especially problematic aspect of traditional regulation though is its effect on incentives. A firm in a competitive industry and even an unregulated monopolist has an incentive to trim its costs to a minimum so that it can capture the highest possible profit. A firm subject to rate-of-return regulation has no comparable incentive to keep costs down. The higher the firm s incremental costs the higher the prices the regulator will generally allow the firm to charge to cover those costs. A key problem is that the firm has an incentive to choose overly capital-intensive technologies because this increases the capital base to which the regulator applies the firm s allowable rate of return Price-Cap Regulation Many Federal and state regulators have turned from traditional regulation to price-cap regulation of industries considered to be natural monopolies. Prior to all states regulated telephone service on a rate-of-return basis. By September states had switched to some form of price-cap regulation Under price-cap regulation the regulator sets an initial price or basket of prices that the firm can charge for its goods. The price caps are then updated over time by a positive factor to account for inflation and a negative offset to account for the firm s perceived ability to trim its costs through productivity improvements. If the regulated firm succeeds in trimming costs by more than than the productivity offset in the price cap its profits will increase. The hope is that price-cap regulation may avoid some of the perverse incentive effects of traditional regulation by de-linking the regulated firm s returns from its costs. Several recent studies have found that in comparison with rate-of-return regulation price-cap regulation is associated with improvements in the technical efficiency of telecommunications providers as well as greater investment in modernizing switches and deploying fiber-optic cable Price-cap regulation is far from ideal however and in fact faces problems similar to those of traditional regulation. In setting the initial price cap the regulator must measure the firm s capital base and incremental costs as well as determine a rate of return that the capped prices should yield. This is identical to the process in traditional rate-of-return regulation. In setting an | Economic Report of the President inflation factor for the price cap s growth the regulator must assess both the rate at which the firm s input costs are likely to grow and the rate of productivity growth the firm is capable of achieving. Given difficulties in gauging these rates the regulator must make periodic adjustments to the price-cap mechanism in light of industry outcomes. But if the regulated firm underperforms is it because the regulator miscalculated or because the firm failed to pursue productivity improvements diligently ? Both rate-of-return and price-cap regulation suffer to some degree from information problems. A regulator can not know with precision all of the economic factors relevant to setting prices. In practice these types of regulation can lead to shortages high costs slowed innovation or a combination of all of these shortcomings. Where vigorous competition is feasible market forces can guide firms to deploy their resources in ways that benefit customers far more effectively than could a price-setting regulator Advancing technology is providing competitive inroads to a number of industries once considered natural monopolies. Satellite television offers a competitive alternative to cable television service ( Box ) and wireless telecommunications are competing with wireline telephone services. Such technology-induced competition can be expected to increase as cable companies begin to offer voice communications and telephone companies roll out video services Box : Satellite Television Virtually all cable system operators hold franchise monopolies over cable television service within their local service territories. Only a few communities have issued multiple franchises allowing for overbuild competition between cable system operators in the local market. A number of studies have found that cable rates in the 1980s were roughly percent lower in markets with cable overbuild competition than in comparable markets served by cable franchise monopolists The rise of satellite TV services since the mid-1990s has also put competitive pressure on cable system operators. A study of thousands of cable systems across the United States finds that controlling for a variety of other factors a cable system s penetration rate ( cable subscribers as a ratio of homes passed by cable ) tends to be lower in areas where satellite reception is better. This is consistent with satellite TV providing more competition to cable TV where a larger fraction of households has access to satellite reception. While satellite TV has taken market share away from cable TV the overall penetration of pay TV services among U.S. households has grown as satellite TV services have grown. As of June percent of households with televisions subscribed to pay TV service Chapter | Box continued By June this had grown to percent. A recent study indicates that the introduction of satellite TV led to substantial gains for consumers However ongoing antitrust oversight of the pay TV industry remains important. In both the FCC and the DOJ acted to block the merger of the two primary satellite TV providers to prevent a loss of competition in pay TV services Telephone Service : A Natural Monopoly ? Natural monopoly arguments have traditionally offered a rationale for economic regulation of telephone service. It can be costly for entrants to reproduce the incumbent local networks of copper wires or loops that connect nearly every U.S. household to telephone service. Over the past two decades however the wireline ( land line ) telephone monopoly has yielded to encroaching competition from the entry of alternative suppliers of longdistance service in the 1980s the explosive growth in mobile wireless telephone service over the past decade and the recent introduction of voice communications over the Internet. Such proliferating competition has posed challenges to the economic regulation of telephone services Long-Distance Services Prior to both local and long-distance telephone service in the United States was supplied primarily by a single firm AT&T. As part of a antitrust settlement with the DOJ AT&T was broken up in into a number of regional exchanges providing local service and one long-distance provider that retained the AT&T name. The breakup separated local telephone service which remained rate-regulated because of its natural monopoly characteristics or for jurisdictional reasons from long-distance service and equipment manufacturing businesses viewed as potentially competitive Thereafter competition in long-distance service progressed with the entry and expansion of alternative providers Between and per-minute long-distance prices fell by more than percent after adjusting for inflation. This resulted in part from the FCC lowering per-minute access charges on long-distance calls savings that were passed through to long-distance customers as a result of the emerging competition among long-distance providers. At the same time the proportion of | Economic Report of the President U.S. households connecting to local telephone service grew from percent in to percent in A study of telephone demand over this period found that much of this increased penetration in telephone service could be explained by the drop in long-distance prices. This reflects the fact that consumers value connecting to the local telephone network for the ability to place long-distance calls as well as local calls Goods tend to be supplied efficiently when prices reflect costs. If a price is higher than the true cost of supplying an additional unit of a good too little of the good will be consumed relative to what would yield the greatest net benefits to consumers and producers. Telephone charges pegged to the volume of call traffic tend to discourage call volume. This can lead to less than efficient utilization of the telephone network if price exceeds the network costs of putting through an additional call or minute of calling. By the same token price reductions toward unit cost encourage more efficient utilization of the network and increase the value consumers derive from connecting to the network Mobile Wireless Telephone Services Whatever the prospects for competition in telephone service may have been in decades past substantial competition has emerged in recent years and more is on the way. Mobile wireless telephone service has grown by nearly percent annually from million subscribers in the United States in to more than million in ( Chart ) Nationwide percent of the population subscribed to wireless service at the close of In contrast nationwide wireline telephone penetration was nearly percent in but the number of wireline telephone lines peaked in at million lines and fell by about million lines over the next two years. Some of this decline likely reflects consumers choosing to switch from wireline to mobile wireless telephone service Compared to wireline service wireless service offers the convenience of mobility and accessibility. Growing wireless penetration has been driven by a rapid drop in wireless prices. The average price per minute of mobile wireless telephone service fell from cents in to about cents in ( Chart ) Sharpening competition has helped drive the falling average price per minute of mobile wireless telephone service over the past decade Wireless telephone services are carried over radio spectrum. Spectrum generally refers to a broad range of frequencies of electromagnetic radiation which encompasses visible light. Frequencies higher than those of visible light include ultraviolet light and x-rays while lower frequencies include first infrared light and then as wavelengths grow longer radio waves. Radio spectrum refers to the lower range of frequencies which carry broadcasting and mobile communications services. If two transmitters at the same geographic location were to use the same frequency at the same time they would interfere with each other Chapter | | Economic Report of the President garbling their transmissions. To limit such interference problems the Federal government licenses rights to use specified bands of spectrum at specified locations. Federal government users of spectrum are licensed through the National Telecommunications and Information Administration ( NTIA ) All other spectrum users are licensed through the FCC In the early 1990s government-issued spectrum licenses for wireless telephone service were limited to just two cellular providers in each cellular market area. A series of FCC-run auctions beginning in provided additional spectrum for digital personal communications services ( PCS ) enough to support as many as eight wireless providers. By the end of percent of the Nation s population could choose from three or more wireless providers and percent could choose from at least six. By the end of these figures were up to percent and percent respectively Talking on the Internet : Voice over Internet Protocol Local exchange telephone networks are facing growing competition from Internet-based telephone services. Unlike traditional circuit-switched telephone calls communications using Voice over Internet Protocol ( VoIP ) break the call stream into data packets sent over the Internet turning your computer into an alternative to traditional telephone service. Much of the current volume of VoIP calls originates and terminates on public switched telephone networks by callers using digital subscriber line ( DSL ) broadband services. But VoIP services are spreading to other network facilities such as those of cable television systems. According to news reports several of the country s largest cable system operators plan to roll out VoIP services within their service territories which would make them available to millions of households. News reports indicate that Wireless Fidelity ( Wi-Fi ) broadband service providers are also exploring VoIP services. Looking ahead electric utilities that develop broadband over power lines service could also provide VoIP services. All of these recent developments together with the rapid growth in mobile wireless telephone service suggest that the monopoly access to household voice communications that local telephone exchanges have had for nearly a century is yielding to intensifying competition The prospect of growing VoIP traffic has raised concerns in some quarters that this emerging competition may undermine the current structure of regulating telephone services. A basic rationale for the economic regulation of telephone service has been the natural monopoly argument that is that competition for telephone service was unlikely to arise. Economic regulation then offered the prospect of an alternative way although a problematic one of achieving some of the benefits of competition that customers have enjoyed in most other markets. But with competition now emerging the natural Chapter | monopoly rationale for the economic regulation of telephone service is beginning to fall away. Squelching competition as a threat to the existing regulatory framework would turn matters on their head. Regulation should adapt to changing market realities in ways that allow innovation to flourish and consumers to choose among alternatives while ensuring national security homeland security law enforcement and public safety Realizing the Promise of Broadband Broadband services offer download speeds much faster than dial-up Internet access enabling innovative features such as streaming video and VoIP. For example fiber-optic cable to the home can provide speeds of more than megabits per second. Broadband services have quickly been embraced by the public growing from million high-speed lines ( defined as connection speeds over kilobits per second in at least one direction ) in December to more than million lines in June This represents an annual growth rate of percent. In the first few years after inception broadband penetration among U.S. households has outpaced the earlier diffusion of dial-up Internet mobile wireless telephones personal computers videocassette recorders and color television Universal Affordable Access to Broadband Last March the President announced a national goal of universal affordable access to broadband services by The Administration s ongoing efforts to achieve this goal reflect a belief in the powers of competition and private sector innovation to bring the benefits of broadband to consumers. As experience in the telephone industry has shown competition offers the most robust and reliable means of broadly diffusing important technologies. The Administration has taken steps to unleash the power of free markets to deliver broadband services by removing disincentives to invest strengthening property rights and allowing consumers rather than the government to choose the technologies that best meet their needs Removing Disincentives to Invest Competition in broadband service is growing. Already many communities have two providers of broadband service. In percent of the zip codes in the United States had at least two high-speed Internet access providers. By the middle of the fraction had risen to percent. So far competition in broadband has primarily been between DSL services provided by telephone companies and cable modem services provided by cable television system operators. Cable s share in high-speed lines has grown | Economic Report of the President from percent in December to percent in June One avenue by which telephone companies could compete more effectively in broadband service is through investment in fiber-optic cable which offers faster connection speeds than can generally be achieved over the copper wires of the traditional telephone network. According to news reports fiber-optics will allow telephone companies to offer television in addition to very highspeed broadband services similar to the current offerings of many cable television operators While fiber-optic high-speed lines have more than doubled between December and June other forms of broadband delivery have grown at an even faster pace so that fiber s share in high-speed lines has fallen Part of the reason may be that regulatory uncertainty has impeded fiber-optic investment. The Telecommunications Act of requires telephone companies to provide portions of their network facilities for sale or lease at regulated rates to competing local exchange companies. This process is known as unbundling network elements. Until recently it remained unclear whether the Act s unbundling requirements would extend beyond copper loops to also cover fiber-optic cable. People are motivated to invest by the prospect of reaping returns. In residential neighborhoods an unbundling requirement that would force investors to share the fruits of their investment in fiber-optic cable with competitors could blunt incentives to invest in fiber-optics. The result might not be more competition but rather less innovation. The Administration supported the FCC s decisions in and to exempt fiber-optic loops from unbundling requirements when this technology is deployed to residential neighborhoods including fiber-to-the-home fiber-tothe-curb and fiber-to-multi-dwelling-units. According to news reports in the wake of these rulings a number of major telephone companies have announced plans to invest several billion dollars in deploying fiber-optic cable to reach more than million households within three years Setting Interference Standards The Administration has also helped to lower barriers to the development of new competition in broadband service. Broadband over power lines ( BPL ) holds the promise of adding a third wire into the home to compete with cable modem and DSL services. However BPL generates radio waves that can interfere with the operation of wireless systems. The Administration has helped the FCC develop policies to address BPL interference issues Beginning in the Commerce Department s NTIA undertook a detailed technical examination of interference risks posed by BPL by conducting millions of measurements on test equipment. The NTIA submitted a report and set of specifications to the FCC which adopted final rules on BPL technical requirements in October Setting appropriate interference Chapter | standards prevents those who deploy BPL technology from significantly infringing on the spectrum rights of others while allowing the technology to enhance the broadband service options available to homes and businesses Strengthening Spectrum Rights Another potential source of competition in the provision of broadband service is third generation or 3G wireless technologies. Wireless technology may revolutionize broadband competition by eliminating reliance on wires and cables. The technology may hold particular value for areas with sparse customers where wire- and cable-based communications networks may be particularly expensive to deploy The rising demand for wireless services may at some point strain the limits of available spectrum. Aspects of the Federal government s system of allocating spectrum licenses can make it difficult for promising new technologies to displace lower-valued uses of spectrum. In May the President established the Spectrum Policy Initiative to reform spectrum management for the twenty-first century. In June the Department of Commerce provided two reports including policy recommendations to the President and in November the President directed Federal agencies to implement the reports recommendations. In particular the President directed the Secretary of Commerce in coordination with other Federal agencies to develop a plan within one year for identifying and implementing incentives to promote more efficient and effective use of spectrum while protecting national and homeland security critical infrastructure and government services One of many issues is the extent to which spectrum currently in government hands could be released for commercial use. In July the Department of Commerce produced a plan in concert with the FCC and Department of Defense to release for commercial use a broad swath of radio spectrum while accommodating critically important spectrum requirements for national security. In December the President signed into law a piece of legislation to establish a spectrum relocation fund that will compensate government agencies for putting spectrum they have used up for auction This will facilitate making Federal spectrum available when there are highervalued private sector uses and provide a better mechanism for relocating Federal spectrum-dependent systems with less uncertainty for both Federal users and industry Making more spectrum available for private use is not the only way to promote the development of promising new wireless technologies that provide high-speed Internet and other services. Spectrum policy could also enable spectrum used by the private sector to become available for higher-valued uses without making incumbent users worse off. As discussed in Chapter Expanding Individual Choice and Control assigning tradable property rights allows providers of the higher-valued uses to compensate incumbent holders | Economic Report of the President for their property rights. The Administration has encouraged the FCC to allow greater use of secondary markets through which licensees could sublease their spectrum. The FCC adopted spectrum leasing rules in October Simplifying Federal Rules To promote widespread deployment of broadband networks the Administration has worked to ensure that broadband providers have timely and cost-effective access to rights-of-way the legal right to pass through property controlled by another including access to conduits corridors trenches tower sites and undersea routes. Such passageways often cross large areas of land owned or controlled by the Federal government. The Administration has established a Federal Right-of-Way Working Group under the Department of Commerce to explore ways to simplify the tangle of Federal agency regulations broadband providers must navigate in seeking rights-of-way over Federal lands The Working Group issued a report with a set of recommendations. In April the President instructed Federal government agencies to implement these recommendations Conclusion The information technology sector has been a vibrant part of our economy and there is every indication that it will continue to be. The continued strength of this sector depends on fostering an environment in which innovation will flourish. In a free market innovators compete to lower the cost of goods improve their quality and usefulness and develop entirely new goods that promise quantum leaps in consumer welfare. People are motivated to invest in developing new ideas and the infrastructure to enter new markets by the prospect of earning returns on their investment. Government thus has an important role to play in defining property rights in intellectual and physical capital so that people will be spurred to invest and innovate as well as ensuring the development of an environment in which public safety and national security are protected. Government efforts to hasten the spread of innovative technologies should focus on lowering regulatory barriers that impede market provision. But government should avoid picking winners among emerging services. Doing so could entrench services that may become outdated as the marketplace evolves and hinder people from choosing the services they truly prefer. At this time it is hard to predict the range of technologies that will emerge to deliver high-speed data services or even what the scope of these services will be. As people vote with their dollars the market winners that emerge will be those technologies and services that deliver customers the greatest value Chapter | | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R The Global HIV/AIDS Epidemic S ocieties worldwide face the challenge of curbing the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) epidemic. The disease has already killed over million people and currently over million people are living with the human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) the virus that causes AIDS The impact of HIV/AIDS varies across the world both in terms of the scale of the epidemic and the ability to treat infected individuals. Less-developed countries are particularly hard-hit on both accounts. Almost two-thirds of all people with HIV live in sub-Saharan Africa a region that makes up only one-tenth of the world s population. At the same time few infected individuals in the region receive adequate treatment for the disease. In addition to the devastation from the immense loss of life the disease also has economic consequences that intensify the humanitarian crisis President Bush has made fighting the worldwide AIDS epidemic a priority of U.S. foreign policy and he has taken bold action against the crisis through his Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief. Understanding the unique challenges presented by this epidemic is essential to designing policies to prevent the spread of the disease and to treat those who are already infected. This chapter discusses the nature of the crisis its consequences and what governments can do to create affordable access to existing treatments while encouraging research toward the development of new medical therapies to combat this disease. The key points of this chapter are : AIDS is a global problem with far-reaching consequences. While the disease s impacts on human health and mortality are widely recognized the AIDS epidemic also has devastating economic consequences that exacerbate the humanitarian crisis A comprehensive and integrated approach of prevention treatment and care is essential to quelling the epidemic. In poor countries treatment affordability and the lack of health care infrastructure are major concerns. Compassionate pricing policies and aid from developed nations can play an important role in expanding access to treatment To continue the development of better treatments and to work toward eradication of HIV/AIDS drug companies need to maintain the highest possible quality of research. Intellectual property laws are important to ensuring appropriate incentives for innovation to create the next generation of therapies and to develop a safe and effective vaccine A Global Crisis The scale of HIV/AIDS is far worse than forecasts initially indicated over a decade ago. In there were more new cases of HIV/AIDS than in any other single year since the disease emerged with almost million people becoming infected around the globe. Roughly million people died of the disease in alone In the United States AIDS is the fifth-leading cause of death in people years of age. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) estimated that over people in the United States were living with AIDS in and approximately people were living with HIV. The number of AIDS cases continues to increase among minority populations and African Americans accounted for percent of new HIV/AIDS diagnoses in One of the most disturbing statistics surrounding the disease is that approximately people in the United States are living with an undiagnosed HIV infection. Patients who are unaware of their infection are less likely to take precautions to prevent the spread of the disease and are unable to begin effective treatment. Furthermore of the estimated people who are diagnosed with HIV/AIDS roughly one-third may not be receiving treatment. Taken together the estimates of those untreated and untested suggest that close to half a million people in the United States are living with HIV without treatment HIV/AIDS infection levels in some parts of the world greatly exceed those in the United States. The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS ( UNAIDS ) estimates that million people worldwide were newly infected with HIV in which is the highest number of new infections in any single year since the beginning of the epidemic in Approximately million people died of AIDS in and UNAIDS estimates that over million people have died from complications of AIDS since the first case was identified. Estimates suggest that people die and are newly infected with the virus each day. Because of aggressive prevention treatment and care efforts there has been a decline in the number of deaths among AIDS patients in the United States while the number of people living with HIV/AIDS continues to increase in the United States and globally While the epidemic affects virtually every country in the world the prevalence of HIV/AIDS varies markedly across regions ( Chart ) Close to two-thirds of those infected are Africans for whom HIV/AIDS is the leading cause of death. In seven countries in southern Africa at least one out of every five adults is living with HIV. In Swaziland the HIV prevalence has reached nearly percent among pregnant women ; in South Africa one in four women between the ages of and is infected. HIV/AIDS is predominantly a disease of young people ; the majority of people who contract the disease | Economic Report of the President Chart Estimated HIV Infection Levels The HIV/AIDS epidemic affects virtually every country in the world and the disease s prevalence varies markedly across regions Western Europe North America Caribbean North Africa & Middle East Eastern Europe & Central Asia East Asia South & South-East Asia Latin America Sub-Saharan Africa Oceania Source : UNAIDS become infected by the age of As a result of its lethality and the relative youth of its victims HIV/AIDS has reduced life expectancy by more than years in many African countries. Life expectancy in some countries is projected to fall to roughly years within the next decade whereas in the absence of HIV/AIDS some were expected to approach or exceed years. Chart shows this dramatic effect in some of the hardest-hit countries in Africa Disease Characteristics and Treatments The human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) is an infectious agent that damages the body s immune system. As the viral infection progresses individuals lose their ability to fight secondary infections and certain cancers. The term acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) describes the advanced stages of HIV infection. The virus primarily infects an important part of the immune system know as the CD-4 or helper T-cells which lead the body s attack against infections. When these cells multiply to fight an infection they themselves become more susceptible to HIV infection. The HHS definition of a diagnosis of AIDS established by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention includes all HIV-infected people who have fewer than CD-4 positive T-cells per cubic millimeter of blood ( as compared to or more Chapter | in healthy adults ) HIV-infected individuals with higher CD-4 counts can also be diagnosed with AIDS if they develop one of several types of opportunistic infections or cancers associated with severely compromised immune systems The symptoms and signs of opportunistic infections common in people with AIDS can be highly debilitating. Many individuals who have progressed to an AIDS diagnosis find it difficult to work or perform basic household chores and as the immune system continues to deteriorate these effects generally worsen. Studies in Western countries have found that the median time it takes for an untreated HIV infection to progress to AIDS is about years though the amount of time varies widely across patients. If left untreated the majority of patients will die within one year of the progression from HIV infection to full-blown AIDS Because no vaccine is available the primary way to prevent HIV is through the avoidance of behaviors that put a person at risk of contracting the infection. HIV is not spread through casual contact. The virus is most commonly spread through unprotected sex with an infected partner but it can also be spread through contact with infected blood. Mothers can transmit HIV to their babies during pregnancy birth or through breast milk while nursing. In the case of mother-to-child transmission at birth the administration of certain drugs during labor can greatly reduce the likelihood of infecting the newborn | Economic Report of the President There is no cure for HIV/AIDS though the past decade has witnessed great strides in the treatment of AIDS. Multiple categories of drugs are now available for combating the disease but the administration of individual drugs alone can render the treatment progressively less effective as the disease develops resistance to the medication. To minimize resistance and maximize effectiveness health care providers use treatments comprised of a combination of several drugs to suppress the virus. Even though the side effects can be quite severe this type of therapy is credited with dramatically improving the health and life expectancy of HIV-infected individuals Advances in treatments have reduced the number of deaths caused by HIV/AIDS but despite price reductions by manufacturers and large-scale international assistance the price of these treatments has so far exceeded what most residents of the developing world can afford. UNAIDS states that in low- and middle-income countries death rates for HIV-infected year olds are up to times greater than those of people living with HIV in industrialized countries and differences in access to antiretroviral therapy can largely account for this trend. Limited health care infrastructure and a lack of trained health care professionals in poor countries coupled with difficulties in accessing even basic care further increase the suffering of those that can not afford treatment The Economic Impact of HIV/AIDS The vast scale of human suffering that AIDS causes and the sheer number of lives lost to the disease make the epidemic a global emergency. Its scope extends beyond the immediate humanitarian crisis as the epidemic affects many aspects of economic and social development. Roughly percent of worldwide HIV/AIDS cases occur in Africa Latin America the Caribbean and Asia where much of the affected population is already living in poverty AIDS deepens poverty intensifies food shortages and in some cases erases decades of economic progress Direct Economic Impacts on Households There are several mechanisms by which the disease hinders economic development particularly in less-developed countries. First HIV/AIDS-related illnesses directly decrease the income of an affected household. Even if an infected family member is able to work a sick worker is likely to be less productive than a healthy one. Many people with AIDS are unable to work at all. The disease s eventual lethality and loss of income-earning family members exacerbates this reduction in a family s income. One study estimates that in South Africa and Zambia for example income in affected households Chapter | typically fell by to percent due to AIDS-related illnesses. Furthermore year olds contract half of all new HIV infections worldwide so a large percentage of the current and future workforce in the hardest-hit countries is dying. By predominantly affecting the working age population the disease leaves too few people to support the aging and young populations both within an individual family and within a society. One heavily impacted sector is agriculture and failure to produce food can have particularly devastating effects on households and communities. The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations estimated that million agricultural workers died from AIDS between and and they projected that million more will likely die by In some countries this could mean a loss of over percent of the agricultural workforce ( Chart ) At the same time that AIDS erodes a patient s productive capacities it can impose debilitating costs on other members of a household. Medical expenses rise with a patient s health care needs while other family members may need to miss work or school to care for a patient. According to the Report by UNAIDS AIDS-care-related expenses on average can absorb one-third of an affected household s income. Many of these households are already poor and face adversities such as chronic food shortages. Coupled with the fact that AIDS patients need more calories than healthy individuals the AIDSinduced deepening of poverty and the decrease in agricultural workers are intensifying these food shortages | Economic Report of the President AIDS is more damaging to a household s income than other fatal diseases Several studies have found that adults with AIDS use more health care than those with other illnesses. One study conducted in Thailand showed that the loss of income from an AIDS death is on average more than percent greater than if the family member had died of another cause Indirect Economic Impacts on Households In addition to the direct effect on poverty caused by the decrease in family earnings and increase in family expenditures HIV/AIDS can have consequences that indirectly affect households well-being. For example the disease can change the way that affected families make long-term decisions Subsistence households may alter their planning horizons because they do not expect family members to live as long and because their needs become more immediate due to pressing health concerns When families face the increasing costs described above children may be pulled out of school in order to supplement the declining family income resulting in a loss in the children s future earning potential. Moreover a household might have less incentive to invest in education because of the dramatic decrease in any one child s life expectancy. Private-sector firms which also invest in human capital through education and training have similarly diminished investment incentives when human capital is short-lived Training and education can be expensive but increased skills lead to longterm financial rewards which can not be fully realized when life expectancy declines. All of these factors can combine to create a vicious cycle of increased poverty in the short run and an inability of households to improve their condition in the long run. Shorter planning horizons can potentially lead to a variety of other indirect effects such as quicker depletion of natural resources and accelerated environmental degradation A high prevalence of HIV/AIDS in a community can also place extraordinary stress on social networks. These networks are important because they frequently provide an informal kind of insurance in rural areas of developing countries where populations lack access to formal insurance markets. These informal markets work by pooling risk across diverse households so those experiencing good times can help those experiencing bad ones. For example a household that loses a crop because of flooding can turn to friends in unaffected areas for help. These traditional means of dealing with hardship break down in the case of HIV/AIDS because the disease is so widespread that it can be difficult to turn to friends and family for help since the disease is likely to be directly affecting them as well. Households also can be burdened indirectly by impacts on local labor markets such as when labor shortages during planting and harvesting seasons affect agricultural yields thereby threatening the availability of food for HIV-infected and noninfected households alike Chapter | Academic research has found evidence of these effects and has documented still other effects of HIV/AIDS on individual families. One study finds that in Uganda HIV/AIDS increases the proportion of female-headed households who are living in poverty. Another study finds that in parts of Kenya children in affected families sometimes have no caregivers in their households and manage their own household activities without the supervision of an adult. Research conducted in South Africa shows that affected households allocate more resources to food health and rent and less to education and clothing than nonaffected households providing evidence that HIV/AIDS is placing constraints on an entire generation s capacity to pursue education and higher income in the long run Macroeconomic Impacts The aggregated effects of HIV/AIDS on individual households can create serious macroeconomic consequences. Because decreased mortality and increased education are two of the most significant factors in determining economic growth the HIV/AIDS epidemic has the potential to threaten the economic well-being of entire societies. As discussed in the previous section the disease can decrease the overall level of skills in the workforce through a number of mechanisms because skilled workers die of AIDS children drop out of school and firms and individuals invest less in human capital. This loss of worker skills and capacity reduces economic growth. The disease can also decrease productivity and distort labor market decisions further slowing economic development Although there is still a dearth of data documenting these effects several economic models estimate reductions in economic growth rates for African countries. Recent studies tend to find more significant impacts than previous estimates most likely because the macroeconomic impacts become increasingly measurable as the disease affects a larger proportion of households workers and employers. A report published in estimates that over the period from to HIV/AIDS on average reduced the rate of economic growth in African countries by percent per year. This study reports that by Africa alone could incur a loss of US $ billion Getting Prevention Treatment and Care to the Field Combating the HIV/AIDS pandemic requires both a reduction in new infections and adequate treatment and care for those already infected Interventions in countries such as Kenya the Dominican Republic Thailand Cambodia and most notably Uganda that have promoted risk avoidance | Economic Report of the President and risk reduction have helped reduce the number of new infections and helped reduce the spread of HIV. For example the Abstinence Be Faithful and correct and consistent Condom use or ABC approach employs population-specific interventions that emphasize abstinence for youth and other unmarried persons including delay of sexual debut ; mutual faithfulness and partner reduction for sexually active adults ; and correct and consistent use of condoms by those whose behavior places them at risk for transmitting or becoming infected with HIV Another important step toward quelling the AIDS epidemic is the widespread dissemination of currently available treatments and care. Recent developments in drug therapy and other HIV-related disease care can substantially prolong survival and improve the quality of a patient s life. Indeed evidence from a recent study suggests that the death rate from AIDS in some developed countries has fallen by about percent since more advanced drug therapies became available in the mid-1990s. Unfortunately in the world s poorest countries where most HIV/AIDS patients live access to these treatments is shockingly low. As stated by the President in January : There are whole countries in Africa where more than one-third of the adult population carries the infection. More than million require immediate drug treatment. Yet across that continent only AIDS victims only are receiving the medicine they need Since the President s speech the United States and international partners have made major investments to make safe and effective low-cost antiretroviral ( ARV ) treatment more widely available throughout the developing world. Many people are now on life-saving therapy in focus countries as a result of the President s Emergency Plan and the Global Fund ( one-third of whose resources come from the United States ) has also made great strides in placing patients on ARVs through a portfolio of grants to public-private consortia throughout the world While as recently as two years ago many analysts believed the sole problem with access to ARV treatment was that drug prices were too high for most patients to afford price cuts by brand-name manufacturers and the wider availability of generic versions of ARVs have helped to improve access to these treatments. Nevertheless drug prices are still too high for most patients to afford and health care infrastructures in developing countries have too few resources for the effective distribution of treatment even when drugs are available Two of the keys to expanding access to treatment in poor countries are low prices and generous international aid. Without low prices large-scale distribution is probably not possible even with generous amounts of aid. And even at low prices many of the poorest AIDS sufferers will not be able to afford adequate treatment since they face still more basic needs such as adequate food and clean water. Thus low prices and generous aid must go together for large-scale treatment dissemination to be possible Chapter | A Role for Differential Pricing Charging different prices to different buyers of the same product can be an important way to help poor populations access medical treatment. This practice is pervasive throughout the economy and ranges from senior citizen discounts on movie tickets to cheaper college tuition for low-income families Competition in a market and the ability to resell a good make it difficult for firms to charge different prices because of the opportunity for arbitrage the ability to make a profit by purchasing the product at the lower price and reselling it at a higher price. This demand for the product at the lower price and supply of the product at the higher price will cause prices to equalize a phenomenon that economists refer to as the law of one price. However if a good can not easily be resold as with movie tickets and college tuition differential pricing is possible. It is often in the interest of a profit-maximizing firm to charge high prices to some customers while not relinquishing the ability to sell to other customers who can afford the product only at lower prices. This disparity might seem unfair since buyers of the same product are being treated differently Drug companies have the ability to practice differential pricing because they can possess intellectual property rights. When a firm is the first to develop a new treatment or vaccine it is awarded a patent that allows the company to be the sole seller of the product for years from the date a patent is filed. ( This generally works out to be approximately years from the time the drug is first available on the market. ) Because the development of new drugs requires costly research and development patent rights provide important incentives for firms to take on the upfront costs of development ; the reward for undertaking these risky activities is the promise of high profits should their efforts to develop a new drug succeed. ( Patent rights and the ensuing incentives for innovation are discussed at greater length in the next section. ) The market for AIDS drugs is a case in which differential pricing possibly helps to create societal benefits beyond the profits enjoyed by firms with market power by allowing people in poor countries to pay less for their drugs This is already a common practice for pharmaceuticals and some manufacturers of antiretroviral treatments have offered the drugs to developing countries at lower prices than those that apply in the U.S. and Europe. The AIDS drug PLC for example sells for $ per day in the United States but sells for half that price ( $ per day ) in Uganda. The drug companies can make incremental sales at lower prices without incurring a loss but if PLC were sold everywhere for only $ the companies would not recover their investment in research and the drug would not be available to consumers in either country Consumers paying the higher price for a drug may believe that everyone should have access to the drug at the lower price. However if forced to sell at | Economic Report of the President only one price the drug companies will generally need to set the price somewhere between the highest and the lowest prices under differential pricing thus creating less access to the drug. Patients who could only afford the drug at the lowest price would be unable to purchase it at the standardized price Therefore offering drugs at lower prices in impoverished countries can play a vital role in increasing the availability of AIDS drugs in less-developed countries Humanitarian Aid Even with drugs available in developing countries at prices far below those charged in the United States and other advanced economies severe poverty levels will continue to prevent many AIDS patients from receiving adequate treatment. Effective new treatments can be produced at an incremental cost of $ per year but most individuals in sub-Saharan Africa live on less than $ per year. Furthermore the actual distribution of treatment requires more than just an affordable supply of drugs ; it requires a health care infrastructure that can adequately implement safe treatment programs. This is a particular challenge for people living in remote rural areas The Bush Administration has laid out the President s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief ( the Emergency Plan ) a five-year $ billion commitment to fight the disease globally. The President s Emergency Plan works in over countries around the world while focusing on of the countries most affected by HIV/AIDS with the goal of treating million HIV-positive individuals preventing million new infections and caring for million infected or affected by the disease including orphans. It prioritizes treatment care and prevention activities as the interventions most likely to mitigate the disease s consequences and reduce HIV infection. By prolonging life and restoring health treatment and care interventions can increase the productive capacities of individuals reduce the direct and indirect costs of care and allow those infected and affected by HIV/AIDS to focus on priorities such as work and school thereby securing the future of families and nations. The Emergency Plan s health care approach also sets out to work within hostcountry strategies to strengthen and develop health care networks that will increase access to prevention care and treatment services since the President recognizes that all are crucial to winning the fight against HIV/AIDS The President s plan also works with international partners to intensify the worldwide response to the epidemic and to develop sustained collaborative efforts. The Emergency Plan devotes $ billion over five years to of the most afflicted countries in the world. It also commits $ billion to HIV/AIDS programs in an additional countries including international research in support of new tools for combating HIV/AIDS and it increases the United States pledge to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS Tuberculosis and Malaria by $ billion over five years. The President made the inaugural pledge to the Chapter | Global Fund in May of and at the end of the United States remained the Global Fund s largest donor responsible for over percent of its pledges and percent of its contributions. One success upon which these efforts can build is the intervention strategies in Uganda which successfully turned around the HIV/AIDS crisis in that country. ( Box ) Box : Uganda s Success Story A broad-based national effort and firm political commitment to fighting the HIV/AIDS epidemic yields results and no case illustrates this point better than Uganda s experience. Uganda was one of the first nations to suffer the disease s impacts and now it has become one of the earliest and greatest success stories. As elsewhere in sub-Saharan Africa AIDS has caused immense suffering in Uganda reducing its population s life expectancy and thwarting its development. However the country has experienced substantial declines in infection rates during the past decade even as the rate of new infections continues to increase in most other countries in the region. The percent of Ugandans infected with HIV peaked at around percent in and by it had fallen to percent. Prevalence among pregnant women which is used as a key indicator of the epidemic s progress has fallen by more than half in some areas since and infection rates among men have dropped by more than a third Under the leadership of President Yoweri Museveni Uganda s government brought together groups and leaders from all sectors of society to address the need to prevent further spread of the disease and to provide treatment and care for those affected. In President Museveni directly addressed the epidemic with a commitment to prevention and asserted that fighting AIDS was a patriotic duty of Ugandan citizens. Calling for openness and communication he was joined by religious and traditional leaders community groups and nongovernmental organizations ( NGOs ) In the President created the multi-sectoral Uganda AIDS Commission to oversee the national HIV/AIDS strategy Interventions in Uganda began with an aggressive public media campaign to change risky behaviors and the establishment of a surveillance system to track the epidemic. The campaigns have been aimed at both the general population and key target groups particularly older men and youth while aggressively fighting stigmatizing and discriminating against people living with the disease. Sex education programs in schools and on the radio have encouraged youth to delay the age at which they first have sex have encouraged monogamy and have | Economic Report of the President Box continued focused on the need for safe sex. Since a USAID-funded program has contributed to increases in condom use from percent nationwide to more than percent in rural areas and over percent in urban areas. In addition Uganda s HIV/AIDS surveillance system has trained thousands of community-based AIDS counselors health educators and other specialists. Further testimony to the government s commitment are the many innovations that have been pioneered in Uganda such as HIV/AIDS testing with same-day results and accompanying counseling services The open networks throughout Ugandan society for acquiring information about HIV/AIDS have resulted in behavioral changes in its population. The decline in the number of sexual partners of the average Ugandan is perhaps the most important determinant of the nation s success in curbing the epidemic and some have dubbed this experience a social vaccine. The country s success suggests that high-level political commitment coupled with diverse multi-sectoral participation can turn the tide in the global fight against HIV/AIDS Development of New Treatments and Vaccines While affordable treatments and their effective dissemination are immediate needs pharmaceutical companies need to continue to work toward the development of newer and better treatments as well as vaccines. This is important not only to improve patients lives but also to strive toward the eventual eradication of the disease. In the United States the principal reason that the number of AIDS cases began to decline in the mid-1990s was the introduction of new drugs for treating HIV. Researchers must continue to innovate in order to make even better treatments available and develop safe and effective vaccines. The development of resistance to existing medication rendering treatment less effective over time underscores this importance Incentives for Innovation Research and development of new drugs is a costly endeavor and once developed new products must go through extensive testing and marketing On average a new drug takes years to develop and costs $ million to introduce to the market. For each new drug the bulk of these costs are generally paid before production begins. Since their magnitude does not depend on how much of the drug is produced they are known as fixed costs Chapter | Once companies have incurred the fixed costs and a drug is available in the marketplace it is often inexpensive to produce the drug ; that is the marginal cost the additional cost of producing one more unit of the drug is low. It is similarly low-cost for other companies to copy and produce the drug thus avoiding the high fixed investment in research altogether while reaping the benefits from a lucrative market with low marginal costs of production. In the absence of intellectual property rights no company would want to bear the enormous fixed costs of research and development if they could simply profit from other firms inventions. But without any company investing in these fixed costs innovation would be thwarted Patent rights provide an important means of giving firms the incentive to bear the expensive costs of innovation. A patent grants a company the right to be the sole producer and seller of a product it develops for a limited period of time ( years in the case of pharmaceuticals ) ; thus a patent protects the innovator from direct competition so that it can recoup the money it has spent in developing the new product. This intellectual property right makes it possible for the pharmaceutical company to sell the new drug at a price above its marginal cost of production thereby generating a high enough profit on its sales to recover its initial investment Diseases prevalent in poor geographical areas might not have lucrative enough markets to provide incentives for private-sector companies to develop treatments. For example tropical diseases such as malaria which generally occur only in low-income countries can have a drug market in which patients are unable to pay enough for their treatments for firms to recover the high costs of drug development. The degree to which private companies invest in research and development could therefore fail to be commensurate with the social and economic costs of these diseases including HIV/AIDS. There are however alternative ways to provide incentives for innovation. Prizes for successful drug invention patent buyouts and advance commitments to purchase the drugs are a few alternatives that are particularly promising because they encourage research without disallowing competition once a drug is developed ( Box ) Box : Creative Ways to Encourage Innovation Patent rights and direct government funding are currently the two primary means by which the United States government spurs research To drive development for an AIDS vaccine the Bush Administration endorsed the Global HIV Vaccine Enterprise this past June at the G-8 summit. This initiative will accelerate HIV vaccine development by | Economic Report of the President Box continued enhancing coordination information sharing and collaboration globally. There is also a critical role for the private sector to play in promoting innovation especially in the development of a commercially viable product such as a vaccine When a disease predominantly affects a poor population the private return to investment in vaccine research is likely to be quite low even under well-established patent laws and even if the social value of developing a vaccine is high. In other words society as a whole may place great value on the lives saved by a new vaccine but the ability to pay for vaccines by poor patients will not adequately represent this social value and will be insufficient for firms to recover their research expenditures. Patent rights alone can therefore in some contexts provide insufficient incentives for innovation. They can also create strong incentives to imitate existing successful inventions rather than to take on new problems because competitors can slightly alter a patented approach in order to develop a competing product. While this free-riding off initial research investment creates competition and drives down prices it also prevents the original developer from recouping its research expenditure. Furthermore imitation of existing drugs may not be the socially optimal use of scientific research since the benefits of saving additional lives with novel products may very well outweigh the benefits of lowering the prices of existing drugs Direct government funding of basic research can have an important role but is inefficient when the motivation of the research is a commercially viable product. It is difficult to know the best projects to fund and pharmaceutical firms have an advantage over government officials when it comes to evaluating the potential of vaccines. Moreover organized interests can influence the allocation of government funding resources and academics may be more interested in novel scientific discoveries than in the technical challenges of commercial development Advocates of exploring alternate systems for encouraging pharmaceutical innovation argue that patents and government funding alone have had difficulties stimulating sufficient research to develop vaccines for diseases such as malaria tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS. Most research on HIV/AIDS drugs is currently focused on treatments that will likely be sold in rich countries instead of on vaccines which would likely be less expensive and could be disseminated widely in poor countries. Indeed the research that is currently being conducted toward an AIDS vaccine focuses predominantly on strains of the disease prevalent in rich countries rather than the strains most common in Africa even though two-thirds of all new infections occur there Chapter | Box continued Several mechanisms have been suggested by economists as promising ways to further encourage new research and development in pharmaceuticals. For example foundations can offer monetary prizes for vaccine development in order to encourage innovation without restricting competition in the market once the product is developed However a prize alone would not ensure access to the vaccine by those who need it. Alternatively a foundation could buy out a patent ( that is it could essentially compensate a firm for letting its patent expire early ) Like a prize the patent buyout would provide incentives for innovation that are not tied to the market for purchasing the drug thereby promoting research and development even in markets of poor patients However the buy-out may similarly fail to ensure large-scale access to the vaccine since there is no guarantee that competition in the vaccine s market will be attractive to other producers. Particularly if the vaccine is technically difficult to produce and if safety regulations are burdensome firms may not wish to enter the market for a new vaccine Some scholars have also suggested that another approach to encouraging vaccine research would be for a foundation or group of foundations to make an advance commitment to purchase a vaccine at a pre-specified price and quantity. Pharmaceutical firms then would have a secure financial incentive for researching vaccines and treatments even if a disease affects predominantly poor populations and once developed widespread production of the vaccines could be ensured Despite years of both private and government-sponsored research an HIV vaccine remains elusive. Although the disease s many strains and their ability to evolve rapidly over time present scientific obstacles there is also reason to be optimistic that a vaccine will one day be possible. Some candidate HIV vaccines have already been shown to protect monkeys against infection and could induce immune responses in humans. To enhance coordination of research efforts the President with other G-8 leaders endorsed the establishment of the Global HIV Vaccine Enterprise and announced plans to establish a second HIV Vaccine Research and Development Center in the United States. The Administration has also urged fellow G-8 leaders to similarly expand their commitment to vaccine development | Economic Report of the President Conclusion The United States and countries around the world must continue to fight the spread of HIV/AIDS aid those who are suffering as result of the epidemic and work toward eventual eradication of the deadly disease Interventions are particularly critical because the far-reaching economic consequences of HIV/AIDS threaten the well-being of entire societies. The President has developed a generous aid package with the Emergency Plan and with donations to the Global Fund and the Administration supports the protection of intellectual property rights. Many other members of the international community have taken action against the HIV/AIDS crisis and the United Nations General Assembly Special Session on HIV/AIDS in has affirmed the international community s commitment to make progress in the struggle against HIV/AIDS. Governments donors and private enterprise around the world must continue to build upon the successes of these actions to win the global fight against AIDS Chapter | C H A P T E R Modern International Trade O pen markets and free trade raise living standards both at home and abroad The President s policy of opening markets around the world is based on this solid foundation. Yet as international trade has grown in both volume and scope so too have concerns that old ideas about trade policies no longer apply to today s trade environment The key points in this chapter are : Free trade allows countries to mutually benefit from specializing in producing products at which they are adept and then exchanging those products. This rationale remains the same even with advances in technology and new types of trade Foreign direct investment is playing an increasingly important role in world trade as companies invest across borders to gain skills technology resources and market access The Administration has advanced multilateral regional and bilateral trade agreements in order to open global markets. Lower trade barriers benefit consumers worldwide and expand markets for America s manufactured goods farm products and services Free Trade : Beyond the Basics The Administration s pursuit of trade liberalization is based upon a long history of intellectual support for free trade. Modern trade theory begins with the nineteenth century s David Ricardo. Ricardo s central insight his elegant model of comparative advantage is the starting point from which to explain the gains from trade Ricardo s model of comparative advantage addressed the question of how a home country could compete with a foreign trading partner that is better at producing everything. Ricardo showed that even if a foreign country could produce each of two goods for less than the home country could ( that is the foreign country has an absolute advantage in the production of the goods ) there could still be mutual gains from trading the two goods. The key to the argument is that it is relative costs of production ( comparative advantage ) that matter not absolute advantage As an example of Ricardo s theory of trade consider a situation in which one country requires two hours to produce a unit of each of two goods while in a second country it takes five hours to make Good One and ten hours to make Good Two. In Ricardo s simple model the price of each good in the first country before trade is one unit of the other good because the two goods take the same resources to produce. In the second country Good Two would be expected to cost twice as much as Good One because it takes twice as much labor to produce it. The first country has an absolute advantage in both goods but comparative advantage still provides a basis for trade. In this case the second country would gain from importing Good Two which costs only half as much in the other country ( only one unit of Good One ) The second country would pay for these imports of Good Two by exporting Good One Similarly the first country would import Good One which in its trading partner costs only one-half a unit of Good Two. It would pay for its imports by exporting Good Two. In the end world production rises as a result of trade and each country can consume more of both goods. This stylized example illustrates that comparative advantage allows countries to gain when they specialize in producing items in which they are relatively the most productive Critics do not usually argue that Ricardo s theory of comparative advantage is incorrect but instead that it omits key aspects of trade that may undermine the theory s results and alter the consequent policy prescriptions. In basic trade theory for example capital and labor do not move across borders seeking the highest return. At least for capital such movements are now routine. Economic models that take into account both capital and labor ( Ricardo s theory discussed only labor ) show that countries as a whole still gain from free trade. There are however differing impacts of trade on different parts of the economy and the labor force. Policies aimed at supporting individuals affected by trade are thus vital to ensuring that its gains are widely shared. These policies are discussed later in the chapter Globalization and the Terms of Trade Theoretical arguments showing the gains from trade compare a situation in which a country is open to trade with one in which it is closed. The differences in production technology between a trading partner and the home country mean that different prices prevail in the two countries before they open their borders to trade. It is this difference in prices that allows both countries to benefit from trade. With the advent of trade a new price for exchanging products will be reached somewhere between the countries original prices. This new price is known as the terms of trade. Each country gains from opening when the terms of trade differs from the pre-trade price Over time events in either country could change the terms of trade. Other things equal each country would prefer the price it receives for its export good to increase just as any merchant would wish to receive more for the product he sells | Economic Report of the President After trade is opened it is possible that changes in the world economy could move the terms of trade in directions that benefit one country but not the other. In this case both countries would still be better off than they were prior to trade but one country would see its gains diminished. Such subsequent price changes could come from changes to the countries technologies or from the discovery of natural resources such as oil that lead to changes in production and trade patterns The possibility that a country could lose from global price changes is at the heart of some recent critiques of globalization. One critique noted for example that as China develops and becomes more similar to the United States the United States could be made worse off. There are two problems with this critique. The typical view of globalization is that it is a phenomenon marked by increased international economic integration. The critique above however is of a situation in which development in China leads to less trade not more. If China and the United States have differences that allow for gains from trade ( for example differences in technologies and productive capabilities ) removing those differences may reduce the amount of trade and thus reduce the gains from that trade. The worst-case scenario in this situation would be a complete elimination of trade. This is the opposite of the typical concern that globalization involves an overly rapid pace of international economic integration The second problem with the critique is that it ignores the ways in which modern trade differs from Ricardo s simple model. The advanced nations of the world have substantially similar technology and factors of production and seemingly similar products such as automobiles and electronics are produced in many countries with substantial trade back and forth. This is at odds with the simplest prediction of the Ricardian model under which trade should disappear once each country is able to make similar products at comparable prices. Instead the world has observed substantially increased trade since the end of World War II. This reflects the fact that there are gains to intra-industry trade in which broadly similar products are traded in both directions between nations ( the United States both imports and exports computer components for example ) Intra-industry trade reflects the advantages garnered by consumers and firms from the increased number of varieties of similar products made available by trade as well as the increased competition and higher productivity spurred by trade. Given the historical experience that trade flows have continued to increase between advanced economies even as production technologies have become more similar one would expect the potential for mutually advantageous trade to remain even if China were to develop so rapidly as to have similar technologies and prices as the United States Chapter | The Impact of Trade on Labor Markets According to standard economic theory the degree to which an economy is open to trade affects the mix of jobs within an economy and can cause dislocation in certain areas or industries but has little impact on the overall level of employment. The main influences on total employment are factors such as the available workforce and the levels of interest rates taxes and regulations that govern the labor market. Trade tends to lead a country to specialize in producing goods and services at which it excels. Trade affects the mix of jobs because workers and capital would be expected to shift away from sectors in which they are less productive relative to foreign producers and toward existing and new sectors. This would be expected to lead to higher productivity and thus higher wages for workers The conclusion that free trade has little effect on the overall number of jobs is borne out in data on the U.S. economy. If trade were a major determinant of the Nation s ability to maintain full employment measures of the amount of trade and the unemployment rate would move in tandem but in fact they usually do not. The increase in imports as a percentage of gross domestic product ( GDP ) over the past several decades has not led to any significant trend in the overall unemployment rate ( Chart ) Indeed over the past decade the U.S. economy has experienced historically low unemployment while exports and imports have grown considerably | Economic Report of the President Similar conclusions arise from examination of data on the trade or current account balance ( the broadest measure of the difference between exports and imports of goods services and income flows ) From to the third quarter of the current account balance moved from a surplus of percent of GDP to a deficit of roughly percent of GDP. Yet the average unemployment rate in was percent the same as the average unemployment rate in Over this period the U.S. economy gained more than million jobs an increase of roughly percent. Increased trade has neither inhibited overall job creation nor contributed to an increase in the overall rate of unemployment That factors other than trade are the most important influences on the labor market is of no consolation to a worker who loses a job because of competition stemming from international trade. To assist people facing such dislocation the Administration has built upon and developed programs to help workers acquire the skills needed to prosper in new jobs The Administration has proposed a reform of the overall workforce training system to help Americans obtain marketable skills needed to compete for jobs in emerging and innovative fields. The Administration recognizes that effective workforce training requires the cooperation of the private sector and community colleges and has worked to nurture these partnerships through the High Growth Job Training Initiative at the Department of Labor and through the recently-enacted Community-based Job Training Grants In addition the Administration has proposed the establishment of Personal Reemployment Accounts an innovative approach to worker retraining. With these accounts qualifying individuals who lose their jobs would receive an account with funds that can be used for training and other services that best fit their needs. Individuals who find new employment relatively quickly would be eligible to keep the balance of their accounts as a cash reemployment bonus. The accounts would thus provide both support to unemployed workers and an incentive to find new employment The Administration has also worked to enhance the long-standing Trade Adjustment Assistance program which provides training and income support to workers directly hurt by import competition. As part of the Trade Act of eligibility was extended to workers indirectly affected by trade such as workers employed by firms that supply goods and services to industries directly affected by trade competition. Benefits were enhanced to include a health insurance tax credit and a wage supplement for older workers who found new jobs that did not pay as well as their previous jobs. This assistance which will total $ billion over years will ease the adjustment for displaced workers and help them move into jobs for which their skills are most in demand Chapter | The U.S. Advantage in Services Trade This section considers the burgeoning trade in services. The performance of U.S. service workers and firms has been particularly strong. The United States exports more services than it imports and this surplus has been growing in recent years. Moreover U.S. services exports tend to involve relatively highly-skilled and highly-paid occupations such as engineering financial services or architectural services. While services trade may not have been envisioned in the time of Ricardo the principle of comparative advantage holds. Any move toward economic isolationism would thus threaten the competitive gains made by U.S. exporters while harming U.S. consumers and firms that benefit from imports One prominent type of services trade is measured in the business professional and technical services category. This statistical category encompasses advertising telecommunications computer and data processing services and accounting and legal services. The United States exports services when a U.S firm provides engineering or architectural services to partners in other countries. Annual U.S. exports in this category have grown by almost $ billion since compared to a $ billion increase in imports over this period ( Chart ) The growing trade surplus in this category is particularly striking in light of the widening of the overall current account deficit. The existence of a trade surplus suggests that the United States has a comparative advantage in the international provision of tradable services | Economic Report of the President Ricardo s theory that countries mutually gain from trade if they each specialize in producing those items they could make relatively efficiently was inspired by trade in goods. Given the difficulties of communication and transportation in the nineteenth century there would have been little point in theorizing about trade in services In the modern global economy however services trade plays an important role in international commerce and an especially positive one for the United States. Advances in communication have made possible the increased trade in services. These developments pose a challenge to industries that did not previously face foreign competition though As noted above the United States is good at the provision of services Expanded access to the broader international marketplace would be expected only to further strengthen the U.S. advantage. The U.S. advantages in services have fueled job gains both directly in firms that export services and indirectly in firms that hire more workers in the United States as a result of the efficiencies they gain through trade. One study of the effect of services trade in the information technology sector found that it created over net new jobs in the United States in and is expected to create net new jobs by These new hires tend to be in positions requiring relatively high levels of skills or creativity such as software development Foreign Direct Investment : An Increasingly Important Part of Trade While the intellectual foundations behind free trade are unchanged the means by which goods are exchanged between countries have changed greatly since the time of Ricardo. Goods are no longer simply produced in one place using only that country s resources and then sent off on ships to be unloaded at a foreign port. Instead many of the goods Americans enjoy today whether produced in the United States or abroad are made with components from a variety of sources Production of goods in this fashion is facilitated by foreign direct investment ( FDI ) FDI occurs when an individual or firm buys a foreign company or takes control of a sufficiently large portion of a foreign company ( typically percent or more of the target firm s stock ) that it can influence management decisions. Greenfield FDI occurs when a company builds a plant abroad from scratch ( i.e. turns a green field into a factory ) though this type of investment is less common. FDI in turn gives rise to increased trade U.S. firms investing or setting up enterprises abroad can increase opportunities for exporting their goods. Moreover there is a good deal of evidence suggesting that increased employment at the foreign subsidiaries of Chapter | U.S. firms is associated with a corresponding increase in employment in the U.S. parent company. Similarly recent research shows that one dollar of spending on capital investments abroad by U.S. firms is associated with an additional dollars of spending on capital investment at home. The available evidence thus suggests that on the whole overseas investment by U.S firms goes hand in hand with expansion at home Subsidiaries of foreign firms operating in the United States make important positive contributions to the U.S. economy as well. These firms bring over technology techniques and skills that in turn lead U.S. industries to be more efficient. U.S. subsidiaries of foreign companies employed million U.S workers in nearly percent of total private-sector employment. This is up from million workers in ( percent of total private employment at that time ) The Global Supply Chain and FDI The production of goods today can involve many firms in different countries performing a variety of distinct functions to bring products to market. A car made by an American company could include parts made by firms in the United States Japan Canada and other countries and it might be assembled in Canada or in Mexico. Producing this car could involve one firm extracting and molding the steel for the chassis another firm designing and assembling interior components such as the seats and steering wheel and a third firm transporting cars to the showroom. Within these steps the production process could further involve a mix of domestic and imported components. Likewise a car produced by a foreign company could be made in the United States and include a large share of components made here as well Firms invest in other countries for many reasons. One is that by investing abroad firms may be able to take advantage of resources that are unique to the country in which the foreign business is located. Examples could be as straightforward as the development of a mining project which by necessity must be undertaken where the natural resource is located or the construction of an aluminum smelter in a country with abundant deposits of bauxite the ore from which aluminum can be economically retrieved Firms might undertake foreign investment because it can be more cost-effective to own a supplier rather than be one of the suppliers many customers. Once the goods are produced the domestic firm can use its distribution networks infrastructure and knowledge about foreign tastes to export into new markets as well as increase sales in existing markets. Firms might also invest in retailing operations in other countries in order to exercise control over the sale of their products. Moreover some firms invest abroad to avoid the trade barriers and transportation costs they might face if they produced in only one country for export to the whole world | Economic Report of the President FDI spurs increased trade as firms move goods between parent companies and their foreign affiliates. Foreign affiliates use the goods from the parent company as both inputs to production and final goods to be sold through their distribution networks. In percent of total U.S. trade in goods was accounted for by trade within components of firms with operations in two or more countries. This includes the flow in both directions between U.S. companies and their majority-owed subsidiaries abroad and between majority-owned U.S. subsidiaries and their foreign parent companies How Inward FDI Strengthens Domestic Firms Foreign direct investment into the United States by foreign firms can increase the competitiveness of U.S. domestic firms. Studies suggest for example that American auto firms were driven to produce higher-quality and more fuel-efficient cars in the late 1970s and 1980s when foreign car manufacturers began producing and selling cars in the United States Evidence also shows that foreign direct investment into the United States is associated with the adoption of new technology techniques and skills by locally-owned companies. The transfer of expertise can include skills in areas such as operations marketing management and organization ; it can be especially important in sectors such as biotechnology in which research and development activities play a prominent role. Such technology can spill over to domestic customers and suppliers through a number of channels. Examples would include when workers at a foreign subsidiary leave and find employment with local firms when domestic customers incorporate the products of these foreign firms into their supply chains and when foreign firms provide their U.S. suppliers with access to information or technology in order to improve their own products quality and reliability. For example one foreign auto manufacturer in the United States recently shared with its U.S. steel suppliers its innovations for producing stronger rust-resistant steel. One study estimates that such spillovers accounted for about percent of the productivity growth in U.S. manufacturing firms between and Encouraging FDI Many factors lead foreign firms to consider the United States when deciding to invest abroad. These include a large pool of talented workers access to deep capital markets a culture that supports innovation and risktaking and a stable legal political and economic environment. Evidence shows that countries prone to corruption political instability and having private firms or industries taken over by the government are less likely to receive foreign direct investment than countries that protect investor and intellectual property rights. A recent study found that the United States was Chapter | ranked the second-best country out of in terms of ease of doing business just after New Zealand. In comparison China was ranked the 42nd-best place and India the 120th At home the United States maintains an open and nondiscriminatory policy toward investments made by foreign firms. With limited exceptions such as for national security reasons the United States permits foreign investment in all sectors. The United States does not screen investments on size or the companies country of origin does not restrict FDI to involve establishing only new facilities and with limited exceptions does not have performance requirements such as local content requirements or export quotas Achievements in Trade Negotiations The Administration has pushed aggressively to open global markets to trade. This has been done through multilateral talks under the auspices of the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) and through agreements to liberalize trade between the United States and various partners. The Administration has worked to ensure that the benefits promised under the agreements are realized for U.S. consumers workers manufacturers farmers and service providers At the same time lower trade barriers benefit people in U.S. trading partner countries. When U.S. trading partners do not fulfill their obligations the Administration has sought their compliance through a practical problemsolving approach. When that fails however the Administration has utilized formal dispute-settlement mechanisms This section addresses the progress made in fostering global trade which provides mutual advantages to the United States and to all nations. The section also discusses efforts to make sure that all nations live up to the agreements they have signed. Because China has grown in importance as a U.S trading partner this section begins with a discussion of U.S. trade with this emerging economy. It then describes efforts to ensure the protection of intellectual property rights. It concludes with a description of progress in the negotiation of bilateral and multilateral trade agreements Trade with China Prior to China s accession to the WTO exports from the People s Republic of China were granted access to the U.S. market on substantially similar terms as exports from members of the WTO. This access however depended on an annual Congressional vote to grant China Normal Trading Relations status ( also known as Most Favored Nation status ) There were some exceptions to China s equal access most notably in textiles and apparel. Because China was not a member of the WTO it was not subject to the sort of reciprocal | Economic Report of the President obligations to lower trade barriers that WTO members undertook in decades of trade negotiations The Administration s efforts to bring China into the WTO culminated in China s December accession. WTO membership offered China the stability of Permanent Normal Trade Relations and access to the WTO s rulesbased dispute-settlement mechanisms but demanded of China extensive far-reaching and often complex commitments to change its trade regime at all levels of government and open its market to greater competition. China committed to lower trade barriers in virtually every sector of the economy provide national treatment ( treat imports on an equal basis with domesticallyproduced goods ) improve market access to goods and services imported from the United States and other WTO members and protect intellectual property rights ( IPR ) In light of the state s large role in the Chinese economy China also agreed to special rules regarding subsidies and the operation of stateowned enterprises. In accepting China as a fellow WTO member the United States also secured a number of significant commitments from China that protect U.S. interests during the period in which China implements its WTO obligations. The United States in turn agreed to accord China the same treatment it accords the other members of the WTO That treatment includes a gradual liberalization of the market for textiles and clothing. This is a sector that has been gradually transformed by advances in technology and transportation as well as by the opening of this sector through trade agreements. Much of the world textile and apparel market had been governed for decades by a global agreement that set bilateral quotas Those countries that were founding members of the WTO in the mid-1990s agreed to liberalize textiles and apparel trade over the ensuing years a process that culminated with the elimination of quotas on January Since China s WTO accession the Administration has worked to secure access to China s market for U.S. companies and their workers farmers and service providers as promised by China s WTO membership and to protect U.S. rights within Chinese markets. Where possible the Administration has tried to resolve differences through negotiation. This approach has shown concrete results ; in April for example meetings of the Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade resolved seven potential WTO disputes involving high-technology products agriculture and intellectual property protection. When successful this negotiated approach can deliver more-immediate results than those available through the sometimesprotracted legal procedures of a formal WTO dispute. When this pragmatic approach has not produced prompt and effective results however the Administration has also pursued dispute resolution under WTO procedures It filed the first-ever WTO case against China to address discriminatory tax treatment of U.S. semiconductors in China. Within four months of the filing Chapter | the Chinese government agreed to eliminate the problematic tax program to address U.S. concerns resolving the dispute without lengthy litigation A central point of discussion with the Chinese has been about the benefits of moving to a flexible market-based exchange rate. The U.S. government and organizations such as the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) have argued that the exchange rate should have greater flexibility. Greater flexibility in China s exchange rate would allow for smooth adjustments in international accounts and would help protect China from the boom-bust economic cycles of the past. Such a change poses a number of economic challenges. The Department of the Treasury has been actively engaged with the Chinese in working toward such a transition and has established a technical cooperation program to address areas the Chinese view as impediments to greater flexibility leading to three missions in that covered currency risk management banking system best practices and developing an exchange rate futures market in China Amidst these changes in policy trade between the United States and China has been growing rapidly. For goods trade through November China ranked as the third-largest trading partner of the United States. For most of the period since China s WTO accession U.S. exports to China have been growing at a rate faster than its imports from China ( from to for example U.S. goods exports to China grew by percent while imports from China grew by percent ) but this export growth is occurring from a much smaller base and so the bilateral trade deficit has grown. The growing bilateral deficit has led to concerns in some circles about China s rising prominence in world trade. In fact the data suggest that the increased imports from China are largely coming at the expense of imports from other countries in the Pacific Rim ( Chart ) This change is due in large part to China s role as a final assembly platform for exports for Asian manufacturing firms. The total share of imports from the Pacific Rim has fallen from its recent high in the mid-1990s. This helps to demonstrate why bilateral trade deficits have little economic significance and why they are not a useful measure of the benefits of a trading relationship ; these bilateral measures can be driven by a reallocation of trade among partners of the sort that is common in a world of hundreds of trading nations Intellectual Property Rights In the Administration launched a major initiative to protect intellectual property rights. This initiative is called STOP ! ( for Strategy Targeting Organized Piracy ) and is the most comprehensive initiative ever advanced to combat trade in pirated and counterfeit goods. The initiative is a government-wide effort to empower American businesses to secure and enforce their intellectual property | Economic Report of the President rights in overseas markets stop fakes at our borders expose international pirates and counterfeiters keep global supply chains free of infringing goods dismantle criminal enterprises that steal America s intellectual property and reach out to like-minded trading partners and build an international coalition to stop piracy and counterfeiting worldwide. This initiative builds on the Administration s strong existing record of global enforcement and negotiation Such efforts are particularly important to the United States which is a major producer of innovative goods. Recordings films books and software are among the most successful U.S. exports. Property rights in general are vital to the functioning of a market economy ( see Chapter Expanding Individual Choice and Control ) The enforcement of intellectual property rights ensures that creators of innovative products capture the returns to their efforts. This enforcement is vital as well to provide incentives to encourage future innovation ( see Chapter The Global HIV/AIDS Epidemic ) Empirical studies have shown that improvements in a nation s intellectual property protection can lead to increased trade. These studies found the effect to be particularly strong in goods that were easy to imitate providing evidence that theft of intellectual property displaces legitimate imports. One study found that strengthened patent protection in large developing countries could increase their imports by almost percent Chapter | Trade Liberalization Tariffs and other barriers to trade in developing countries are still much higher than those in the United States so there remains considerable scope for lowering barriers both to benefit our trading partners and expand market access for U.S. firms. Imposing barriers to trade means higher prices for consumers and firms and a lower standard of living To dismantle these barriers and make the benefits of free trade available to U.S. exporters producers and consumers the Administration has pursued trade agreements on several fronts. After intense diplomacy at meetings in Geneva in July of last year the United States achieved international agreement on a framework for moving forward on the Doha Development Agenda of WTO trade negotiations. These talks which were launched in in Doha Qatar have focused on measures that will especially benefit developing nations including the elimination of agricultural export subsidies. The Administration has also pursued free trade agreements ( FTAs ) that set modern rules for commerce meet high standards of market access for goods and break new ground in areas such as services e-commerce intellectual property protection transparency and the effective enforcement of environmental and labor laws. Agreements were concluded in with Australia Morocco Bahrain and with the participants in the Central American Free Trade Agreement ( CAFTA ) including Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic. At the same time the United States continued negotiations with the five nations of the Southern African Customs Union ( Botswana Lesotho Namibia South Africa and Swaziland ) while launching new negotiations with Thailand Panama and the Andean nations Colombia Ecuador and Peru. The President has also announced to Congress his intention to begin FTA negotiations with the United Arab Emirates and Oman Tariff reduction commitments negotiated in our bilateral FTAs in will save foreign consumers and businesses from paying higher prices for imports and would be expected to spur increased productivity and thus higher incomes in liberalizing countries. When combined with agreements already negotiated by the Administration partner countries accounting for almost $ billion in trade have committed to eventually eliminate tariffs on almost all U.S. exports. Tariffs that averaged as high as percent for U.S exports will be reduced to zero as a result of these agreements Opening markets expands opportunities for U.S. farmers businesses and workers. An example of the benefits of open markets can be seen in the impact of the recent trade agreement with Chile. Caterpillar Corporation manufactures mining trucks in Decatur Illinois that it sells around the world. The Escondida copper mine in Northern Chile the largest copper mine in the | Economic Report of the President world uses mining vehicles to move more than million tons of material per year. Before the free trade agreement with Chile went into effect in January Caterpillar 's mining trucks were subject to tariffs of $ or more. These mining trucks now enter Chile duty-free and have become Illinois biggest export. In Caterpillar tripled its sales to Chile and added nearly people to its U.S. payrolls The increase in market access for U.S. exports gained through trade diplomacy is especially noteworthy because the United States enters these negotiations with trade barriers that are very low. Central American nations for example already had extensive access to the U.S. market through the Caribbean Basin Initiative. Under the terms of the CAFTA those countries are now making reciprocal commitments to allow in U.S. goods and services Bilateral FTAs can also strengthen opportunities for progress in regional and WTO negotiations. In his first term the President made multilateral trade negotiations a priority. In the second term concluding multilateral trade negotiations held under the auspices of the WTO will be a top priority for the Administration. Under the President s leadership the United States successfully led the effort to ensure that was not a lost year for the Doha Development Agenda negotiations. Early in the United States mounted an intensive effort to get the Doha negotiations on a practical track toward success. U.S. negotiators pressed trading partners to narrow differences establish key frameworks for detailed negotiations and push forward to reach an agreement that would foster increased economic growth development and opportunity. The diplomatic effort focused on the key market access areas of agriculture industrial goods and services ; the effort in developed frameworks that will be built upon in moving forward with the wider WTO agenda. At the end of July negotiations were successfully put back on track. WTO ministers are scheduled to meet in Hong Kong China at the end of to chart the final course for the negotiations To ensure continued U.S. global leadership on trade two legislative steps are necessary. First Congress needs to reaffirm the United States commitment to the WTO in its regular review. Second Trade Promotion Authority ( TPA ) must be renewed. TPA leaves the power to regulate international commerce in the hands of the Congress. Under TPA Congress agrees to accept or reject an accord negotiated by the President without modification If TPA is not renewed it will likely be difficult if not impossible to achieve the kind of comprehensive benefits the Administration has already negotiated in its free trade agreements to date. At stake are the substantial gains that would come from a successful conclusion to the Doha talks. These gains would accrue both to the United States and to all participants in the global trading system Chapter | Conclusion The United States is the world s leader in many ways and remains the leading advocate for pro-growth policies around the world. Connecting the world s economies through trade provides economic benefits at home while offering opportunities to other nations that are embracing economic reforms Peace and prosperity go hand in hand each reinforcing the other. The President 's policies are designed to foster rising living standards at home while encouraging other nations to follow our lead | Economic Report of the President Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during the calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely N. Gregory Mankiw Chairman Kristin J. Forbes Member Harvey S. Rosen Member Appendix A | Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling........................ John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner........................... Arthur F. Burns............................. Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier..................... Joseph S. Davis............................. Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt................................... Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller............................ James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck.............................. Warren L. Smith............................ Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker.................. Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon................................ Marina v.N. Whitman.................... Gary L. Seevers............................. William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel.......................... Charles L. Schultze....................... William D. Nordhaus..................... Lyle E. Gramley............................. George C. Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L. Weidenbaum................. William A. Niskanen Jerry L. Jordan Martin Feldstein William Poole................................ Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore...................... Michael L. Mussa.......................... Michael J. Boskin.......................... John B. Taylor............................... Richard L. Schmalensee David F. Bradford Paul Wonnacott Laura D Andrea Tyson Alan S. Blinder.............................. Joseph E. Stiglitz Martin N. Baily Alicia H. Munnell Janet L. Yellen Jeffrey A. Frankel.......................... Rebecca M. Blank......................... Martin N. Baily Robert Z. Lawrence....................... Kathryn L. Shaw R. Glenn Hubbard Mark B. McClellan Randall S. Kroszner N. Gregory Mankiw Kristin J. Forbes............................ Harvey S. Rosen............................ Position Oath of office date Separation date Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member....................................... Vice Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Member....................................... Chair Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chair Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... Chairman Member....................................... Member....................................... August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July October December April July August February June October November November February July July June June January February April October August August May May July November May November November November | Economic Report of the President January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July July January January May September January August June January January April June February August August August March July January January January February November July Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to provide the President with objective economic analysis and advice on the development and implementation of a wide range of domestic and international economic policy issues The Chairman of the Council N. Gregory Mankiw continued to chair the Council during Dr Mankiw is on leave from Harvard University where he is the Allie S. Freed Professor of Economics. Dr. Mankiw is responsible for communicating the Council s views on economic matters to the President through personal discussions and written reports. He represents the Council at Cabinet meetings meetings of the National Economic Council daily White House senior staff meetings and other formal and informal meetings. He also travels within the United States and overseas to present the Administration s views on the economy. Dr. Mankiw is the Council s chief public spokesperson. He directs the work of the Council and exercises ultimate responsibility for the work of the professional staff The Members of the Council Kristin J. Forbes and Harvey S. Rosen are Members of the Council of Economic Advisers. Dr. Forbes is on leave from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Sloan School of Management where she is the Mitsubishi Career Development Chair of International Management and Associate Professor of International Management. Dr. Rosen is on leave from Princeton University where he is the John L. Weinberg Professor of Economics and Business Policy Dr. Randall Kroszner was previously a Member of the Council and has returned to the University of Chicago s Graduate School of Business where he is a Professor of Economics Associate Director of the Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State and Research Consultant to the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Appendix A | The Chairman and the Members work as a team on most economic policy issues. Dr. Mankiw is responsible for the Council s macroeconomic analysis including the Administration s economic forecast. Dr. Forbes s responsibilities include international finance and trade issues with a particular focus on emerging markets and developing economies. Dr. Rosen s responsibilities include policy analysis relating to fiscal policy and microeconomic issues including labor and financial markets health care and regulation Macroeconomic Policies As is its tradition the Council devoted much time during to assisting the President in formulating economic policy objectives and designing programs to implement them. In this regard the Chairman kept the President informed on a continuing basis of important macroeconomic developments and other major policy issues through regular macroeconomic briefings. The Council prepares for the President the Vice President and the White House senior staff almost daily memoranda that report key economic data and analyze current economic events. In addition they prepare weekly discussion and data memos for the President Vice President and senior White House staff The Council the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) the Administration s economic troika are responsible for producing the economic forecasts that underlie the Administration s budget proposals. The Council under the leadership of the Chairman and the Chief Economist initiates the forecasting process twice each year. In preparing these forecasts the Council consults with a variety of outside sources including leading private-sector forecasters In the Council took part in discussions on a range of macroeconomic issues. An important part of the Council s ongoing work involved monitoring economic data including assessing the response of the economy and the labor market in particular to fiscal and monetary policies. Council staff analyzed economic conditions at the state level with a particular focus on labor market developments. The Council also provided analysis relating to the macroeconomic impact of natural disasters such as hurricanes The Council works closely with the Treasury the Federal Reserve and other government agencies in providing analyses to the Administration on these topics of concern. The Council continued to work closely in with the National Economic Council the Office of Management and Budget and other offices within the Executive Office of the President in assessing the economy and economic policy proposals. The Council participated in the development and analysis of policies relating to domestic and international tax reform and reform of Social Security | Economic Report of the President The Council continued its efforts to improve the public s understanding of economic issues and of the Administration s economic agenda through regular briefings with the economic and financial press frequent discussions with outside economists and presentations to outside organizations. The Chairman and Members continued to give public addresses on economic developments with a focus on the role of policies and the implications of increased international economic integration. The Chairman also regularly exchanged views on the economy with the Chairman and Governors of the Federal Reserve System Council staff provided regular assistance with economic data to other offices of the Executive Office of the President including the Office of Communications and the Offices of Speechwriting for the President and Vice President International Economic Policies The Council was involved in a range of international trade issues including discussions on trade liberalization at the global regional and bilateral levels The Council participated in deliberations concerning trade policy in a number of industries and provided analysis related to U.S. economic interaction with China and the impact of trade on the domestic economy. Dr. Forbes and Council staff participated in dialogues with the Chinese government including the National Development and Reform Committee and the Joint Economic Committee. Council staff participated in the Beijing working group talks of the Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade in July The Council participated in discussions concerning international financial policy involving relations with both advanced and emerging market economies The Council provided extensive analysis of the implications of changes in the U.S. external position and developments in foreign exchange markets. The Council participated in the development of U.S. proposals for the G-8 Summit held at Sea Island Georgia which Dr. Forbes attended. Dr. Forbes and Council staff also participated in sub Cabinet-level discussions with Japan The Council is a leading participant in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) the principal forum for economic cooperation among the high-income industrial countries. The Chairman heads the U.S. delegation to the semiannual meetings of the OECD s Economic Policy Committee ( EPC ) and serves as the EPC Chairman. Dr Forbes also participated in meetings of the Economic Policy Committee as well as meetings of the OECD s Working Party on macroeconomic policy and coordination. Dr. Rosen participated in the OECD s Working Party on microeconomic policy and in the annual OECD review of U.S. economic policy as did CEA chief economists Andrew Samwick and Donald Marron Council members regularly met with representatives of the Council s counterpart agencies in foreign countries as well as with foreign trade ministers other government officials and members of the private sector Appendix A | Microeconomic Policies A wide variety of microeconomic issues received Council attention during The Council actively participated in the Cabinet-level National Economic Council dealing with issues including energy policy the environment health care homeland security pensions transportation technology tort reform and financial markets The Council participated in Administration efforts to improve the supervisory regime for government-sponsored enterprises in the home mortgage system The Council also participated in ongoing policy discussions relating to terrorism risk insurance The Council was involved in a variety of issues related to health care. These included analyses of the sources of rising health care costs the design and impact of health savings accounts and a number of issues related to the Medicare and Medicaid programs. The Council also participated in discussions related to pharmaceutical products and helped evaluate the impacts of disease management and information technology in health care On labor and education programs the Council was involved in the development of the President s proposal for a temporary worker program as well as evaluations of other proposed immigration reforms. The Council assisted in Administration efforts to review education policies as well as to evaluate the effectiveness of the Head Start program. The Council also participated in discussions related to reauthorization of the Workforce Investment Act evaluation and reform of job training programs and consideration of education and other benefits for Veterans The Council worked on a variety of environmental issues in The Council played a role in the development of a suite of proposed air quality rules including the Clean Air Mercury Rule and the Clean Air Interstate Rule which seek to regulate mercury sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions from power plants. The Council was involved in the development of regulations concerning fine particles and emissions coming from diesel engines. The Council was a member of the Interagency Ocean Policy Group and helped to formulate the Administration s response to the U.S. Commission on Ocean Policy s recommendations for national ocean policy Energy policy continued to be an important focus of the Council s efforts in with analysis on the impact of oil prices on the economy and the impact of various policy proposals regarding energy supplies. The Council also played a role in the analysis of policy for telecommunications broadband and spectrum allocation. The Council participated in discussions concerning Federal prison industries the Postal Service tort reform and transportation issues including the state of the airline industry. Council staff also provided analyses related to agricultural issues including the economic impacts of mad cow disease | Economic Report of the President The Staff of the Council of Economic Advisers The professional staff of the Council consists of the Chief of Staff the Senior Statistician the Chief Economist the Director of Macroeconomic Forecasting eight senior economists one economist four staff economists and five research assistants. The professional staff and their areas of concentration at the end of were : Chief of Staff Phillip L. Swagel Chief Economist Donald B. Marron Senior Statistician Catherine H. Furlong Director of Macroeconomic Forecasting Steven N. Braun Senior Economists Gerald E. Auten Public Finance William D. Block............................ International Finance and Development John C. Driscoll Macroeconomics and Public Finance R. Richard Geddes Regulation and Finance Joshua Graff Zivin........................... Environment Health Care and Regulation Philip I. Levy International Trade Pia M. Orrenius Labor Health Care and Education Alexander Raskovich Regulation Energy and Technology Economist Anne L. Berry Finance Regulation and Technology Staff Economists Carol L. Cohen............................. International Trade and Finance Maria Damon Environment and Regulation Rebecca J. Kalmus Health Care and Labor Peter R. Kingston.......................... Macroeconomics and Finance Appendix A | Research Assistants Derek A. Haas Finance Regulation and Technology Namita K. Kalyan Macroeconomics Daniel L. Ramsey.......................... Public Finance Therese C. Scharlemann Macroeconomics James W. Soldano International Finance Statistical Office Mrs. Furlong directs the Statistical Office. The Statistical Office maintains and updates the Council s statistical information oversees the publication of the monthly Economic Indicators and the statistical appendix to the Economic Report of the President and verifies statistics in Presidential and Council memoranda testimony and speeches Linda A. Reilly.............................. Statistician Brian A. Amorosi Program Analyst ( Statistical ) Dagmara A. Mocala Research Assistant Administrative Office The Administrative Office provides general support for the Council s activities This includes financial management human resource management and travel facility security information and telecommunications management support Rosemary M. Rogers Administrative Officer Brenda Compton Financial Manager Office of the Chairman Alice H. Williams Executive Assistant to the Chairman Sandra F. Daigle............................ Executive Assistant to the Chairman and Assistant to the Chief of Staff and Chief Economist Lisa D. Branch.............................. Executive Assistant to Dr. Forbes Mary E. Jones Executive Assistant to Dr. Rosen Staff Support Sharon K. Thomas Administrative Support Assistant Jane Tufts and Barbara Pendergast provided editorial assistance in the preparation of the Economic Report of the President Scott E. Carrell served as a senior economist for labor and public finance during the summer of and then returned to his position on the faculty of the Air Force Academy. Gerald F. Zukowski and Roger E. Stanley also served at the Council in on detail from other government agencies | Economic Report of the President John List and Ted Gayer provided consulting services to the Council during Student Interns during the year were Sarah E. Anders Mary B. Anderson Christian M. Bonilla Eric C. Breitenstein Matthew J. Burton Deepa Dhume Michael M. Furchtgott Sabah M. Khan Susan J. Li Joshua S Meltzer Barbara J. Merry Amol S. Navathe Kirsten D. Powers Brian K Smedley Dagmara K. Tchalakov and Sean M. Zimmerman. Alexander P Ryan joined the staff of the Council in January as a student intern Departures The Council s senior staff in most cases are on leave of absence from faculty positions at academic institutions or from other government agencies or research institutions. Chief Economist Andrew Samwick returned to Dartmouth College where he is a Professor of Economics and Director of the Rockefeller Center for Public Policy. The senior economists who resigned during the year returned to their previous affiliations. They are Karen Dynan ( Federal Reserve Board ) Ted Gayer ( Georgetown University ) Eric Helland ( Claremont McKenna College ) David Meyer ( Federal Trade Commission ) Mark Showalter ( Brigham Young University ) Beth Anne Wilson ( Federal Reserve Board ) and Alan Viard ( Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas ) Staff economists are generally graduate students who spend one year with the Council and then return to complete their dissertations. Those who returned to graduate studies in economics in are : William Congdon ( Princeton University ) Brent Neiman ( Harvard University ) and Matthew Weinzierl ( Harvard University ) Research assistants who resigned during and went on to further employment or graduate studies were Christine Dobridge ( Deutsche Bank ) Amanda Kowalski ( MIT economics ) and Julia Stahl ( New York University Law School ) Brandon Schwartz Information Management Assistant resigned to pursue graduate studies Appendix A | Public Information The Council s annual Economic Report of the President is an important vehicle for presenting the Administration s domestic and international economic policies. The Report is available on the Internet where it is accessible at www.gpoaccess.gov/eop and for purchase as a bound volume from the Government Printing Office. The Council also has primary responsibility for compiling the monthly Economic Indicators which is issued by the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress. The Internet address for the Economic Indicators is www.gpoaccess.gov/indicators. The Council s home page is located at www.whitehouse.gov/cea | Economic Report of the President Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION C O N T E N T S Page NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B Gross domestic product Real gross domestic product Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes Percent changes in real gross domestic product Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product Gross domestic product by major type of product Real gross domestic product by major type of product Gross value added by sector Real gross value added by sector Gross domestic product ( GDP ) by industry value added in current dollars and as a percentage of GDP Real gross domestic product by industry value added and percent changes Gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business Gross value added and price costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business Personal consumption expenditures Real personal consumption expenditures Private fixed investment by type Real private fixed investment by type Government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type Real government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type Private inventories and domestic final sales by industry Real private inventories and domestic final sales by industry Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts Real exports and imports of goods and services Relation of gross domestic product gross national product net national product and national income Relation of national income and personal income National income by type of income Sources of personal income Disposition of personal income Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures and per capita gross domestic product in current and real dollars Page B B Gross saving and investment Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and persons by race selected years POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B Population by age group Civilian population and labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Civilian employment by demographic characteristic Unemployment by demographic characteristic Civilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic Civilian unemployment rate Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic Unemployment by duration and reason Unemployment insurance programs selected data Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries Employment cost index private industry Productivity and related data business sector Changes in productivity and related data business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B B B B B B B B B Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufacturing industries Capacity utilization rates New construction activity New private housing units started authorized and completed and houses sold Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories Manufacturers shipments and inventories Manufacturers new and unfilled orders PRICES : B B B B B Consumer price indexes for major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes for commodities services and special groups Changes in special consumer price indexes Changes in consumer price indexes for commodities and services Page B B B B Producer price indexes by stage of processing Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B B B B B B B B B Money stock and debt measures Components of money stock measures Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and the monetary base Bank credit at all commercial banks Bond yields and interest rates Credit market borrowing Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing Mortgage debt outstanding by holder Consumer credit outstanding GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B B B B B B B B B B B B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) by major type Federal Government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B B B B Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits by industry Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Sales profits and stockholders equity all manufacturing corporations Page B B B Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Historical stock prices and yields Common stock prices and yields AGRICULTURE : B B B B B B Farm income Farm business balance sheet Farm output and productivity indexes Farm input use selected inputs Agricultural price indexes and farm real estate value U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : B U.S. international transactions B U.S. international trade in goods by principal end-use category B U.S. international trade in goods by area B U.S. international trade in goods on balance of payments ( BOP ) and Census basis and trade in services on BOP basis B International investment position of the United States at yearend B Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries B Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries B Foreign exchange rates B International reserves selected years B Growth rates in real gross domestic product General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Because of the formula used for calculating real gross domestic product ( GDP ) the chained ( ) dollar estimates for the detailed components do not add to the chained-dollar value of GDP or to any intermediate aggregate. The Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) no longer publishes chained-dollar estimates prior to except for selected series Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) Data in these tables reflect revisions made by the source agencies through January In particular tables containing national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) estimates reflect revisions released by the Department of Commerce in July NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B Gross domestic product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonresidential Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment and software Residential Change in private inventories p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Gross domestic product Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local AddenFinal Gross dum : sales of domesGross domestic national tic purproduct chases product Percent change from preceding period Gross Gross domes- domestic tic prodpuruct chases p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services plus net income receipts from rest of the world Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis GDP TABLE B Real gross domestic product [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonresidential Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment and software Residential Change in private inventories p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Real gross domestic product Continued [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local Final sales of domestic product Gross domestic purchases Addendum : Gross national product Percent change from preceding period Gross Gross domes- domestic tic prodpuruct chases p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Gross GDP domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services plus net income receipts from rest of the world Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes [ Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted ] Gross domestic product ( GDP ) Index numbers = Year or quarter Real GDP ( chain-type quantity index ) GDP chain-type price index Real GDP ( chain-type quantity index ) GDP chain-type price index p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Quarterly percent changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis GDP implicit price deflator Percent change from preceding period GDP ( current dollars ) GDP implicit price deflator TABLE B Percent changes in real gross domestic product [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product Exports and imports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Residential fixed Exports Imports Total Gross private domestic investment Nonresidential fixed Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Structures Equipment and software Federal State and local p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Note. Percent changes based on unrounded data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product [ Percentage points except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product ( percent change ) Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Total NonDurable durable goods goods Nonresidential Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment and software Change in priResivate dential inventories p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product Continued [ Percentage points except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Exports Net exports Total Goods Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Imports Services Total Goods Federal Services Total Total NaNontional defense defense State and local p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Total Durable goods Nonresidential Nondurable goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment and software Residential p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product Continued [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports of goods and services Year or quarter Imports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Total National defense Nondefense State and local Total Goods Services Total Goods Services Total p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonresidential Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment and software Residential p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter Exports and imports of goods and services Exports Imports Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local Final sales of domestic product Gross domestic purchases Total Percent change Gross domestic purchases Gross Less food and domestic Less energy product Total food and energy p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Quarterly percent changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce. Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Gross domestic product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Change Final in Gross sales of pridomestic domesvate product tic product inventories Total Total Final sales Durable goods Change in private inventories Final sales Change in private inventories Nondurable goods Final sales Change in private inventories Services Structures p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Estimates for durable and nondurable goods for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) ; later estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Includes government consumption expenditures which are for services ( such as education and national defense ) produced by government In current dollars these services are valued at their cost of production Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Real gross domestic product by major type of product [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Change Final in Gross sales of pridomestic domesvate product tic product inventories Total Final sales Total Durable goods Change in private inventories Final sales Change in private inventories Nondurable goods Final sales Change in private inventories Services Structures p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IVp Estimates for durable and nondurable goods for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) ; later estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Includes government consumption expenditures which are for services ( such as education and national defense ) produced by government In current dollars these services are valued at their cost of production Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Gross value added by sector [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Households and institutions Business Year or quarter Gross domestic product Total Nonfarm Farm Total Households Nonprofit institutions serving households General government Total Federal State and local Addendum : Gross housing value added p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Gross domestic business product equals gross domestic product excluding gross value added of households and institutions and of general government. Nonfarm product equals gross domestic business value added excluding gross farm value added Equals compensation of employees of nonprofit institutions the rental value of nonresidential fixed assets owned and used by nonprofit institutions serving households and rental income of persons for tenant-occupied housing owned by nonprofit institutions Equals compensation of general government employees plus general government consumption of fixed capital Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Real gross value added by sector [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Households and institutions Business Year or quarter Gross domestic product Total Nonfarm Farm Total Households Nonprofit institutions serving households General government Total Federal State and local Addendum : Gross housing value added p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Gross domestic business product equals gross domestic product excluding gross value added of households and institutions and of general government. Nonfarm product equals gross domestic business value added excluding gross farm value added Equals compensation of employees of nonprofit institutions the rental value of nonresidential fixed assets owned and used by nonprofit institutions serving households and rental income of persons for tenant-occupied housing owned by nonprofit institutions Equals compensation of general government employees plus general government consumption of fixed capital Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Gross domestic product ( GDP ) by industry value added in current dollars and as a percentage of GDP [ Billions of dollars ; except as noted ] Private industries Year Gross domestic product Total private industries Agriculture forestry fishing and hunting Manufacturing Mining Construction Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Utilities Wholesale trade Retail trade Value added Percent Industry value added as a percentage of GDP ( percent ) Consists of agriculture forestry fishing and hunting ; mining ; construction ; and manufacturing Consists of utilities ; wholesale trade ; retail trade ; transportation and warehousing ; information ; finance insurance real estate rental and leasing ; professional and business services ; educational services health care and social assistance ; arts entertainment recreation accommodation and food services ; and other services except government Note. Value added is the contribution of each private industry and of government to gross domestic product. Value added is equal to an industry s gross output minus its intermediate inputs. Current-dollar value added is calculated as the sum of distributions by an industry to its labor and capital which are derived from the components of gross domestic income See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Gross domestic product ( GDP ) by industry value added in current dollars and as a percentage of GDP continued [ Billions of dollars ; except as noted ] Private industries continued Year Transportation and warehousing Information Finance insurance real estate rental and leasing Arts EducaProentertional fes- services tainment Other sionrecrea- services Governal and health tion ment care except busiaccom- governand modation ness social ment servand assisices food tance services Private Private goods- servicesproduc- producing ing indusindustries tries Value added Industry value added as a percentage of GDP ( percent ) Note ( cont d ) Value added industry data shown in Tables B and B are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) GDP by industry data based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) have been updated in line with the national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) benchmark revisions released in December Revised SIC-based estimates are available from the Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis for current-dollar value added by industry for and for real value added for For further details see Survey of Current Business November Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Real gross domestic product by industry value added and percent changes Private industries Year Gross domestic product Total private industries Agriculture forestry fishing and hunting Manufacturing Mining Construction Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Utilities Wholesale trade Retail trade Chain-type quantity indexes for value added ( = ) Percent change from year earlier Consists of agriculture forestry fishing and hunting ; mining ; construction ; and manufacturing Consists of utilities ; wholesale trade ; retail trade ; transportation and warehousing ; information ; finance insurance real estate rental and leasing ; professional and business services ; educational services health care and social assistance ; arts entertainment recreation accommodation and food services ; and other services except government See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Real gross domestic product by industry value added and percent changes continued Private industries continued Year Transpor tation and warehousing Information Finance insurance real estate rental and leasing Professional and business services Arts Educaentertional tainment services recreaOther health services tion care except accom- governand social modation ment and assisfood tance services Government Private goodsproducing industries Private servicesproducing industries Chain-type quantity indexes for value added ( = ) Percent change from year earlier Note. Data are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) See Note Table B Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Net value added Consumption of fixed capital Addenda : Net operating surplus Total Taxes Comon Net penprodinterest Business sauction and curtion and misrent of imports Total cel- transemploy- less lafer ees subsineous paydies pay- ments ments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Taxes on cor- Profits porate after income tax InCapivental tory conProfits valua- sumpbefore tion tion tax adadjustjustment ment Estimates for nonfinancial corporate business for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) ; later estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Gross value added and price costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Price per unit of real gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business ( dollars ) Total Chained ( ) dollars Compensation of employees ( unit labor cost ) Unit nonlabor cost Total Consumption of fixed capital Taxes on production and imports Net interest and miscellaneous payments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Taxes on corporate income Profits after tax Estimates for nonfinancial corporate business for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) ; later estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) The implicit price deflator for gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business divided by Less subsidies plus business current transfer payments Unit profits from current production With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter Personal consumption expendi- Total tures Nondurable goods FurniMotor ture vehiand cles house- Total and hold parts equipment Clothing and shoes Food Services Gaso- Fuel line oil and and Total oil coal Household operation Housing Total Electricity and gas Trans- Mediporcal tacare tion p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IVp Includes other items not shown separately imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Includes TABLE B Real personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Durable goods Personal FurniconMotor ture sumpvehiand tion Total cles houseexand hold pendiparts equiptures ment Nondurable goods Total Food Clothing and shoes Gasoline and oil Services Fuel oil and coal Household operation Total Housing Total Electricity and gas Transportation Medical care p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Includes other items not shown separately Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Note. See Table B-2 for data for total personal consumption expenditures for Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Private fixed investment by type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonresidential Residential Structures Equipment and software Year or quarter Private fixed investment Total nonresidential Information processing equipment and software Structures Total Computers and peripheral equipment Total Software Other Industrial equipment Transportation equipment Other equipment Total residential Total Single family p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Includes other items not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Real private fixed investment by type [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonresidential Residential Structures Equipment and software Year or quarter Private fixed investment Total nonresidential Information processing equipment and software Structures Total Computers and Total peripheral equipment1 Software Other Industrial equipment Transportation equipment Other equipment Total residential Total Single family p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p For details on this component see Survey of Current Business Table Table for growth rates Table for contributions and Table for quantity indexes Includes other items not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal National defense Year or quarter Total Total Total State and local Nondefense Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software Total Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software Total Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Real government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal National defense Year or quarter Total Total Total State and local Nondefense Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software Total Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software Total Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Note. See Table B-2 for data for total government consumption expenditures and gross investment for Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Private inventories and domestic final sales by industry [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Private inventories Quarter Fourth quarter : Total Farm Mining utilities and construction Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Other industries Nonfarm Final sales of domestic business Ratio of private inventories to final sales of domestic business Total Nonfarm NAICS : : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter change calculated from this table is not the current-dollar change in private inventories component of GDP. The former is the difference between two inventory stocks each valued at its respective end-of-quarter prices. The latter is the change in the physical volume of inventories valued at average prices of the quarter. In addition changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas change in private inventories is stated at annual rates Inventories of construction mining and utilities establishments are included in other industries through Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Final sales of domestic business equals final sales of domestic product less gross value added of households and institutions and of general government and includes a small amount of final sales by farm and by government enterprises Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis. Estimates through are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Beginning with estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Real private inventories and domestic final sales by industry [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Private inventories Quarter Total Farm Mining utilities and construction Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Other industries Nonfarm Final sales of domestic business Ratio of private inventories to final sales of domestic business Total Nonfarm Fourth quarter : NAICS : : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas the change in private inventories component of GDP is stated at annual rates Inventories of construction mining and utilities establishments are included in other industries through Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Final sales of domestic business equals final sales of domestic product less gross value added of households and institutions and of general government and includes a small amount of final sales by farm and by government enterprises Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis. Estimates for through are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Beginning with estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) See Survey of Current Business Table 5.7.6B for detailed information on calculation of the chained ( ) dollar inventory series. Also historical data on SIC basis are available from the Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts from rest of the world Year or quarter Exports of goods and services Total Total Goods Services Current payments to rest of the world Income receipts Imports of goods and services Total Total Goods Services Income payments Current taxes and transfer payments to rest of the world ( net ) Total From persons ( net ) From government ( net ) From business ( net ) Balance on current account NIPA p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services. Beginning with repairs and alterations of equipment were reclassified from goods to services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Real exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Year or quarter Total Imports of goods and services Goods Goods Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services. Beginning with repairs and alterations of equipment were reclassified from goods to services Note. See Table B-2 for data for total exports of goods and services and total imports of goods and services for Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Relation of gross domestic product gross national product net national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Gross domestic product Plus : Income receipts from rest of the world Less : Income payments to rest of the world Less : Consumption of fixed capital Equals : Gross national product Total Private Government Equals : Net national product Less : Statistical discrepancy Equals : National income p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Year or quarter National income Plus : Corporate profits Taxes ContriNet with buon prointerest inventory duction tions and mis- Business Current current surplus valuation for and cellane- transfer of govand imports govern- ous paypayernment capital ment less ments ments enterconsump- subsi- social on ( net ) prises tion insurdies assets adjustance ments Wage Personal accruals income less receipts disburse- on asments sets Equals : Personal current transfer receipts Personal income p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Compensation of employees Proprietors income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Wage and salary accruals Year or quarter National income Supplements to wages and salaries Government Employer contributions for employee pension and insurance funds Employer contributions for government social insurance Total Total Other Total Total Farm Nonfarm Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p See next page for continuation of table TABLE B National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Total Total Capital Profits conInven- sumptory Profits after tax tion valu- adjustProfits Taxes on ation before corpoNet Undis- adjust- ment rate tax Total divi- tributed ment income dends profits BusiNet ness interest Taxes Less : current on and produc- Sub- transmisceltion sifer laneous and dies paypayimports ments ments ( net ) Current surplus of government enterprises p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Compensation of employees received Wage and salary disbursements Year or quarter Personal income Total Total Private Governindusment tries Supplements to wages and salaries Total Employer contributions for employee pension and insurance funds Employer contributions for government social insurance Proprietors income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Farm Nonfarm Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Consists of aid to families with dependent children and beginning with assistance programs operating under the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal income receipts on assets Year or quarter Total Personal Personal interest dividend income income Personal current transfer receipts Government social benefits to persons Total Old-age survivors Government disability unemand ployment health insurinsurance ance ben- benefits efits Total Veterans benefits Family assistance Other Less : Other Contributions current for transfer governreceipts ment from social business insurance ( net ) p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal current taxes Equals : Disposable personal income Total Personal Personal Personal curconrent sumption interest transpayexpendi- ments fer tures payments Percent of disposable personal income Equals : Personal saving Personal outlays Total Personal Personal consumption saving expenditures p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Consists of nonmortgage interest paid by households Percents based on data in millions of dollars Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures and per capita gross domestic product in current and real dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Disposable personal income Year or quarter Total ( billions of dollars ) Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Gross domestic product per capita ( dollars ) Population ( thousands ) Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are averages of quarterly data. Quarterly data are averages for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) TABLE B Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Net saving Year or quarter Total gross saving Net private saving Total net saving Total Net government saving Wage Undisaccruals Personal tributed less discorsaving porate burseprofits ments Total Federal State and local Consumption of fixed capital Total Private Government p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Gross saving and investment Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic investment capital account transactions and net lending NIPA Addenda : Gross government saving Gross domestic investment Year or quarter Total Total CapNet ital lending Statistical Gross acGross private govern- count or net discrepborancy domes- ment transrowing tic ac ( ) invest- invest- tions ment NIPA ment ( net ) Gross private saving Total Federal State and local Gross saving as a Net perdomes- cent tic of invest- gross ment national income Net saving as a percent of gross national income p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p For details on government investment see Table B of capital transfers and the acquisition and disposal of nonproduced nonfinancial assets to equals the balance on current account NIPA ( see Table B ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Consists Prior TABLE B Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and persons by race selected years Families Year ALL RACES WHITE Alone Alone or in combination BLACK Alone Alone or in combination Number ( millions ) Median money income ( in dollars ) Persons below poverty level Below poverty level Female householder Total Number ( millions ) Percent Number ( millions ) Percent Median money income ( in dollars ) of persons years old and over with income Males Number ( millions ) Percent Females All persons Yearround full-time workers All persons Yearround full-time workers $ $ $ $ $ The term family refers to a group of two or more persons related by birth marriage or adoption and residing together. Every family must include a reference person Current dollar median money income adjusted by CPI U RS Based on census adjusted population controls ; comparable with succeeding years Reflects implementation of Census 2000-based population controls comparable with succeeding years Reflects household sample expansion Data are for white alone ; for white alone or in combination ; for black alone ; and for black alone or in combination. ( Black is also Black or African American. ) Beginning with data for the Current Population Survey allowed respondents to choose more than one race ; for earlier years respondents could report only one race group Note. Poverty rates ( percent of persons below poverty level ) for all races for years not shown above are : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and Poverty thresholds are updated each year to reflect changes in the consumer price index ( CPI U ) For details see Current Population Reports Series P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B Population by age group [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under and over Revised total population data for are available as follows : ; ; ; and Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning All estimates are consistent with decennial census enumerations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B Civilian population and labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Year or month Civilian noninstitutional population Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Not in labor force Civil- Civilian ian emlabor ployforce ment/ parpopticipation ulation rate ratio Thousands of persons years of age and over Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Not seasonally adjusted labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force See next page for continuation of table Civilian Civilian TABLE B Civilian population and labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Year or month Civilian noninstitutional population Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Not in labor force Civil- Civilian ian emlabor ployforce ment/ parpopticipation ulation rate ratio Thousands of persons years of age and over Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments or other changes. See Employment and Earnings for details on breaks in series Beginning in data for agricultural employment are for agricultural and related industries ; data for this series and for nonagricultural employment are not strictly comparable with data for earlier years. Because of independent seasonal adjustment for these two series monthly data will not add to total civilian employment Note. Labor force data in Tables B-35 through B-44 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see Employment and Earnings Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Civilian employment Males Year or month Total Total years Unemployment Females years and over Total years Males years and over Total Total Females years years and over Total years years and over : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Civilian employment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month All civilian workers White Total Males Black and other Females Both sexes Total Males Females Black or African American Both sexes Total Both FeMales males sexes : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Beginning in persons who selected this race group only. Prior to persons who selected more than one race were included in the group they identified as the main race. Data for black or African American were for black prior to Data discontinued for black and other series. See Employment and Earnings for details Note. Beginning with data for since data for all race groups are not shown here detail will not sum to total See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Unemployment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month All civilian workers White Total Males Females Black and other Both sexes Total Black or African American Males Females Both sexes Total Males Females Both sexes : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See footnote and Note Table B Note. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Civilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Labor force participation rate Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec All civilFeian Males males workers Employment/population ratio Both sexes years White Black and other Black or African American Civilian All civilFeian Males males workers Both sexes years White labor force or civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified footnote Table B Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics See Black Black or and African other American TABLE B Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other or black or African American White Year or month All civilian workers Males Total Total years Females years and over Total years Males years and over Total Total years Females years and over Total years years and over Black and other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Black or African American 1Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified See footnote Table B Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other or black or African American White Year or month All civilian workers Males Total Females Total years years and over Total Males years years and over Total Total years Females years and over Total years years and over Black and other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Black or African American Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified footnote Table B Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics See TABLE B Civilian unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted by NSA ] Males Year or month All civilian workers : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Females By race Both years years sexes Total and Total years and years years over over White Black and other Black or African American Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified footnote Table B-37 whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-35 NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics See Persons Asian ( NSA ) Women Hispanic Married who mainor men tain Latino spouse eth- present families ni ( NSA ) city TABLE B Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Black and other or black or African American White Year or month All civilian workers Males Total Females Total years years and over Total Males years years and over Total Total years Females years and over Total years years and over Black and other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Black or African American Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified See footnote Table B Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Unemployment by duration and reason [ Thousands of persons except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Duration of unemployment Unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Year or month Reason for unemployment weeks and over Average ( mean ) duration ( weeks ) Median duration ( weeks ) Job losers Total On layoff Other Job leavers Reentrants New entrants Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals for by reason for unemployment are not equal to total unemployment January job losers and persons who completed temporary jobs Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Data Beginning TABLE B Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs Insured unemployment ( weekly average ) State programs Total benefits paid ( millions of dollars ) Year or month Covered employment p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p Thousands Insured unemployment Initial claims Exhaustions Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) Average weekly check ( dollars ) Weekly average ; thousands * * * * * * * * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Through includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs and UCX ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemembers effective October ) programs. Beginning covered employment data are State and UCFE programs only. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of wage and salary earners Covered employment data beginning are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Prior data are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Includes State UCFE RR and UCX. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) Federal Supplemental Compensation Emergency Unemployment Compensation and TEUC ( Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation ) programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Including Emergency Unemployment Compensation total benefits paid for and would be approximately ( in millions of dollars ) : for and for Including Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation total benefits paid for and ( not including RRB program ) would be approximately ( in millions of dollars ) : for and for Note. Insured unemployment and initial claims programs include Puerto Rican sugar cane workers Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration TABLE B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Goods-producing industries Year or month Total Total Natural resources and mining Service-providing industries Manufacturing Construction Total Dura ble goods Nondurable goods Total Trade transportation and utilities Total Retail trade p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Includes wholesale trade transportation and warehousing and utilities not shown separately Note. Data in Tables B and B are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period that includes the 12th of the month. Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B through B ) which include proprietors self-employed persons unpaid family workers and private household workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Service-providing industries Continued Year or month Information Financial activities Professional and business services Education and health services Leisure and hospitality Other services Government Total Federal State Local p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Note ( cont d ) weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; which are based on a sample of the working-age population ; and which count persons only once as employed unemployed or not in the labor force. In the data shown here persons who work at more than one job are counted each time they appear on a payroll Establishment data for employment hours and earnings are classified based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) For further description and details see Employment and Earnings Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Average weekly hours Year or month Total private Manufacturing Total p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Average hourly earnings Overtime Current dollars dollars Manufacturing ( current dollars ) $ $ $ Total private For Average weekly earnings total private Level Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars $ $ production or nonsupervisory workers ; total includes private industry groups shown in Table B-46 dollars divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Note. See Note Table B-46 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Percent change from year earlier TABLE B Employment cost index private industry Total private Year and month Goods-producing Total Wages Total Wages comand Bene- comand pen- sala- fits pen- salasation ries sation ries Service-producing Total Wages comand Benepen- sala- fits sation ries Benefits Manufacturing Nonmanufacturing Total Wages Total Wages comand Bene- comand Benepen- sala- fits pen- sala- fits sation ries sation ries Index June = ; not seasonally adjusted December : : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec Index June = ; seasonally adjusted Percent change from months earlier not seasonally adjusted December : : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec Percent change from months earlier seasonally adjusted Employer costs for employee benefits Note. The employment cost index is a measure of the change in the cost of labor free from the influence of employment shifts among occupations and industries Data exclude farm and household workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Productivity and related data business sector [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter Output per hour of all persons Hours of all persons Output Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers for recent quarters. The trend from is based on the consumer price index research series ( CPI U RS ) Current dollar output divided by the output index Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Changes in productivity and related data business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Output per hour of all persons Hours of all persons Output Compensation per hour Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm ness business ness business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector Real compensation per hour Business sector Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector at work of all persons engaged in the sector. See footnote Table B-49 and salaries of employees plus employers contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index. See footnote Table B-49 Current dollar output divided by the output index Note. Percent changes are based on original data and may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B-49 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Hours Wages PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Total industrial production Manufacturing Total Durable Nondurable Other ( non-NAICS ) Mining Utilities Total industry and total manufacturing series include manufacturing as defined in the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) plus those industries logging and newspaper periodical book and directory-publishing that have traditionally been considered to be manufacturing and included in the industrial sector Note. Data based on the North American Industry Classification System ; see footnote Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Total industrial production Final products Nonindustrial supplies Consumer goods Total Total Automotive products Materials Equipment Other Nondura- durable Total Business ble goods goods Defense and space Includes other items not shown separately Note. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Total Construction Business Total Nonenergy Energy TABLE B Industrial production indexes selected manufacturing industries [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Durable manufacturing Year or month Primary metal Fabricated metal products Machinery Nondurable manufacturing Computer and electronic products Transportation equipment Total Selected hightechnology Apparel Paper Total Motor vehicles and parts Printing and support Chemical Plastics and rubber products Food Total Iron and steel products p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Computers and office equipment communications equipment and semiconductors and related electronic components Note. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Capacity utilization rates [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month Total industry Stage-of-process Primary and semifinished Durable goods Nondurable goods Other ( nonNAICS ) Mining Utilities p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Total Output as percent of capacity See footnote and Note Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Crude Finished TABLE B New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Total Total New housing units Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction Residential buildings Total Lodging Total Office Commercial Manufacturing Federal State and local Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Includes farm residential buildings residential improvements not shown separately single- and multi-family units Including farm Health care educational religious public safety amusement and recreation transportation communication power highway and street sewage and waste disposal water supply and conservation and development Includes New Note. Data beginning reflect reclassification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B New private housing units started authorized and completed and houses sold [ Thousands ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] New housing units started New housing units authorized Type of structure Type of structure Year or month Total unit to units units or more p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Total unit to units units or more New housing units completed New houses sold Authorized by issuance of local building permits in : permit-issuing places beginning ; places for ; places for ; places for ; places for ; places for ; and places prior to Monthly data derived Note. Data beginning for new housing units started and completed and for new houses sold are based on new estimation methods and are not directly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month SIC : Total manufacturing and trade Sales Inventories Ratio Manufacturing Merchant wholesalers Sales Inven3 tories Ratio Retail trade Sales InvenInven3 tories Ratio Sales tories Ratio Retail and food services sales NAICS : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures Seasonally adjusted end of period. Inventories beginning January for manufacturing and December for wholesale and retail trade are not comparable with earlier periods Inventory/sales ratio. Annual data are : beginning averages of monthly ratios ; for ratio of December inventories to monthly average sales for the year ; and for earlier years weighted averages. Monthly ratios are inventories at end of month to sales for month Food services included on SIC basis and excluded on NAICS basis. See last column for retail and food services sales Effective in data classified based on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Data on NAICS basis available beginning Earlier data based on Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Data include semiconductors Note. Earlier data are not strictly comparable with data beginning for wholesale and retail trade Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B Manufacturers shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Shipments Year or month SIC : Inventories Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Total Total Materials and supplies Work in process Finished goods Total Materials and supplies Work in process Finished goods NAICS : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures adjusted end of period. Data beginning are not comparable with data for earlier data in data classified based on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Data on NAICS basis available beginning Earlier data based on Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Data include semiconductors Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Seasonally Effective TABLE B Manufacturers new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] New orders Unfilled orders Durable goods industries Year or month Total Total Capital goods nondefense Nondurable goods industries Total Unfilled orders shipments ratio Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Total Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries SIC : NAICS : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures Unfilled orders are seasonally adjusted end of period. Ratios are unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ( excludes industries with no unfilled orders ) Annual ratios relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Effective in data classified based on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Data on NAICS basis available beginning Earlier data based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Data on SIC basis include semiconductors. Data on NAICS basis do not include semiconductors Note. For data beginning on NAICS basis since there are no unfilled orders for manufacturers nondurable goods manufacturers nondurable new orders and nondurable shipments are the same ( see Table B ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census PRICES TABLE B Consumer price indexes for major expenditure classes [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Food and beverages All items ( CPI-U ) Total Food Apparel Housing Transpor- Medical Entertaintacare ment tion Includes Recreation Education and communication Other goods and services alcoholic beverages not shown separately = fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners costs Series reflect changes in composition and renaming beginning in and formula and methodology changes beginning in Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics December Household Energy TABLE B Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Food and beverages Housing Food Year or month Total Total At home Shelter Away from home Total Total Fuels and utilities Owners equivaRent of lent rent primary of pri- Total resimary dence residence Fuels Total Fuel oil and other fuels Gas ( piped ) and electricity Furnishings and operations : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately other items not shown separately = December See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes Continued [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Transportation Medical care Private transportation Year or month Total New vehicles Total Total New cars Used cars and trucks Motor fuel Motor vehicle maintenance and repair Public transportation Total Medical care commodities Medical care services : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. See Note Table B-60 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Consumer price indexes for commodities services and special groups [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Commodities Year or month All items ( CPI-U ) All commodities Commodities less food Services All services Special indexes Services less medical care services All items less food All items less energy All items All items All items less less food medical and care energy CPI-U- CPI-U- C-CPIRS U X1 ( Dec. ( Dec ( Dec = = = ) ) ) : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec CPI-U-X1 is a rental equivalence approach to homeowners costs for the CPI-U for years prior to the first year for which the official index incorporates such a measure. CPI-U-X1 is rebased to the December value of the CPI-U ( = ) and is identical with CPI-U data from December forward. Data prior to estimated by moving the series at the same rate as the CPI-U for each year CPI research series using current methods ( CPI-U-RS ) introduced in June Data for are preliminary. All data are subject to revision annually Chained consumer price index introduced in August Data for and are subject to revision Note. See Note Table B-60 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Changes in special consumer price indexes [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] All items ( CPI-U ) Year or month Dec to Dec.1 All items less food Year to year Dec to Dec.1 All items less energy Year to year Dec to Dec.1 All items less food and energy Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year All items less medical care Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Percent change from preceding month Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Note. See Note Table B-60 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted TABLE B Changes in consumer price indexes for commodities and services [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] All items ( CPI-U ) Year Dec to Dec.1 Commodities Year to year Total Dec to Dec.1 Food Year to year Medical care Services Dec to Dec.1 Total Year to year Dec to Dec. Medical care Year to year Dec to Dec. Year to year Dec to Dec. Energy Year to year Dec to Dec. Year to year Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes and services fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Commodities Household Note. See Note Table B-60 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Finished goods Consumer foods Year or month Total finished goods Total Crude Finished goods excluding consumer foods Consumer goods Processed Total Total Durable Nondurable Capital equipment Total finished consumer goods : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Data have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Crude materials for further processing Total Foods and feeds Other For manufacturing For construction Processed fuels and lubricants : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Year or month Intermediate Materials and components materials for food manufacturing and feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Containers Supplies Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other TABLE B Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Finished goods Intermediate materials supplies and components Crude materials for further processing Excluding foods and energy Year or month Total Foods Energy Total Capital equipment Consumer goods excluding foods and energy Total Foods and Energy feeds1 Other Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Energy Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Intermediate Data materials for food manufacturing and feeds have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Producer price indexes for major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Total Textile products and apparel Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power Chemicals and allied products : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug2 Sept Oct Nov Dec Prices Data for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Rubber and plastic products Lumber and wood products Pulp paper and allied products Metals and metal products Transportation equipment Machinery and equipment Furniture and household durables Nonmetallic mineral products : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Year or month Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Total Motor vehicles and equipment Miscellaneous products TABLE B Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Year or month Total finished goods Finished consumer foods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Consumer goods Total Finished energy goods Capital equipment Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to year Dec. year Dec. Dec. year Dec. year Dec. year Finished goods excluding foods and energy Dec to Dec. Year to year Dec. to Year to Dec. year SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnadsonUnadsonUnadsonUnadsonUnadsonjusted ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally adjusted justed justed justed justed Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Percent change from preceding month SeaUnadsonjusted ally adjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Data have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B Money stock and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures except debt end-of-period basis ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] M1 Year and month December : p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p M2 M3 Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) M2 plus large time deposits RPs Eurodollars and institution-only MMMF balances Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors Percent change Debt M1 plus retail MMMF balances savings deposits ( including MMDAs ) and small time deposits Consists From year or months earlier From previous period M1 M2 M3 Debt of outstanding credit market debt of the U.S. Government State and local governments and private nonfinancial sectors changes are from December to December ; monthly changes are from months earlier at a simple annual rate changes are from fourth quarter to fourth quarter. Quarterly changes are from previous quarter at annual rate Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Annual Annual TABLE B Components of money stock measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Year and month December : Currency Nonbank travelers checks Demand deposits Other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) Small denomination time deposits Savings deposits including money market deposit accounts ( MMDAs ) 2004p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p Small Data denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $ prior to are savings deposits only ; MMDA data begin December See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Components of money stock measures Continued [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) balances Year and month Institution only Retail December : Large denomination time deposits Overnight and term repurchase agreements ( RPs ) ( net ) Overnight and term Eurodollars ( net ) p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p Large denomination deposits are those issued in amounts of more than $ Note. See also Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and the monetary base [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements Year and month Reserves of depository institutions Total December : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Nonborrowed Required Execess ( NSA ) Monetary base Data Borrowings of depository institutions from the Federal Reserve ( NSA ) Total Primary Secondary Seasonal Adjustment are prorated averages of biweekly ( maintenance period ) averages of daily figures Aggregate reserves incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with regulatory changes to reserve requirements. For details on aggregate reserves series see Federal Reserve Bulletin Total includes borrowing under the terms and conditions established for the Century Date Change Special Liquidity Facility in effect from October through April Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Bank credit at all commercial banks [ Monthly average ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Securities in bank credit Year and month December : Total bank credit Total securities U.S Treasury and agency securities Other securities Loans and leases in bank credit Total loans and leases Commercial and industrial Real estate Total Revolving home equity Other Con- Secusumer rity Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Data are prorated averages of Wednesday values for domestically chartered commercial banks branches and agencies of foreign banks New York State investment companies ( through September ) and Edge Act and agreement corporations Excludes Federal funds sold to reverse repurchase agreements ( RPs ) with and loans to commercial banks in the United States Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Constant maturities 3month 6month 3year 10year 30year Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor s ) Newhome mortgage yields Prime rate charged by banks Discount window ( Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) Primary credit Adjustment credit Federal funds rate Rate on new issues within period ; bank-discount basis Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Department of the Treasury. In February the Department of the Treasury discontinued publication of the 30-year series Beginning December data for corporate Aaa series are industrial bonds only Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) 3month 6month Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Constant maturities 3year 10year 30year Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor s ) Newhome mortgage yields Prime rate charged by banks High-low : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Discount window ( Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) Primary credit Adjustment credit High-low Federal funds rate High-low For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for and are ranges of the rate in effect during the period credit replaced adjustment credit as the Federal Reserve s principal discount window lending program effective January July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day s transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Housing Finance Board Moody s Investors Service and Standard & Poor s Primary Since TABLE B Credit market borrowing [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item NONFINANCIAL SECTORS DOMESTIC FEDERAL GOVERNMENT Treasury securities Budget agency securities and mortgages NONFEDERAL BY INSTRUMENT Commercial paper Municipal securities and loans Corporate bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Home Multifamily residential Commercial Farm Consumer credit NONFEDERAL BY SECTOR Household sector Nonfinancial business Corporate Nonfarm noncorporate Farm State and local governments FOREIGN BORROWING IN THE UNITED STATES Commercial paper Bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances BY INSTRUMENT Open market paper GSE issues ( government-sponsored enterprises ) Agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pool securities Corporate bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages BY SECTOR Commercial banking U.S.-chartered commercial banks Foreign banking offices in U.S. Bank holding companies Savings institutions Government-sponsored enterprises Agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pools Asset-backed securities issuers Finance companies REITS ( real estate investment trusts ) Brokers and dealers Funding corporations Other BY INSTRUMENT Open market paper Treasury securities Agency- and GSE-backed securities Municipal securities Corporate and foreign bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Consumer credit NONFINANCIAL DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN BORROWING FINANCIAL SECTORS ALL SECTORS Credit unions life insurance companies and mortgage companies See next page for continuation of table TABLE B Credit market borrowing Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item I II III IV I II III NONFINANCIAL SECTORS DOMESTIC FEDERAL GOVERNMENT Treasury securities Budget agency securities and mortgages NONFEDERAL BY INSTRUMENT Commercial paper Municipal securities and loans Corporate bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Home Multifamily residential Commercial Farm Consumer credit NONFEDERAL BY SECTOR Household sector Nonfinancial business Corporate Nonfarm noncorporate Farm State and local governments FOREIGN BORROWING IN THE UNITED STATES Commercial paper Bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances NONFINANCIAL DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN BORROWING FINANCIAL SECTORS BY INSTRUMENT Open market paper GSE issues ( government-sponsored enterprises ) Agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pool securities Corporate bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages BY SECTOR Commercial banking U.S.-chartered commercial banks Foreign banking offices in U.S. Bank holding companies Savings institutions Government-sponsored enterprises Agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pools Asset-backed securities issuers Finance companies REITS ( real estate investment trusts ) Brokers and dealers Funding corporations Other BY INSTRUMENT Open market paper Treasury securities Agency- and GSE-backed securities Municipal securities Corporate and foreign bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Consumer credit ALL SECTORS Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties End of year or quarter All properties Farm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Government underwritten Total to 4family houses Multifamily properties Commercial properties Conventional to 4-family houses Total Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III p Includes FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes multifamily properties not shown separately and commercial properties not shown here but are the same as nonfarm properties commercial properties Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter Total : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III p Total Savings institutions Commercial banks Other holders Life insurance companies Federal and related agencies Individuals and others Includes savings banks and savings and loan associations. Data reported by Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation-insured institutions include loans in process for and exclude loans in process beginning Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Farmers Home Administration ( FmHA ) Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Resolution Trust Corporation ( through ) and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation and Public Housing Administration. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) Federal Land Banks Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( FHLMC ) Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation ( beginning ) Federal Home Loan Banks ( beginning ) and mortgage passthrough securities issued or guaranteed by GNMA FHLMC FNMA or FmHA. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with individuals and others. Includes private mortgage pools Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations TABLE B Consumer credit outstanding [ Amount outstanding ( end of month ) ; millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Total consumer credit Year and month December : Revolving Nonrevolving : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals. Credit secured by real estate is excluded Includes automobile loans and all other loans not included in revolving credit such as loans for mobile homes education boats trailers or vacations. These loans may be secured or unsecured. Beginning includes student loans extended by the Federal Government and by SLM Holding Corporation Data newly available in January result in breaks in these series between December and subsequent months Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Total Fiscal year or period Receipts On-budget Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Off-budget Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Federal debt ( end of period ) Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Gross Federal Held by the public Addendum : Gross domestic product Transition quarter ( estimates ) ( estimates ) Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The transition quarter is the 3-month period from July through September Refunds of receipts are excluded from receipts and outlays See Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year for additional information Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years [ Percent ; fiscal years ] Outlays Fiscal year or period Receipts Surplus or deficit ( ) National defense Total Federal debt ( end of period ) Gross Federal Held by public Transition quarter ( estimates ) ( estimates ) Note. See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Receipts ( on-budget and off-budget ) Fiscal year or period Total Individual income taxes Social Cor- insurpora- ance tion and in- retire- Other come ment taxes receipts Outlays ( on-budget and off-budget ) National defense Total InternaIncome Social Net Depart- tion- Health Medi- secu- secu- inter- Other al care ment of rity est Total Defense afrity military fairs Surplus or deficit ( ) ( onbudget and offbudget ) Transition quarter Estimates Note. See Note Table B-78 Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Description RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Total outlays Actual Estimates Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts Off-budget outlays Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Federal Government accounts Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other RECEIPTS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance and retirement receipts On-budget Off-budget Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties and fees Miscellaneous receipts Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System All other OUTLAYS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit On-budget Off-budget Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Medicare Income security Social security On-budget Off-budget Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off-budget Beginning includes universal service fund receipts Note. See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget TABLE B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Year or quarter Current receipts Current expenditures Federal Government Net government saving ( NIPA ) State and local government Net Federal Government saving ( NIPA ) Net State and local government saving ( NIPA ) Current receipts Current expenditures p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Current receipts Current expenditures Addendum : Grantsin-aid to State and local governments Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal current expenditures and State and local current receipts. Total government current receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) by major type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts Current expenditures Current tax receipts Year or quarter Total Total ContribuCurrent InTaxes Taxes tions come Current surplus on for transof Peron regovern- Total sonal produc- corpo- govern- ceipts fer tion ment rement current rate on and social assets ceipts entertaxes inimprises come insurports ance Consumption expenditures Net Current Intergoverntransest Sub- ment fer sipay- dies saving payments ments p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV 3O5.9 : I II III IV p Includes Includes taxes from the rest of the world not shown separately an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Federal Government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts Current expenditures Current tax receipts Year or quarter Total Total ContribuCurrent InTaxes Taxes tions come Current surplus on for transof Peron regovernsonal produc- corpo- govern- ceipts fer tion ment rement current rate on and social assets ceipts entertaxes inimprises come insurports ance Total Net Consump- Current Inter- Sub- Federal transGovernest tion sifer pay- dies ment expaysaving pendi- ments ments tures p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IVp Includes taxes from the rest of the world not shown separately an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Federal grants-in-aid Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Includes Includes TABLE B State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts Current expenditures Current tax receipts Year or quarter Total ContribuInTaxes Taxes tions come Current on for transPer- producon regovern- ceipts fersonal corpoTotal current tion ment rerate on ceipts and social taxes iniminsur- assets come ports ance p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Includes Current surplus of government enterprises Total Consumption expenditures Federal grants-in-aid Includes an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Net GovernState ment and social Interbenefit est Sub- local paypay- si- governments ments dies ment saving to persons TABLE B State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year Total Sales Indiand Property gross vidual taxes income receipts taxes taxes General expenditures by function Corporation net income taxes Revenue from Federal Government Fiscal All other Total Education Highways Public welfare All other years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans services air transportation water transport and terminals parking facilities transit subsidies police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development solid waste management financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other government administration interest on general debt and general expenditures n.e.c Note. Except for States listed data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregation of data for government fiscal years that ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years ( Texas used August and Alabama and Michigan used September ) Data for and earlier years include data for governments fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Data are not available for intervening years Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] End of year or month Fiscal year : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Total Treasury securities outstanding Marketable Total Treasury bills Treas- Treasury ury notes bonds Nonmarketable Treasury inflation-protected securities Total Notes Bonds Total Data U.S savings Foreign securi- series ties Government account series Other beginning January are interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing securities ; prior data are interest-bearing securities only Includes Federal Financing Bank securities not shown separately in the amount of $ billion ; for November and December $ billion Through series is U.S. savings bonds. Beginning includes U.S. retirement plan bonds U.S. individual retirement bonds and U.S. savings notes previously included in other nonmarketable securities Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks and for the period July through February depositary compensation securities Includes $ million in certificates not shown separately Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors End of year or month Amount outstanding privately held Maturity class Within year to years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Average length Years Months : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec In the average length calculation was revised to include Treasury inflation-protected securities Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis Source : Department of the Treasury TABLE B Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities [ Billions of dollars ] Held by private investors Total public debt Federal Reserve Deand posiGovernTotal tory ment privately instiacheld tucounts tions : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept End of month Pension funds U.S savings bonds Private State and local governments Insurance companies Mutual funds State Foreign and and interlocal nationgovernal ments Face Other investors value Reserve holdings exclude Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements commercial banks savings institutions and credit unions Current accrual value Includes Treasury securities held by the Federal Employees Retirement System Thrift Savings Plan G Fund. Includes money market mutual funds mutual funds and closed-end investment companies Includes nonmarketable foreign series Treasury securities and Treasury deposit funds. Excludes Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements in custody accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Estimates reflect benchmarks to this series at differing intervals Includes individuals Government-sponsored enterprises brokers and dealers bank personal trusts and estates corporate and noncorporate businesses and other investors Federal Includes Note. Data shown in this table are as of December Source : Department of the Treasury CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Taxes on corporate income Net dividends Total Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments p : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV p Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Year or quarter SIC : NAICS : : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Financial Total Total Total Federal Reserve banks Nonfinancial Other Total Manufacturing Transportation Utilities Wholesale trade Retail trade Information Other Rest of the world See Table B-92 for industry detail Data on SIC basis include transportation and utilities. On NAICS basis includes transportation and warehousing. Utilities classified separately in NAICS ( as shown beginning ) Industry data for SIC are based on the SIC for data beginning and on the SIC for earlier data shown. Data on NAICS basis are based on the NAICS Note. Industry data on SIC ( Standard Industrial Classification ) basis and NAICS ( North American Industry Classification System ) basis are not necessarily the same and are not strictly comparable Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Nondurable goods Durable goods Year or quarter Total manufacturing Total Fabricated metal products Machinery Computer and electronic products Electrical equipment appliances and components Motor vehicles bodies and trailers and parts Other Total Food and beverage and tobacco products Chemical products Petroleum and coal products Other SIC : NAICS : : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III For SIC data includes primary metal industries not shown separately Industry groups shown in column headings reflect NAICS classification for data beginning For data on SIC basis the industry groups would be machinery industrial machinery and equipment ; electrical equipment appliances and components electronic and other electric equipment ; motor vehicles bodies and trailers and parts motor vehicles and equipment ; food and beverage and tobacco products food and kindred products ; and chemical products chemicals and allied products Industry data based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) are based on the SIC for data beginning and on the SIC for earlier data shown. Data on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) are based on the NAICS Industry groups shown on SIC and NAICS basis are not necessarily the same and are not strictly comparable Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Sales profits and stockholders equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Profits Sales ( net ) Before income taxes After income taxes Durable goods industries Stockholders equity Profits Sales ( net ) Before income taxes After income taxes Nondurable goods industries Stockholders equity Profits Sales ( net ) Before income taxes After income taxes Stockholders equity : IV New series : : IV : IV NAICS : : IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III In the old series income taxes refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted. In the new series no income taxes have been deducted Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Beginning profits before and after income taxes reflect inclusion of minority stockholders interest in net income before and after income taxes Data for ( most significantly : I ) reflect the early adoption of Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement ( Employer s Accounting for Post-Retirement Benefits Other Than Pensions ) by a large number of companies during the fourth quarter of Data for ( : I ) also reflect adoption of Statement Corporations must show the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle in the first quarter of the year in which the change is adopted Data based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Other data shown are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting principles industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census TABLE B Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders equity percent Year or quarter Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries : IV New series : : IV : IV NAICS : : IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter footnote Table B footnote Table B See footnote Table B Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See Note Table B Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census See See TABLE B Historical stock prices and yields Common stock prices New York Stock Exchange indexes Year Composite ( Dec. = ) Composite Industrial Transpor- Utility tation Finance ( ) December = Averages Common stock yields ( S&P ) ( percent ) Standard Nasdaq & Poor s composite Dow Jones composite index Dividendindustrial ( Feb. price index average = ratio ( ) = ) Earningsprice ratio of daily closing prices Includes stocks as follows : for NYSE all stocks listed ; for Dow Jones industrial average stocks ; for S&P composite index stocks ; and for Nasdaq composite index over The NYSE relaunched the composite index on January incorporating new definitions methodology and base value. ( The composite index based on December = was discontinued. ) Subset indexes on financial energy and health care were released by the NYSE on January ( see Table B ) NYSE indexes shown in this table for industrials utilities transportation and finance were discontinued Effective April the NYSE doubled the value of the utility index to facilitate trading of options and futures on the index. Annual indexes prior to reflect the doubling Based on stocks in the S&P composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter Annual data are averages of quarterly ratios Sources : New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) Dow Jones & Co. Inc. Standard & Poor s ( S&P ) and Nasdaq Stock Market TABLE B Common stock prices and yields Common stock prices Year or month indexes New York Stock Exchange ( December = ) Composite : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Financial Energy Health Care Common stock yields ( S&P ) ( percent ) Dow Jones industrial average Standard & Poor s composite index ( = ) Nasdaq composite index ( Feb. = ) Dividendprice ratio Earningsprice ratio Averages of daily closing prices Includes stocks as follows : for NYSE all stocks listed ( in about ) ; for Dow Jones Industrial average stocks ; for S&P composite index stocks ; and for Nasdaq composite index over The NYSE relaunched the composite index on January incorporating new definitions methodology and base value. Subset indexes on financial energy and health care were released by the NYSE on January Based on stocks in the S&P composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices Monthly data are averages of weekly figures annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter Annual data are averages of quarterly ratios Sources : New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) Dow Jones & Co. Inc. Standard & Poor s ( S&P ) and Nasdaq Stock Market AGRICULTURE TABLE B Farm income [ Billions of dollars ] Income of farm operators from farming Gross farm income Cash marketing receipts Year Total p Total Livestock and products Crops Value of inventory changes Direct Government payments Production expenses Net farm income Cash marketing receipts Government payments value of changes in inventories other farm related cash income and nonmoney income produced by farms including imputed rent of operator residences Crop receipts include proceeds received from commodities placed under Commodity Credit Corporation loans Physical changes in beginning and ending year inventories of crop and livestock commodities valued at weighted average market prices during the year Includes only Government payments made directly to farmers Note. Data for are forecasts Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service TABLE B Farm business balance sheet [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Physical assets End of year Financial assets Nonreal estate Total assets Real estate Livestock and poultry Investments PurMachinin Other ery and Crops chased cooperinmotor atives puts vehicles Total claims Real estate debt Nonreal estate debt Proprietors equity Excludes commercial broilers ; excludes horses and mules beginning ; excludes turkeys beginning Credit Corporation ( CCC ) crops held on farms plus value above loan rate for crops held under CCC fertilizer chemicals fuels parts feed seed and other supplies Currency and demand deposits Includes CCC storage and drying facilities loans Does not include CCC crop loans Beginning data are for farms included in the new farm definition that is places with sales of $ or more annually Non-Commodity Includes Note. Data exclude operator households Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service TABLE B Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Farm output Productivity indicators Primary output Year Total Livestock and products Crops Secondary output Farm output per unit of total factor input Farm output per unit of labor input Note. Farm output includes primary agricultural activities and certain secondary activities that are closely linked to agricultural production for which information on production and input use can not be separately observed See Table B for farm inputs Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service TABLE B Farm input use selected inputs Farm employment ( thousands ) Year Total Selected indexes of input use ( = ) Crops harSelfvested em ( milployed Hired lions and workers of unpaid acres ) workers Capital input Labor input Total farm input Total Durable equipment Total Materials input Hired Selfemlabor ployed Total Feeds seeds AgriPurand culpur- Ener- tural chased gy servchased chem- ices liveicals stock p Includes persons doing farmwork on all farms. These data published by the Department of Agriculture differ from those on agricultural employment by the Department of Labor ( see Table B-35 ) because of differences in the method of approach in concepts of employment and in time of month for which the data are collected Prior to this category was termed family workers and did not include nonfamily unpaid workers. Series discontinued in Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and vegetables and minor crops. Includes double-cropping Basis for farm employment series was discontinued for through Employment is estimated for these years Sources : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service TABLE B Agricultural price indexes and farm real estate value [ = except as noted ] Prices received by farmers Year or month All farm products Crops Livestock and products Prices paid by farmers All commodities services interest Total taxes and wage rates Production items Feed Livestock and poultry AgriculFertil- tural izer chemicals Fuels Farm machinery Farm services Rent Wage rates Addendum : Average farm real estate value per acre ( dollars ) : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes items used for family living not shown separately other production items not shown separately for States. Annual data are : March for February for April for February for and January for Includes Average Note. Data on a base prior to have not been calculated by Department of Agriculture Source : Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics Service TABLE B U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] Exports Year Total Feed grains Food grains Oilseeds and products Imports Cotton Tobacco Animals and products Total Fruits nuts and vegetables Animals and products Coffee Cocoa beans and products Agricultural trade balance ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Jan-Nov : Total includes items not shown separately wheat and wheat flour fruit nut and vegetable preparations. Beginning in includes bananas Less than $ million Rice Includes Note. Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural commodities are defined as ( ) nonmarine food products and ( ) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex processes of manufacture. Export value at U.S. port of exportation is based on the selling price and includes inland freight insurance and other charges to the port. Import value defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excludes import duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Services Goods Year or quarter Exports Imports Balance on goods Income receipts and payments Balance Net Net travel Other on goods Balance military and and services Receipts Payments on transac- transporservices net income tions tation Unilateral current transfers net Balance on current account : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III p Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing ; excludes military Includes transfers of goods and services under U.S. military grant programs See next page for continuation of table TABLE B U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Financial account Year or quarter U.S.-owned assets abroad net [ increase/financial outflow ( ) ] Capital account transactions net Total U.S official reserve assets Foreign-owned assets in the U.S. net [ increase/financial inflow ( ) ] Statistical discrepancy Other U.S Government assets U.S private assets Total Foreign official assets Other foreign assets Total ( sum of the items with sign reversed ) Of which : Seasonal adjustment discrepancy : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III p Consists of gold special drawing rights foreign currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B U.S. international trade in goods by principal end-use category [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports Imports Nonagricultural products Year or quarter Total Agricultural products Total Indus- Capital trial goods supplies except Autoand auto- motive mate- motive rials Nonpetroleum products Other Total Petroleum and products Total Indus- Capital trial goods supplies except Auto- Other and auto- motive mate- motive rials : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III p End-use commodity classifications beginning and are not strictly comparable with data for earlier periods. See Survey of Current Business June and July Note. Data are on a balance of payments basis and exclude military In June end-use categories for goods exports were redefined to include reexports ; beginning with data for reexports ( exports of foreign goods ) are assigned to detailed end-use categories in the same manner as exports of domestic goods Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B U.S. international trade in goods by area [ Millions of dollars ] Item first quarters at annual rate EXPORTS Industrial countries Euro area Canada Japan United Kingdom Other Other countries OPEC Other Of which : China Mexico International organizations and unallocated IMPORTS Industrial countries Euro area Canada Japan United Kingdom Other Other countries OPEC Other Of which : China Mexico International organizations and unallocated BALANCE ( excess of exports ) Industrial countries Euro area Canada Japan United Kingdom Other Other countries OPEC Other Of which : China Mexico International organizations and unallocated Preliminary ; seasonally adjusted Euro area includes : Austria Belgium Finland France Germany Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal Spain and beginning Greece Australia New Zealand and South Africa and other western Europe Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries consisting of Algeria Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela. Previously included Ecuador ( through ) and Gabon ( through ) Includes mainly Latin America other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less members of OPEC Note. Data are on a balance of payments basis and exclude military For further details regarding these data see Survey of Current Business July Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B U.S. international trade in goods on balance of payments ( BOP ) and Census basis and trade in services on BOP basis [ Billions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Goods : Exports ( f.a.s. value ) Goods : Imports ( customs value except as noted ) Census basis ( by end-use category ) Year or month Foods Total feeds BOP Total and Census basis bevbasis erages Industrial supplies and materials Capital goods except automotive Automotive vehicles parts and engines Services ( BOP basis ) Census basis ( by end-use category ) Consumer goods ( nonfood ) except automotive Total BOP basis Foods feeds Total and Census bevbasis erages F.a.s. value Industrial supplies and materials Capital goods except automotive Automotive vehicles parts and engines Consumer goods ( nonfood ) except automotive Exports Imports F.a.s. value : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Customs value Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded from total exports through and included beginning F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports and at foreign port of exportation for imports Beginning exports have been adjusted for undocumented exports to Canada and are included in the appropriate end-use categories For prior years only total exports include this adjustment Total includes other exports or imports not shown separately Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments Total includes revisions not reflected in detail Total exports are on a revised statistical month basis ; end-use categories are on a statistical month basis Note. Goods on a Census basis are adjusted to a BOP basis by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in line with concepts and definitions used to prepare international and national accounts. The adjustments are necessary to supplement coverage of Census data to eliminate duplication of transactions recorded elsewhere in international accounts and to value transactions according to a standard definition Data include trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands Puerto Rico and U.S. Foreign Trade Zones Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Economic Analysis ) TABLE B International investment position of the United States at year-end [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment p NET INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value U.S.-OWNED ASSETS ABROAD : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value U.S. official reserve assets Gold Special drawing rights Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund Foreign currencies U.S. private assets : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value U.S. Government assets other than official reserves U.S. credits and other long-term assets Repayable in dollars Other U.S. foreign currency holdings and U.S short-term assets Direct investment abroad : At current cost At market value Foreign securities Bonds Corporate stocks U.S. claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns U.S. claims reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere FOREIGN-OWNED ASSETS IN THE UNITED STATES : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Foreign official assets in the United States U.S. Government securities U.S. Treasury securities Other Other U.S. Government liabilities U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Other foreign official assets Other foreign assets : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Direct investment in the United States : At current cost At market value U.S. Treasury securities U.S. securities other than U.S. Treasury securities Corporate and other bonds Corporate stocks U.S. currency U.S. liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Valued at market price Note. For details regarding these data see Survey of Current Business July Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis TABLE B Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries Year or quarter United States Canada European Union Japan France Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( Index = ) p : I II III IV : I II III IV p p : I II III IV : I II III IVp Consumer prices ( Index = ) See Note Table B for information on U.S. industrial production series Consists of Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal Spain Sweden and United Kingdom. Data exclude Cyprus Czech Republic Estonia Hungary Latvia Lithuania Malta Poland Slovakia and Slovenia which became members on May Prior to data are for West Germany only All data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted Sources : National sources as reported by Department of Commerce ( International Trade Administration Office of Trade and Industry Information ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter United States Canada Japan France Germany United Kingdom Italy Civilian unemployment rate ( Percent ) : I II III IV : I II III IV Manufacturing hourly compensation in U.S. dollars ( Index = ) Prior to data are for West Germany only Civilian unemployment rates approximating U.S. concepts. Quarterly data for Japan France Germany and Italy should be viewed as less precise indicators of unemployment under U.S. concepts than the annual data There are breaks in the series for France ( and ) Germany ( and ) Italy ( and ) United Kingdom ( and ) and United States ( and ) For details on break in series in and for United States see footnote Table B-35. For details on break in series for other countries see U.S. Department of Labor Comparative Civilian Labor Force Statistics Ten Countries : June Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis ; data relate to all employed persons ( employees and self-employed workers ) For details on manufacturing hourly compensation see U.S. Department of Labor International Comparisons of Manufacturing Productivity and Unit Labor Cost Trends September Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics TABLE B Foreign exchange rates [ Foreign currency units per U.S. dollar except as noted ; certified noon buying rates in New York ] Period Canada ( dollar ) EMU Members ( euro ) Belgium ( franc ) France ( franc ) Germany ( mark ) Netherlands ( guilder ) Italy ( lira ) Japan ( yen ) Switzerland ( franc ) Sweden ( krona ) United Kingdom ( pound ) March : I II III IV : I II III IV Trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar Nominal G index ( March = ) : I II III IV : I II III IV Broad index ( January = ) Real Major currencies index ( March = ) OITP index ( January = ) Broad index ( March = ) Major currencies index ( March = ) OITP index ( March = ) European Economic and Monetary Union members include Austria Belgium Finland France Germany Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal Spain and beginning in Greece U.S. dollars per foreign currency unit G-10 comprises the individual countries shown in this table. Discontinued after December Weighted average of the foreign exchange value of the dollar against the currencies of a broad group of U.S. trading partners Subset of the broad index. Includes currencies of the euro area Australia Canada Japan Sweden Switzerland and the United Kingdom Subset of the broad index. Includes other important U.S. trading partners ( OITP ) whose currencies are not heavily traded outside their home markets Adjusted for changes in the consumer price index Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B International reserves selected years [ Millions of SDRs ; end of period ] Area and country All countries Industrial countries United States Canada Austria Belgium Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal Spain Australia Japan New Zealand Denmark Iceland Norway San Marino Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Oct Nov Euro area : Developing countries : Total By area : Africa Asia Europe Middle East Western Hemisphere Memo : Oil-exporting countries Non-oil developing countries Includes data for Luxembourg Includes data for European Central Bank ( ECB ) beginning Detail does not add to totals shown Includes data for Taiwan Province of China Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities holdings of gold ( at SDR per ounce ) special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange U.S. dollars per SDR ( end of period ) are : ; ; ; ; ; ; October ; and November Source : International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics TABLE B Growth rates in real gross domestic product [ Percent change at annual rate ] Area and country World Advanced economies Of which : United States Japan United Kingdom Canada Euro area Germany France Italy Spain Netherlands Belgium Austria Finland Greece Portugal Ireland Luxembourg Memorandum : Major advanced economies Newly industrialized Asian economies Other emerging market and developing countries Regional groups : Africa Central and eastern Europe Commonwealth of Independent States Russia Developing Asia China India Middle East Western Hemisphere Brazil Mexico All figures are forecasts as published by the International Monetary Fund. For United States advance estimates by the Department of Commerce show that real GDP grew percent in Includes Canada France Germany Italy Japan United Kingdom and United States Includes Hong Kong SAR ( Special Administrative Region of China ) Korea Singapore and Taiwan Province of China Includes Mongolia which is not a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States but is included for reasons of geography and similarities in economic structure Note. For details on data shown in this table see World Economic Outlook published semiannually by the International Monetary Fund Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and International Monetary Fund