Economic Report President of the Transmitted to the Congress February Together with the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers Economic Report of the President Transmitted to the Congress February together with THE ANNUAL REPORT of the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U.S. Government Printing Office Internet : bookstore.gpo.gov Phone : ( ) Fax : ( ) Mail Stop : SSOP Washington DC ISBN-13 : Economic Report of the President | i C O N T E N T S Page ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT............................................. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER THE YEAR IN REVIEW AND THE YEARS AHEAD CHAPTER PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH CHAPTER PRO-GROWTH TAX POLICY................................................ CHAPTER THE FISCAL CHALLENGES FACING MEDICARE CHAPTER CATASTROPHE RISK INSURANCE CHAPTER THE TRANSPORTATION SECTOR : ENERGY AND INFRASTRUCTURE USE............................................................................... CHAPTER CURRENCY MARKETS AND EXCHANGE RATES CHAPTER INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND INVESTMENT CHAPTER IMMIGRATION APPENDIX A. REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION......................................................... * For a detailed table of contents of the Council s Report see page Economic Report of the President | iii ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Economic Report of the President | v ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress of the United States : Economic growth in the United States has been above the historic average and faster than any other major industrialized economy in the world. January was the 41st month of uninterrupted job growth produced by this economy in an expansion that has thus far added more than million new jobs. Unemployment is low inflation is moderate and real wages are rising. Our economy is on the move and we can keep it that way by continuing to pursue sound economic policy based on free-market principles Sound economic policy begins with low taxes. We should work together to spend the taxpayers money wisely and to tackle unfunded liabilities inherent in entitlement programs such as Social Security Medicare and Medicaid. I have laid out a detailed plan in my budget to restrain spending cut earmarks in half by the end of this session and balance the budget by without raising taxes. The tax relief of the past few years has been a key ingredient in growing our economy and it should be made permanent Our growing economy is dynamic. The rise of new technologies new competition and new markets abroad is changing how we do business. We need to take action in four key areas to keep America s economy flexible and dynamic First we must break down barriers to trade so our workers can sell more goods and services to the percent of the world s customers who live outside of our borders. Global trade talks like the Doha Round at the World Trade Organization have the potential to level the playing field so that we can compete on fair terms in foreign markets while helping lift millions of people out of poverty around the world Economic Report of the President | The only way we can complete the Doha Round and make headway on other trade agreements is to extend Trade Promotion Authority which is set to expire on July 1st. This authority is essential to completing good trade agreements. The Congress must renew it if we are to improve our competitiveness in the global economy Second we must work to make private health insurance more affordable and to give patients more choices and control over their health care. One of the most promising ways to do this is by reforming the tax code. We must end the unfair bias against individuals who buy insurance on their own. I propose creating a standard deduction for every American who buys health insurance whether they get it through their jobs or on their own. In a changing economy we need a health care system that is flexible and consumer-oriented. With this reform more than million Americans who are now covered by employer-provided insurance will benefit from lower tax bills. Those who now purchase health insurance on their own would save money on their taxes. Millions of others who now have no health insurance at all would find basic private coverage within their reach. My proposal also taps the innovation of States in making basic affordable insurance available to all by creating Affordable Choices grants to help ensure the poor and the sick have access to private health insurance Third we must continue to diversify our energy supply to benefit our economy national security and environment. In my State of the Union Message I set an ambitious goal of reducing gasoline usage in the United States by percent over the next years. Meeting this goal will require significant changes in supply and demand but we should let the market decide the best mix of technologies and fuels to most efficiently attain it. On the supply side I propose a higher and reformed fuel standard that would include renewable and other alternative fuels. We should also allow environmentally friendly exploration of oil and natural gas. On the demand side I propose enhancing Corporate Average Fuel Economy standards for cars and extending the current rule for light trucks so that we can reduce the amount of gasoline that our passenger vehicles consume and do so in a more efficient way | Economic Report of the President Fourth a strong and vibrant education system is vital to maintaining our Nation s competitive edge in the world and extending economic opportunity to every citizen here at home. Five years ago we rose above partisan differences to enact the No Child Left Behind Act preserving local control raising standards holding schools accountable for results and providing more choice. This year we must reauthorize and strengthen this good law while preserving its core principles Strong productivity growth underlies much of the good economic news from the past few years and the policies discussed above. Productivity growth helps to increase our standards of living and improve our international competitiveness. To maintain this progress we must pursue a variety of pro-growth policies including those contained in the American Competitiveness Initiative and comprehensive immigration reform These and other issues are discussed in the Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers. The Council has prepared this Report to put into broader context the economic issues that underlie my Administration s policy decisions. I commend it to you THE WHITE HOUSE FEBRUARY Economic Report of the President | THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Economic Report of the President | LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. February MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Edward P. Lazear Chairman Katherine Baicker Member Matthew J. Slaughter Member Economic Report of the President | C O N T E N T S Page overview chapter the year in review and the years ahead...................... Developments in and the Near-Term Outlook....................... Consumer Spending and Saving................................................. Housing Prices Residential Investment Business Fixed Investment.......................................................... Business Inventories Government Purchases Exports and Imports Employment Productivity................................................................................ Prices and Wages Financial Markets....................................................................... The Long-Term Outlook Through The Composition of Income Over the Long Term..................... Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter productivity growth The Basics of Productivity Growth : Framework and Recent Facts... Factors That Increase Labor Productivity Productivity Growth in Recent Years.......................................... Productivity Growth and Worker Earnings Productivity and Average Earnings Productivity and Income Differences Understanding the Acceleration in U.S. Productivity : Industry Analysis Why Has Productivity Growth Accelerated in the U.S. While Slowing in Other Countries ? International Openness Flexible Labor Markets............................................................... Low Costs of Starting a Business Policy Implications Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter pro-growth tax policy Rationale for Pro-Growth Tax Policy Defining the Tax Base Choosing the Tax Rates.............................................................. The U.S. Tax System Previous Distortions and Recent Reforms Tax Treatment of Physical Capital Investment............................ Tax Treatment of Human Capital Investment Pro-Growth Changes Since Incremental Approaches to a More Pro-Growth Tax System............ Expensing of Investment Reducing Statutory Tax Rates..................................................... Comparison of Effects of Different Pro-Growth Policies Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter the fiscal challenges facing medicare........................ Entitlement Spending and Medicare The Basics of Medicare Increases in Medicare Spending Over Time...................................... Projections of Future Medicare Spending and Revenue............... Reasons for the Changes in Medicare Spending Over Time Increases in the Number of Medicare Beneficiaries...................... Increases in Spending Per Beneficiary.......................................... Improving the Efficient Allocation of Resources in Medicare Inefficient Health Care Spending Better Incentives for Health Care Providers and Insurers Better Incentives for Medicare Beneficiaries Conclusion....................................................................................... chapter catastrophe risk insurance........................................... The Economics of Catastrophe Risk Insurance Effective Underwriting Reduces Information Problems.............. Catastrophe Losses Are Difficult to Forecast Managing Catastrophe Losses Federal Catastrophe Insurance Programs The National Flood Insurance Program Terrorism and War-Risk Insurance Programs State Property Insurance Markets Conclusion...................................................................................... | Economic Report of the President chapter the transportation sector : energy and infrastructure use........................................................................... Fuel Markets and the Transportation Sector Responding to Changes in the Price of Oil External Costs of Oil Use........................................................... Transportation Fuel Supply Alternative Fuels and Advanced Technologies............................. Demand for Transportation Fuel Improving Fuel Economy........................................................... Transportation Infrastructure and Management of Existing Traffic Flow The Cost of Congestion............................................................. Building More Roads Pricing Road Space..................................................................... Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter currency markets and exchange rates Currency Markets Are Large............................................................ What Determines Currency Values Interest Rate Parity..................................................................... Purchasing Power Parity Fixed versus Floating Exchange Rates Floating Exchange-Rate Regimes................................................ Fixed Exchange-Rate Regimes The Links Between Monetary and Exchange-Rate Policies.............. Conclusion...................................................................................... chapter international trade and investment Trade Liberalization : A Key Contributor to the Strength of the U.S. Economy................................................................................. Firms That Engage in International Trade Are Strong Performers The Effects of Nontariff Barriers on International Trade International Trade in Services U.S. Competitive Advantage in Services..................................... Looking Ahead to Larger Gains from Trade Liberalization Foreign Direct Investment............................................................... Contributions of Inward FDI to the U.S. Economy The Contributions of Outward FDI to the U.S. Economy Conclusion...................................................................................... Contents | chapter immigration.................................................................... The Economics of Immigration The Migration Decision and the Volume of International Migration Lessons from American Immigration History............................. Foreign-Born Workers in the U.S. Labor Force.......................... The Foreign-Born Skill Mix and the Labor Market Impact........ Comprehensive Immigration Policy Reform.................................... A Legal Bridge between Employer Demand and Migrant Supply The Pitfalls of Partial Policy Reforms Conclusion...................................................................................... appendixes A. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B. Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production list of tables Administration Forecast Supply-Side Components of Real GDP Growth Implied Doubling Rates for the Level of Productivity Using Historical Growth Rates........................................................... Effective Marginal Tax Rates on Capital Income of Corporations by Asset Type...................................................... Effective Marginal Tax Rates on Investment............................. Cost of Congestion in Wasted Time and Fuel in the largest Urban Areas U.S. International Trade in Private Services Ten Most Common Occupations for Foreign-Born Workers Ten Occupations with the Highest Proportion of Foreign-Born Workers list of charts Consumption and Net Worth ( Relative to Disposable Personal Income ) Residential Investment and House Prices Consumer Price Inflation Sources of Labor Productivity Growth | Economic Report of the President Productivity and Real Compensation Grow Together Efficiency Growth Highest in Sectors that Made Large IT Investments in 1990s Average Annual Productivity Growth Has Fallen for Most G7 Nations since Effective Marginal Tax Rates on New Investment Effective Marginal Tax Rates on New Business Investment Real Private Nonresidential Fixed Investment Dividends per Share Percent of Firms in the S&P Paying Dividends................. Government Outlays....................................................... Total Healthcare Spending by Medicare Beneficiaries Annual Accident Rate for U.S. Passenger Cars......................... Annual Claim Rate for Properties Covered by the National Flood Insurance Program National Flood Insurance Program Annual Premiums and Losses....................................................................................... Historical and Projected U.S. Oil Consumption and Production The Real Price of Imported Crude Oil..................................... Projected Sales of Alternative Technology Cars and Light Trucks by Fuel Type Share of Vehicle Miles Traveled Main Sources of Congestion Travel Time and Hour of Day on I-90 from Bellevue to Seattle Interest Rates on U.S. and German Long-Term Bonds Exchange Rate Policy Has Moved Away from Fixed Rates Percent of Private U.S. Workforce by Sector Trade Balance by Sector Economic Activities of U.S. Affiliates of Foreign Companies ( ) Foreign Investment Position in the U.S. by Asset Type ( ) U.S. Multinational Goods Sales through Foreign Affiliates and Exports ( ) Economic Activities of U.S. Multinational Companies ( ) Educational Attainment Among Foreign-Born U.S. Residents Foreign-Born Proportion of U.S. Workers by Education Level Contents | list of boxes Indirect Effects of the Housing Sector...................................... Long-Term Prospects for Labor Force Participation Intangible Capital and IT Investment Information Technology the Supply Chain and Productivity Growth in Retail Trade............................................................. Investment Returns Under Different Tax Systems : A Numerical Example Who Bears the Burden of Corporate Taxes ? The President s Proposal to Improve the Tax Treatment of Private Health Insurance The Medicare Advantage Program Long-Term Care....................................................................... Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Benefit Catastrophe Bonds and Sidecars- Accessing Financial Markets to Better Manage Catastrophe Risks Gulf Coast Property Insurance Markets After Hurricanes Katrina Rita and Wilma......................................................... The President s New Energy Initiatives Cordon Pricing Experiences in London and Stockholm........... Airport Pricing to Decrease Congestion Types of Currency Market Transactions Hedging Against Foreign-Exchange Rate Fluctuations A Description of the IMF Classification of Exchange-Rate Regimes The Impossible Trinity Nontariff Barriers Restrict Trade Multinationals Bring New Products and Processes to the Host Country U.S. Multinational Companies and U.S. Jobs.......................... The Number and Characteristics of Unauthorized Migrants.... | Economic Report of the President Overview T he U.S. economy continues to exhibit robust growth with a strong labor market and moderate inflation ( see Chapter ) These accomplishments are supported by rapid productivity growth that makes our economy one of the most dynamic and resilient in the world. Productivity growth is a common thread that ties nearly all positive economic news together and plays a central role in our international competitiveness Much of this Report explores the role of productivity and productivityrelated issues in the continuing expansion of the U.S. economy. Policymakers face a challenge : productivity growth is important for economic growth and many of the underlying issues that they are trying to solve but there is no single cause of productivity and no single policy to spur its growth ( see Chapter ) Tax policy can be structured to encourage productivity growth ( see Chapter ) Entitlement programs on the other hand may indirectly weigh on productivity growth if not reformed ( see Chapter ) Open commerce and financial markets allow productivity to flourish ( see Chapters ) Economists discuss productivity growth using macroeconomic data but its result is most importantly seen in increases in individual Americans standards of living Chapter : The Year in Review and the Years Ahead The economic expansion continued for the fifth consecutive year in This economic growth comes despite numerous headwinds and results from inherent U.S. economic strengths and pro-growth policies. Chapter reviews the past year and discusses the Administration s forecast for the years ahead The key points are : Real GDP posted above-average percent growth in The composition of growth changed with more coming from exports and business structures investment while residential investment flipped from contributing to GDP growth in to subtracting from it in Consumer spending remained strong Labor markets continued to strengthen with the unemployment rate dropping to percent and payroll job growth averaging per month. Real average hourly earnings accelerated to a percent increase during the months of Energy prices rose sharply in the first half of the year but then declined just as sharply in the second half Chapter : Productivity Growth Productivity growth rarely makes the headlines but is important to the Nation because higher productivity growth improves the outlook for economic issues such as standards of living inflation international competitiveness and long-run demographic challenges. Chapter reviews the sources of the recent strength in productivity growth highlighting the role that flexible markets and entrepreneurship play in explaining cross-country differences. It also explains the benefits of productivity growth and discusses how policymakers can further promote it. The key points are : Recent productivity growth has been primarily driven by efficiency growth ( growth in how well labor and capital inputs are used ) and by capital deepening ( growth in the amount of capital that workers have available for use ) Openness to international trade and investment and improvements in the education and training of the U.S. workforce will continue to be important to long-run productivity growth Policies that encourage capital accumulation research and development and increases in the quality of our education system can boost productivity growth Chapter : Pro-Growth Tax Policy Chapter discusses the advantages of adopting a more pro-growth tax system. It reviews recent changes that have reduced tax distortions on capital investment decisions and evaluates options to reduce such distortions further The key points are : The goal of pro-growth tax policy is to reduce tax distortions that hamper economic growth. Most economists agree that lower taxes on capital income stimulate greater investment resulting in greater economic growth greater international competitiveness and higher standards of living The tax code contains provisions that discourage investment and create distortions that affect the level distribution and financing of capital investment Estimates from research suggest that removing these tax distortions to investment decisions could increase real gross domestic product ( GDP ) by as much as percent in the long run Since temporary changes in the tax code have reduced the tax on investment. These pro-growth policies have stimulated short-run investment and economic growth. However the temporary nature of the provisions eliminates desirable long-run economic stimulus | Economic Report of the President Chapter : The Fiscal Challenges Facing Medicare Social Security Medicare and Medicaid are three entitlement programs in the United States that provide people with important economic security against financial risk. However the projected long-term growth in entitlement spending is unsustainable because of the pressure it puts on future Federal budgets. It is crucial that reforms to these programs preserve the protection against financial risk that these programs provide without having negative effects on economic growth. Chapter focuses on Medicare by examining the main reasons for its projected financial pressures and by discussing ways to improve the efficiency of the program and thus slow the growth of Medicare spending. The key points are : Medicare spending is growing quickly primarily because of the demographic shift to an older society and the increases in per-beneficiary medical spending driven largely by new technologies Rewarding providers for supplying higher-quality care and improving incentives for patients to choose higher-value care can both increase the efficiency and slow the growth of Medicare spending Chapter : Catastrophe Risk Insurance Insuring economic losses arising from large-scale natural and manmade catastrophes such as earthquakes hurricanes and terrorist attacks poses challenges for the insurance industry and for Federal and State governments Chapter examines the economics of catastrophe risk insurance. The key points are : In insurance markets as in other markets prices affect how people weigh costs and benefits. Artificially low insurance prices can discourage people from adequately protecting against future losses. For example subsidized property insurance prices may stimulate excessive building in high-risk areas potentially driving up future government disaster relief spending Government intervention in insurance markets can have unintended consequences such as limiting the availability of insurance offered by private firms Insurers manage catastrophe losses by being selective about which risks to insure designing insurance contracts to provide incentives for riskreducing behavior and charging prices that are high enough to enable them to diversify risk over time or transfer risk to third parties. By managing and pricing risk more effectively government insurance programs can reduce the burden they impose on taxpayers and minimize negative effects on private insurance markets Overview | Chapter : The Transportation Sector : Energy and Infrastructure Use The transportation sector accounts for the majority of the petroleum consumed in the United States and whether plane train ship or automobile almost all transportation is powered by petroleum. Understanding the petroleum market and the ways in which consumers and firms respond to changes in world oil prices is key to understanding the transportation sector In addition to petroleum the transportation sector also relies heavily on infrastructure. The key points of Chapter are : Recent increases in the price of oil and the external costs of oil have led to renewed interest by markets and governments in the development of new alternatives. Government can play a role in ensuring that external costs are taken into account by markets but ultimately markets are best suited to decide how to respond Cars and light trucks are the largest users of petroleum. As a result the fuel economy of the vehicles purchased and the number of miles that they are driven have a large effect on oil consumption Congestion is a growing problem in American urban areas. Cities and States have shown a growing interest in and capacity for setting prices for road use during peak periods to reduce the full economic costs of congestion Chapter : Currency Markets The need for international transactions provides the impetus for a huge well-functioning market that facilitates currency conversions and allows global economic integration and trade to occur smoothly and quickly at low cost. Both by volume of trade and ease of making transactions currency markets today are the world s deepest most liquid markets. Currency markets range from common markets where parties simply exchange one currency for another to sophisticated markets where parties buy and sell currencies far into the future. The key points of Chapter are : Foreign-exchange markets allow firms to trade goods and services across borders and to manage the risks they face from fluctuations in the price of their domestic currency As with any other good the exchange value of a currency is determined by its supply as well as the demand for the country s assets goods and services Over much of the 20th century countries tended to favor fixed exchange rates but in recent decades there has been a shift toward freely floating exchange rates Monetary and exchange-rate policies are tightly linked. A nation s government must decide between controlling its exchange rate and controlling its domestic inflation rate | Economic Report of the President Chapter : International Trade and Investment The United States derives substantial benefits from open trade and investment flows. Over many decades increased trade and investment liberalization has been an important catalyst for greater productivity growth and rising average living standards in the United States. The key points of Chapter are : Looking ahead international trade liberalization in services presents significant opportunities for U.S. workers firms and consumers Foreign direct investment ( FDI ) flows into the United States benefit the U.S. economy by stimulating growth creating jobs promoting research and development that spurs innovation and financing the current account deficit U.S. direct investment abroad is an important channel of global market access for U.S. firms. U.S. multinational companies have contributed to productivity growth job creation and rising average living standards in the United States Chapter : Immigration The United States is a nation of immigrants and a nation of laws and we value both historical legacies. Immigrants continue to make positive contributions to our Nation and our economy yet our current immigration laws have proven difficult to enforce and are not fully serving the needs of the American economy. The key points of Chapter are : International differences in economic opportunities and standards of living create strong incentives for labor migration. Once established migration flows from a certain region tend to be self-perpetuating Foreign-born workers make significant contributions to the American economy but not all Americans gain economically from immigration Foreign-born workers tend to be concentrated at the low end and the high end of the educational spectrum relative to native-born workers Immigration policy plays a key role in determining the volume and composition of the foreign-born workforce. Comprehensive immigration reform can help ensure an orderly lawful flow of foreign-born workers whose presence continues to benefit the American economy Overview | C H A P T E R The Year in Review and the Years Ahead T he expansion of the U.S economy continued for the fifth consecutive year in Economic growth was strong with real gross domestic product ( GDP ) growing at percent during the four quarters of This strong economic growth comes in the face of numerous headwinds and resulted from the inherent strengths of the U.S. economy and pro-growth policies such as tax relief regulatory restraint and opening foreign markets to U.S. goods and services. Growth in the first quarter rebounded from the effects of the hurricanes including a recovery in consumer confidence and consumer spending and the rebuilding of oil and natural gas infrastructure in the Gulf of Mexico. Although growth slowed in the middle two quarters of the year the overall pace of real activity was strong in the face of near-record inflation-adjusted prices of crude oil and a sharp decline in home construction. On the inflation front energy prices fell substantially towards the end of the year allowing overall consumer price inflation to moderate in ; however price inflation increased for goods and services other than food and energy. In response to these output and inflation developments the Federal Reserve continued raising the federal funds rate through June and then held it constant for the rest of the year. The Administration forecast calls for the economic expansion to continue in but we must continue to pursue pro-growth policies such as those designed to keep tax relief in place restrain government spending slow the rate of health care inflation enhance national energy security and expand free and fair trade This chapter reviews the economic developments of and discusses the Administration s forecast for the years ahead. The key points of this chapter are : Real GDP posted strong percent growth in up from the percent pace. The composition of aggregate demand changed from preceding years. More growth came from exports and business structures investment while residential investment flipped from contributing to GDP growth in to subtracting from it in Labor markets continued to strengthen with the unemployment rate descending to percent in the fourth quarter and payroll job growth averaging per month Energy prices which rose through August and then declined dominated the movement of overall inflation in the consumer price index. Core inflation ( which excludes food and energy inflation ) moved up from percent during the months of to percent in with much of this upward trend due to an acceleration in the amount that renters pay for apartments and other rental properties and the estimated rent on owner-occupied housing. Energy prices fell sharply from September through October and core inflation fell toward the end of the year Real average hourly earnings accelerated to a percent increase during the months of reflecting solid labor markets combined with tamer energy prices The Administration s forecast calls for the economic expansion to continue in and beyond although the pace of expansion is projected to slow somewhat from the stronger growth of recent years The unemployment rate is projected to edge up slightly in while remaining below percent. Real GDP growth is projected to continue at around percent in and thereafter while the unemployment rate is projected to remain stable and below percent Developments in and the Near-Term Outlook The economy went through a period of rebalancing during with faster growth in business structures investment and exports partially offsetting pronounced declines in homebuilding. At the same time consumer spending continued to grow Consumer Spending and Saving Consumer spending sustained its strong growth during the four quarters of ( rising percent in real terms ) continuing its 15-year pattern of rising faster than disposable income. Several factors helped to keep spending elevated and as a result kept saving down ( according to the official definition in the national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) ) These factors included rising energy costs ( through the third quarter ) rising wealth and falling unemployment rates. As a result the personal saving rate fell to a negative percent for the year as a whole its lowest annual level during the postWorld War II era. Despite the negative saving rate Americans continue to build wealth in the form of capital gains ( the rise in asset prices ) which are not included in the definition of saving in the NIPAs. The declining saving rate continues a long-term trend which began in the 1980s Energy Expenditures World demand for crude oil increased from million barrels per day in to million barrels per day during the first three quarters of The United States accounted for about one-eighth ( million barrels per day ) of this higher ( million barrel per day ) pace of crude oil consumption. Most | Economic Report of the President of this increase in world demand was accounted for by non-OECD countries ( up million barrels per day ) Consumption of the non-U.S. OECD countries fell million barrels per day. In the face of this increase in world oil demand the supply available to U.S. consumers was restrained and consumers paid higher prices to maintain their consumption With the rise in energy prices nominal energy purchases rose sharply. That consumers altered their spending patterns only slightly contributed to the fall in the saving rate. Consumer energy prices increased percent relative to nonenergy prices ( according to the NIPA price indexes ) from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of while real consumption of energy per household fell only slightly by percent. Between and consumers appear to have maintained both energy and nonenergy consumption by reducing their saving. Consumers response to persistently high energy prices is likely to emerge gradually as consumers economize on energy consumption and possibly on nonenergy consumption Wealth Effects on Consumption and Saving The rise in household wealth has also played a role in the decline of the saving rate. During the late 1990s and again during the past years a strong rise in household net worth coincided with a sizeable increase in consumer spending relative to disposable personal income ( see Chart ) Chapter | Despite the negative saving rate during Americans continued to build wealth because of capital gains. During the four quarters ending in the third quarter of the household wealth-to-income ratio increased years to years of income. ( The units of the wealth-to-income ratio are years because wealth is measured in dollars while income is measured in dollars per year. That is total household wealth in the third quarter of represents the equivalent of years of accumulated income. ) More than half of the increase during these four quarters was accounted for by an increase in stock market wealth. Housing wealth ( net of mortgage debt ) also edged up relative to income over these four quarters but by much less than its increases during the preceding years. By the third quarter of the overall wealth-toincome ratio was well above the ratio over most of the past years Personal and National Saving Consumer responses to the rise in energy prices and increases in the wealthto-income ratio lowered the personal saving rate to negative percent in The personal saving rate the rate at which households save has been declining since the mid-1980s Corporate net saving takes the form of retained earnings which are not paid out to shareholders. ( Net saving excludes funds used to replace worn out capital goods. ) Retained earnings add to the wealth of corporate shareholders and supply funds for new investment. Corporate net saving rose to percent of gross domestic income ( GDI ) during the first three quarters of its highest level since the 1960s. ( GDI is the economy-wide sum of all sources of income and differs from GDP only by measurement error. ) But even with these high levels of net corporate saving net private saving ( the sum of personal and corporate saving ) was only percent of GDI during the first three quarters of near its lowest level in the post-war period A still broader measure of net saving net national saving is the sum of government and private ( personal plus corporate ) net saving. When the Federal government runs a deficit ( spends more than it collects in tax revenue ) Federal saving is negative as it was in Because the Federal deficit declined substantially in and because corporate saving rose net national saving ( which was negligible in ) rose to percent of GDI during the first three quarters of its highest level since early Gross national saving which includes funds for replacing worn out capital goods is higher than net saving ( percent versus percent during the first three quarters of ) but shows similar historical fluctuations Projected Consumer Spending Looking ahead real consumer spending during the four quarters of is expected to grow less than percent down from an average of percent during the past years. This projected rate is slightly less than the projected | Economic Report of the President growth of real disposable personal income ( household income less taxes adjusted for inflation ) and so the saving rate is forecasted to edge up. During the longer term real consumption is projected to increase at about the same pace as real GDP and real income Housing Prices Nationally housing prices increased less in than in An inflationadjusted version of the housing price index ( the nominal version of which is compiled by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight from new home sales and appraisals during refinancing ) increased at an average annual rate of percent from to and then slowed to a percent annual rate of increase in the first three quarters of ( These inflationadjusted prices are deflated by the consumer price index. ) Looking back the cumulative increase in inflation-adjusted housing prices during the years from to is one of the largest on record exceeded only by the period immediately following the Second World War. Since periods of rising real prices have been linked to increases in the share of the gross national product allocated to home construction ( see Chart ) The percent annual rate of increase in the relative price of housing from to was associated with an increase in the residential construction share of GDP from percent to percent Chapter | Although relative housing prices ( that is relative to the consumer price index ( CPI ) ) increased in almost all metropolitan areas during the years from to the increases were concentrated in a few high-profile markets ; increases in most areas were only modest. For example real prices in Los Angeles increased at a percent annual rate but real price increases in percent of metropolitan areas were less than the percent national average. Most house price changes reflect local conditions ( such as local economic and population growth tastes and geographic and zoning limitations on construction ) In areas with restricted supply small changes in demand may translate into large price changes Although house-price increases during these years were concentrated in a few markets the decline in mortgage rates from to was one common factor that may have helped raise home prices across the nation Because of the drop in mortgage rates prices could increase percent per year during this period without raising the monthly mortgage payment Residential Investment Every major measure of housing activity dropped sharply during and the drop in real residential construction was steeper than anticipated in last year s Report. New home sales fell percent from a peak in October through July a period when rates on conventional mortgages moved up about basis points. ( A basis point is one one-hundredth of a percentage point. ) Sales then edged up during the months from August through December when mortgage rates dipped lower. Builders reacted sharply to the early-2006 drop in sales so that housing starts which peaked at an annual rate of million units in the beginning of the year fell to slightly more than million units by the end of the year. The drop in home construction activity subtracted roughly percentage point from the annual rate of real GDP growth in the second quarter and percentage points in the second half of the year. Furthermore even if housing starts level off at their current pace normal lags between the beginning and completion of a construction project imply that residential investment will subtract from GDP growth during the first half of During employment in residential construction fell as did production of construction materials and products associated with new home sales ( such as furniture large appliances and carpeting ) Yet despite these housing sector declines the overall economy continued to expand ( see Box ) | Economic Report of the President Box : Indirect Effects of the Housing Sector Thus far the sharp drop in homebuilding has had few consequences for the rest of the economy. Employment fell in sectors related to new home construction and housing sales. Despite these repercussions overall payroll employment continued to increase the unemployment rate continued to fall and real consumer spending continued to move upward through the end of Although residential investment fell sharply real GDP growth during was sustained by increases in other forms of investment. As can be seen in the chart below private nominal nonresidential construction ( that is business construction of office buildings shopping centers factories and other business structures ) grew rapidly in the first three quarters of the year and moved up a bit further in the fourth quarter Nonresidential construction draws from some of the same resources ( such as construction labor and materials ) as the residential construction sector. The high level of residential investment during the past couple of years may have limited the growth of investment in nonresidential structures. While the case for housing crowding out other sectors is strongest for nonresidential investment residential investment competes with all other sectors of production in credit and labor markets. A drop in the share of the economy engaged in housing could provide some room for other sectors to grow continued on the next page Chapter | Box continued The housing market could also affect the rest of the economy through the wealth channel. That is declines in housing prices could reduce household net worth and thereby reduce consumption. The increase in housing prices during contributed noticeably to the gain in the ratio of household wealth to income ( shown earlier in chart ) and supported growth in consumer spending. Some of this support may have been facilitated by homeowners taking out larger mortgages after their homes appreciated in value. In contrast housing wealth decelerated in the second and third quarters of while the stock market accounted for most of the gain in the wealth-to-income ratio. Thus far national measures of housing prices have not declined and negative effects through the wealth channel have not occurred In addition to incomes and mortgage rates the number of homes built is underpinned by demographics. Homebuilding during and averaged about million units per year in excess of the roughly 1.8-to-1.9-million unit annual pace of starts that is consistent with the pace of household formation implied by demographic models. As a result the pace of homebuilding will tend to be drawn below this level for long enough so that the above-trend production of and will be offset by belowtrend production. The construction of new homes has fallen rapidly however and this offset may well be complete sometime during Looking further ahead the residential sector is not expected to make noticeable positive contributions to real GDP growth until and beyond Business Fixed Investment During real business investment in equipment and software grew percent slower than the percent average pace during the previous years Its fastest-growing components included computers as well as machinery in the agricultural and service sectors. Investment in mining and oil field machinery was also strong likely in response to elevated crude oil prices and to the need to replace Gulf of Mexico facilities damaged by the hurricanes. Investment in heavy trucks has been solid throughout as trucking firms have been buying in advance of new environmental regulations ( on particulate matter emissions issued in that became effective in ) which will raise heavy truck prices in Aircraft investment however declined sharply for the second consecutive year. Software investment posted a strong percent gain in but since it has grown at only a percent annual rate a noticeable deceleration from the roughly percent annual rate of growth during the 1990s | Economic Report of the President The turnaround in investment in business structures ( that is nonresidential construction ) during has been dramatic with growth at percent up from an anemic percent gain during Growth in was strongest for office buildings multi-merchandise centers lodging facilities and recreational structures. Investment in petroleum and natural gas structures also grew rapidly reflecting high petroleum and natural gas prices and the reconstruction of the Gulf of Mexico capacity. Investment continued to fall however in air transportation structures and medical buildings Business investment growth is projected to remain strong in somewhere in the neighborhood of the percent annual rate of growth during the first three quarters of Continued growth in output combined with a tight labor market are expected to maintain strong demand for new capital equipment at the same time as corporations are flush with funds for these investments. The financial environment for these investments is favorable Cash flow ( the internally generated funds that are available for corporate investment ) was at a record percent average share of GDP in the first three quarters of while nonresidential investment ( at percent of GDP ) was close to its historical average. In the longer run business investment is projected to grow only slightly above the growth rate of real GDP Business Inventories Inventory investment was fairly steady during and had only a minor influence on quarter-to-quarter fluctuations. Real nonfarm inventories grew at an average $ billion annual pace during a percent rate of growth that is roughly in line with the pace of real GDP growth over the same period. Coming off a long-term decline the inventory-to-sales ratio for manufacturing and trade ( in current dollars ) remained relatively flat during the first half of the year but began to pick up in August Inventory investment is projected to be approximately stable during the next several years as is generally the case for periods of stable growth. The overall inventory-to-sales ratio is expected to continue trending lower Government Purchases Real Federal consumption and gross investment grew percent during This was the third consecutive year of growth at roughly percent Defense spending accounted for all of the increase during the four-quarter period while nondefense purchases fell. The quarterly pattern of these Federal purchases has been volatile with sizeable increases in the first and fourth quarters of the year. Most of the first-quarter surge was in defense components Federal outlays ( which include purchases investment and transfers such as Social Security ) were boosted by a $ billion appropriation in fiscal year Chapter | ( FY ) for reconstruction and relief efforts arising from the hurricanes. In addition the supplemental defense spending package for ongoing operations in Afghanistan and Iraq was $ billion for FY and was passed in mid-June. An additional $ billion emergency funding was provided in the regular defense appropriation act passed at the end of September Another supplemental appropriation for defense is likely for FY Nominal Federal revenues grew percent in FY and percent in FY These rapid growth rates exceeded growth in outlays and GDP as a whole and the U.S. fiscal deficit as a share of GDP shrank from percent in FY to percent in FY to percent in FY State and local government purchases rose percent during up noticeably from rates below percent during each of the previous years. In the wake of the recession this sector fell sharply into deficit in Revenues began to recover in and by the first half of the sector was out of deficit allowing for an increase in state and local consumption and investment. This pattern of delayed response to downturns resembles the past several business-cycle recoveries Exports and Imports Real exports of goods and services grew percent during up from the percent export growth over the four quarters of This acceleration reflects rapid growth among our trading partners. Real GDP among our OECD trading partners grew percent during the four quarters of and is estimated to have grown at the same pace in In addition the economies of some of our major non-OECD trading partners such as China Singapore and India are growing at rates of to percent per year although these countries comprise only about percent of our exports The fastest growth in U.S. goods and services exports was to India but exports to China Africa and Latin America also grew rapidly. Despite the rapid export growth to these emerging economies the European Union ( EU ) remains the major export destination consuming nearly percent of our exports. Within the EU Great Britain s imports of American goods and services grew at a notable percent annual rate during the first three quarters of Real imports grew percent in a slower pace than the percent increase over the four quarters of Petroleum imports which grew strongly in the fourth quarter of to replace production losses after the hurricanes declined percent during the four quarters of Real imports of nonpetroleum goods grew percent over the same period down slightly from the year-earlier pace | Economic Report of the President The current account deficit ( the excess of imports and income flows to foreigners over exports and foreign income of Americans ) jumped to percent of GDP in the fourth quarter of partly due to petroleum imports that replaced lost Gulf of Mexico production. The current account deficit then retraced some of its earlier increase in the first three quarters of when oil imports declined. It appears to have fallen further in the fourth quarter reflecting the drop in prices of imported crude oil. Current account deficits mean that domestic investment continues to exceed domestic saving with foreigners financing the gap between the two Employment Nonfarm payroll employment increased million during the months of an average pace of about jobs per month. The unemployment rate declined by percentage point during the months of the year to percent. The average unemployment rate in ( percent ) was below the averages of the 1970s the 1980s and the 1990s Job gains were spread broadly across major sectors in with the natural resource and mining sector ( which includes oil and natural gas extraction ) experiencing the fastest growth rate ( percent ) likely due to increased demand for energy products. The service-providing sector accounted for percent of job growth during the months of a slightly larger contribution than would be suggested by its 83-percent share of overall employment. Within the service-providing sector percent of job growth was in professional and business service jobs. As noted the service-providing sector accounted for almost all of the job gains. The goods-producing sector accounted for the remaining percent of the gains ( notably weaker than its 17-percent share of overall employment ) a continuation of the long-term trend under which the goods-producing share of total employment has fallen in each of the past five decades. Within the goods-producing sector employment growth during was concentrated in mining and construction while manufacturing employment decreased for the ninth consecutive year Jobless rates fell among most major demographic segments of the population during the months of The unemployment rate dropped for each of the four educational-attainment groups ( less than high school high school some college and college graduates ) For the second consecutive year the drop in the unemployment rate was most pronounced among those without a high school degree. After falling percentage point during ( when the overall rate fell percentage point ) the jobless rate in this group fell another percentage point during the months of ( when the overall unemployment rate fell percentage point ) By race and ethnicity the unemployment rate fell the Chapter | most during among Asians Hispanics and blacks ( and percentage points ) in contrast to percentage point for whites. By age the jobless rate fell most among workers to years old. By sex the jobless rate fell more among adult women than adult men Furthermore the median duration of unemployment an indicator that typically follows the business cycle with a substantial lag declined from its December level of weeks to a December level of weeks close to its historical average. The number of long-term unemployed ( those out of work for more than weeks ) fell by during the year The Administration projects that employment will increase at a pace of jobs per month on average during the four quarters of In the long run the pace of employment growth will slow reflecting the aging of the population and the diminishing rates of labor force growth. The Administration also projects the unemployment rate will average percent over before edging up to percent in and beyond Productivity Labor productivity growth usually increases during the early stage of a business-cycle recovery but then falls somewhat as the cycle matures. Early in this most recent expansion productivity grew at a remarkable percent annual rate for the years and and then slowed to a percent annual rate for the years and Overall productivity has grown at a vigorous percent annual rate from the business-cycle peak in the first quarter of until the third quarter of Although has been regarded as a watershed year for productivity because of the acceleration of productivity from a percent to a percent annual rate of growth the further acceleration to a percent annual rate of growth during to is striking especially given a flat or diminished contribution from capital deepening ( the increase in capital services per hour worked ) ( The time periods referred to are those shown in Table later in this chapter. ) The acceleration may be plausibly accounted for by a pickup in capital deepening and by increases in organizational capital the investments businesses make to reorganize and restructure themselves in this instance in response to newly installed information technology. In contrast capital deepening does not explain any of the post-2001 increase in productivity growth. The post-2001 acceleration in productivity therefore appears to be accounted for by factors that are more difficult to measure than the quantity of capital such as continuing improvements in technology and business practices ( See Chapter Productivity Growth for an extended discussion of this. ) | Economic Report of the President Rather than assuming that the recent remarkable pace of productivity growth will continue the Administration believes it is prudent to build a budget based on a forecast somewhat lower that the 3.1-percent pace of productivity growth since Productivity growth is projected to average percent per year during the 6-year span of the budget projection roughly equal to the average annual pace during the past decade Prices and Wages As measured by the consumer price index ( CPI ) overall inflation fell from percent during the months of to percent during ( Chart ) The drop in overall CPI inflation was almost entirely due to the deceleration of energy prices from a 17.1-percent increase in to a 2.9percent increase in Food prices increased percent during similar to the pace of the previous year. Core CPI prices ( that is excluding food and energy ) increased percent during up from a 2.2-percent increase a year earlier Chapter | After rising sharply during and prices of petroleum products slowed to a percent increase during the months of as the sharp rise through August was reversed later in the year. Prices of natural gas which had risen sharply during fell percent during As of midJanuary prices in futures markets suggested that crude oil prices will rise modestly during while natural gas prices will increase substantially The percentage point acceleration of core CPI prices was accounted for primarily by rent of shelter ( which consists primarily of rent paid by renters and by the rent on owner-occupied dwellings ) which accelerated to a percent rate of increase during the months of from percent in Some of the acceleration in core CPI prices may also have been a delayed reaction to the rapid increase in energy prices from mid-2003 to mid2006 as the higher energy prices were absorbed into the prices of every service and commodity that requires inputs of energy or transportation. Econometric estimates ( although imprecise ) suggest that perhaps a quarter of a percentage point of the increases in the core CPI during the past year may be attributable to the past increases of these energy inputs. The Administration projects that the CPI will increase at a percent annual rate during and about the same as the pace of the core CPI Hourly compensation ( which is about percent of nonfarm business output ) has increased a bit faster in than in Nominal hourly compensation for workers in private industry increased percent in up from percent during the months of according to the Employment Cost Index ( ECI ) All of this increase was from growth in wages and salaries ( percent in versus percent during ) while hourly benefits grew more slowly ( percent versus percent ) Another measure of hourly compensation published by the Department of Labor and derived from the National Income and Product Accounts has increased somewhat faster ( at percent ) than the percent increase in the ECI during the four quarters through the third quarter of Unit labor costs have put little if any upward pressure on inflation thus far and it appears unlikely that they will over the next year. Unit labor costs have increased at the same pace as the GDP price index a percent rate during the four quarters through the third quarter of The Administration expects the growth rate of hourly compensation to increase during as this nation s rapid productivity gains are shared by workers. But even with this acceleration in compensation the expected strong pace of productivity growth will likely keep unit labor costs from putting upward pressure on inflation during Moderate growth of hourly compensation and solid growth of productivity together with strong aggregate demand has driven the profit share of gross domestic income to its highest level since Non-supervisory production-worker wages ( which cover percent of the private workforce ) increased percent ( in nominal terms ) during the | Economic Report of the President months through December an acceleration of percentage points from the pace a year earlier. Real hourly wages of production workers increased percent a 2.1-percentage point acceleration from the pace a year earlier The acceleration in real earnings reflects both the 1.1-percentage point increase in nominal wages and a percentage point deceleration in consumer prices Among the many available measures of inflation the Administration forecast focuses on two : the CPI and the price index for the GDP. The CPI measures prices for a fixed basket of consumer goods and services. It is widely reported in the press and is used to index Social Security the individual income tax Federal pensions and many private-sector contracts. The GDP price index covers prices of goods and services produced in the United States including consumption investment and government purchases. In contrast to the CPI its weights are not fixed but move to reflect changes in spending patterns. Of the two indexes the CPI tends to increase more rapidly in part because it measures a fixed basket of goods ; the GDP price index increases less rapidly because it allows for households and businesses to shift their purchases away from items with increasing relative prices and toward items with decreasing relative prices. Among the differences the GDP price index ( which includes investment goods ) places a larger weight on computers which tend to decline in price ( on a quality-adjusted basis ) In contrast the CPI places a much larger weight on rent and energy The wedge or difference between the CPI and the GDP measures of inflation has implications for Federal budget projections. A larger wedge ( with the CPI rising faster than the GDP price index ) raises the Federal budget deficit because Social Security and Federal pensions rise with the CPI while Federal revenue tends to increase with the GDP price index. For a given level of nominal income increases in the CPI also cut Federal revenue because they raise the brackets at which higher income tax rates apply and affect other inflation-indexed features of the tax code During the years from to the wedge between inflation in the CPI-U-RS ( a historical CPI series designed to be consistent with current CPI methods ) and the rate of change in the GDP price index averaged percent per year. The wedge was particularly high during when the CPI increased percentage point faster than the GDP price index. The wedge during reflected the percent increase in crude oil prices which have a larger weight in consumer prices ( via their effect on refined-petroleum products ) than in GDP as a whole. Because domestic production accounts for only about percent of U.S. oil consumption the weight of oil prices in GDP is roughly one-third of its weight in consumption. This effect unwound during the fourth quarter of when oil prices declined causing the wedge to fall to percentage point during the four quarters of From forward the wedge is projected to average percentage point Chapter | Financial Markets The Wilshire ( a broad stock market index ) increased percent during while the Standard and Poor ( an index of the largest corporations ) increased percent. This was the fourth consecutive year of stock market gains following years of declines. The market has now recovered most of its losses since the March peak at least in nominal terms Despite increases in short-term rates yields on 10-year notes remained low increasing only basis points during the months of The low level of long-term interest rates was due in part to low and stable long-run inflation expectations The Administration forecast of short term interest rates is roughly based on financial market data as well as a survey of economic forecasters. As of November the date that the economic forecast was finalized trading in financial futures suggested that market participants expected shortterm rates to fall over the next several years and the Administration s interest rate projections reflect those views. The Administration projects the rate on 91-day Treasury bills ( percent on November ) to remain flat in before edging down in and The short-term rate is projected to fall to percent by At that level the real rate on 91-day Treasury bills would be close to its historical average The yield on 10-year Treasury notes on November was percent basis points below the discount rate on the 91-day Treasury bills a noticeable reversal of the usual pattern which shows higher rates for long-term yields. The Administration expects the 10-year rate to increase above the 91-day rate during eventually reaching a more normal spread of about percentage points by An increase of a similar magnitude appears to be expected by market participants ( as evidenced by higher rates on and 30-year Treasury notes than on notes with 10-year maturities ) As a result yields on 10-year notes are expected to increase somewhat further reaching a plateau at percent from onward The Long-Term Outlook Through Coming off a fifth year of expansion the U.S. economy is settling into a period of steady growth. Having reached a high level of resource utilization by year-end growth is likely to slow in and then will expand through at around percent. Inflation will remain low and is expected to edge a bit lower and the labor market will remain firm ( Table ) The forecast is based on conservative economic assumptions that are close to the consensus of professional forecasters. These assumptions provide a sound basis for the Administration s budget projections | Economic Report of the President TABLE Administration Forecast Year Interest GDP price Consumer Unemployrate Real GDP index price ment 91-day Nominal ( chain ( chainindex rate Treasury GDP type ) type ) ( CPI-U ) ( percent ) bills ( percent ) Percent change Q4-to-Q4 Interest Nonfarm rate payroll 10-year employTreasury ment notes ( millions ) ( percent ) Nonfarm payroll employment ( average monthly change Q4-to-Q4 thousands ) Level calendar year ( actual ) Based on data available as of November Discount basis If the effect of the BLS benchmark adjustment were included monthly job growth would average and thousand in and respectively. The level of payroll employment would be and million in these years Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Economics and Statistics Administration ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Growth in GDP over the Long Term The Administration projects that following a slight pickup of growth from TABLE Supply-Side Components of Real GDP Growth to real GDP will increase at a slowly diminishing rate from [ Average annual percent change ] through Indeed real GDP is projected to decelerate from a percent to percent Q1 Q3 rate of growth during the four quarters of 2008Q2 Q4 Q2 by The Item to to to to to average growth rate during this interval is roughly 1995line2001 Q1 the consensus Q4 in Q2 with Q3 Q4 of Civilian noninstitutional populationthose years. After year-by-year pace is close the ) private forecasters for aged ) the Civilian labor growth rate of potential to Plus : estimatedforce participation rate .............................real GDP a measure of rate of the growth Civilian labor force is said to be growing at1.0 potenits ) Equals : of productive capacity. ( An economy ) Plus : tial rateCivilian employment rate when all of its resources are utilized-0.1 inflation is stable. The and ) Equals : Civilian employment supply-side components of potential GDP growth are1.8 presented in0.9 Table ) Plus : Nonfarm business employment as and are adiscussed below ) The unemployment rate is projected to edge up0.1 in share of civilian employment ( from its percent level in the fourth quarter of ) and plateau to ) Equals : Nonfarm business employment....................................... ) Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business ) at Plus : percent in As discussed below potential GDP growth is expected to Equals : Hoursthe near term as productivity growth reverts toward its0.0 long-run ) slow in of all persons ( nonfarm business ) ) Plus : ( about percent per year ) and to slow further during the3.1 trend Output per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) 2007-to2011 period as labor force growth declines due to retirement of the the ) Equals : Nonfarm business output................................................ ) Plus : Ratio of real GDP to nonfarm business output baby-boom generation ) The growth rate of the economy over the long run is determined by Equals : Real GDP.......................................................................... its supply-side components which include series since labor force participation population Adjusted by CEA to smooth discontinuities in the population BLS research series adjusted to smooth irregularities in the population series since Line translates the civilian employment growth rate into the nonfarm business employment growth rate Chapter | Line translates nonfarm business output back into output for all sectors ( GDP ) which includes the output of farms and general government Note : Q2 Q4 and Q1 are NBER business-cycle peaks. Detail may not add to total because of rounding Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Based on data available as of November Discount basis If the effect of the BLS benchmark adjustment were included monthly job growth would average and thousand in and respectively. The level of payroll employment would be and million in these years Sources : Council nonfarm business employment to of Economic Analysis and Economics and the ratio of of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce ( Bureau household employment the Statistics Administration ) Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget length of the workweek and labor productivity. The Administration s forecast for the contribution of the growth rates of different supply-side factors to real GDP growth is shown in Table TABLE Supply-Side Components of Real GDP Growth [ Average annual percent change ] Item Q2 Q4 Q2 Q1 Q3 to to to to to Q4 Q2 Q1 Q3 Q4 ) Civilian noninstitutional population aged ) Plus : Civilian labor force participation rate ) Equals : Civilian labor force ) Plus : Civilian employment rate ) Equals : Civilian employment ) Plus : Nonfarm business employment as a share of civilian employment ) Equals : Nonfarm business employment....................................... ) Plus : Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business ) ) Equals : Hours of all persons ( nonfarm business ) ) Plus : Output per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) ) Equals : Nonfarm business output................................................ ) Plus : Ratio of real GDP to nonfarm business output ) Equals : Real GDP.......................................................................... Adjusted by CEA to smooth discontinuities in the population series since BLS research series adjusted to smooth irregularities in the population series since Line translates the civilian employment growth rate into the nonfarm business employment growth rate Line translates nonfarm business output back into output for all sectors ( GDP ) which includes the output of farms and general government Note : Q2 Q4 and Q1 are NBER business-cycle peaks. Detail may not add to total because of rounding Sources : Council of Economic Advisers Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) As can be seen in the fourth column of the table the mix of supply-side factors determining real GDP growth has been unusual since the businesscycle peak at the beginning of The high rate of productivity growth ( percent at an annual rate shown in line ) has been partially offset by the decline in the participation rate ( line ) and the workweek ( line ) Also notable is the large and puzzling decline in the ratio of nonfarm business employment to household employment ( line ) This unusual decline reflects the slow growth of employment as measured by the payroll survey ( which asks employers to report the number of jobs ) relative to the more rapid growth of employment as measured by the household survey ( which estimates the number of employed persons through a sample of households ) This disparity | Economic Report of the President has been reduced somewhat by the just-issued benchmark revision to payroll employment but has yet to be satisfactorily explained The participation rate fell on net from to ( although it ticked up in ) and is projected to trend lower through The recent behavior stands in contrast to the long period of increase from through Looking ahead the participation rate is projected to decline reflecting the aging of the baby-boom cohorts leading to more retirements and a likely increase in the share of people on disability pensions ( see Box ) Box : Long-Term Prospects for Labor Force Participation The overall rate of labor force participation is projected to decline as the baby-boom cohorts advance into age brackets with much lower participation rates. Participation in the labor force ( by working or by looking for a job ) declines as people age through their 50s and 60s as can be seen in the following chart This chart shows the estimated average lifetime age-participation profile for the cohorts born from to Men s participation is high ( exceeding percent ) from age through age but then declines thereafter dropping to percent by age and percent by age The rate of labor force exit is particularly rapid around the continued on the next page Chapter | Box continued age at which one becomes eligible for early Social Security retirement benefits. In fact about percent of those eligible elect to begin collecting Social Security annuities at age although this does not necessarily mean that they exit the workforce The difference between the age-participation profile of this cohort ( the dotted lines ) and those of its elders illustrates how participation rates have evolved over time. Female participation rates have moved sharply upward in a roughly parallel shift. In contrast male participation rates have changed little over time moving down only slightly The current age distribution of the U.S. population is shown by the bars in the following chart and the black line shows an estimate of the age distribution of the population in The large baby-boom cohorts ( who were born between and ) are now to years old and their aging will shift a sizeable fraction of the population into age brackets with lower participation rates thus decreasing the share of the population in the high-participation ages | Economic Report of the President An extrapolation that moves the participation rate of each cohort along a path that parallels the reference cohort and projects how the aging of the population translates into participation rates suggests an average participation rate decline of roughly percent per year. A decline of this magnitude would alter a wide range of labormarket behaviors. In response to the emerging shortage of experienced workers real wages are likely to increase and workweeks are likely to lengthen. Labor productivity is likely to increase as employers invest in labor-saving capital. And more immigrants may enter the U.S. labor force. The largest effect of the baby boom retirements however is likely to be an endogenous effect on the labor force participation rate itself as developments in pay and pension arrangements evolve to induce higher participation rates among experienced workers than our extrapolation would suggest The Composition of Income over the Long Term The Administration s economic forecast is used to estimate future government revenues a purpose that requires a projection of the components of taxable income. The income-side projection is based on the historical stability of labor compensation as a share of gross domestic income ( GDI ) During the first half of the labor compensation share of GDI was percent ( according to the preliminary data available when the projection was finalized ) slightly below its average of percent. From this jump-off point the labor share is projected to slowly rise to percent by The labor compensation share of GDI consists of wages and salaries ( which are taxable ) non-wage compensation ( employer contributions to employee pension and insurance funds which are not taxable ) and employer contributions for social insurance ( which are not taxable ) The Administration forecasts that the wage and salary share of compensation will be approximately flat between and Employer contributions to defined-benefit pension plans rose by almost percentage point of total compensation between and boosting the growth of non-wage compensation. Contributions leveled off and then edged lower in subsequent years The capital share of GDI is expected to edge down from its currently high level before eventually reaching its historical average in Within the capital share private depreciation is expected to increase ( as a result of the strong growth of investment during the past years ) Profits during the first Chapter | three quarters of were about percent of GDI well above their post1959 average of roughly percent. Book profits ( also known in the national income accounts as profits before tax ) are expected to decline as a share of GDI The GDI share of other taxable income ( rent dividends proprietors income and personal interest income ) is projected to edge up slightly over the next years Conclusion With the rapid-growth period of the expansion fading into the past the economy is currently going through a period of rebalancing where higher growth of nonresidential investment and exports are offsetting the lower rates of housing investment. The economy is projected to settle into a steady state in which real GDP grows at about percent per year the unemployment rate creeps up towards a noninflationary level ( of percent ) and inflation remains moderate and stable ( about to percent on the CPI ) Consumer spending is projected to grow in line with disposable income and business investment and exports are projected to grow a bit faster than GDP as a whole. Economic forecasts are subject to error and unforeseen positive and negative developments will affect the course of the economy over the next several years. Given the economy s fundamental strengths however prospects for continued growth in the years ahead remain good. Nonetheless much work remains in making our economy as productive as possible. Later chapters of this Report explore how pro-growth policies such as tax reform fiscal restraint open commerce and enhancing our energy security can enhance our economic performance | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R Productivity Growth N ews about economic issues focuses on topics such as inflation international competitiveness standards of living and long-run demographic challenges. Productivity growth rarely makes the headlines. Why is productivity growth important to the nation ? Because higher productivity growth improves the outlook for all of these issues. It helps keep inflation in check makes it easier for American businesses and workers to compete raises standards of living and reduces the difficulty of meeting long-run demographic challenges by increasing the total amount of resources available Over the past years gross domestic product ( GDP ) per capita has grown faster in the United States than in almost every other advanced industrialized country. The United States owes its recent strong per capita growth in large part to strong labor productivity growth. A continuation of this productivity growth is essential to increasing real wages and maintaining the high standard of living in the United States To remain competitive U.S. businesses must hold costs down by getting the most out of the inputs they use that is they must increase labor productivity. Similarly for U.S. workers to earn higher wages than workers in other countries while competing in a global economy U.S. labor productivity must exceed that of lower-wage countries Labor productivity growth also holds the key to dealing with the economic and fiscal challenges of a rapidly aging population. The total amount of goods and services produced in a country measured by GDP can grow only if productivity or hours of work increase. As the baby boomers ( those born between and ) reach retirement growth in total hours of work across the U.S. economy will slow and the United States will have to depend increasingly on productivity growth to drive increases in GDP. While labor force growth will slow the elderly population will expand relatively quickly Strong GDP growth must continue in order to maintain the standards of living for both the working age and the dependent populations The amount that U.S. workers produce has grown at remarkable rates in recent years. Since productivity growth has averaged over percent per year compared to an average growth rate of about percent per year over the preceding years. Most other major industrialized countries suffered a slowdown in productivity growth between and but in the United States growth accelerated to about percent the fastest productivity growth of any G7 country Canada France Germany Italy Japan the United Kingdom and the United States over that period. Given that the United States productivity was already among the highest and that these countries have similar access to technological improvements and financial markets the sudden increase in U.S. productivity growth relative to other developed countries is especially impressive Table illustrates how small differences in productivity growth rates can over time have large effects on the level of productivity and hence on the standard of living. When productivity doubles twice as much output can be produced using the same level of labor. The table lists four different productivity growth rates that correspond to averages for different U.S. historical time periods along with the number of years it would take to double the standard of living at that rate of growth. If productivity continues to grow at the rate from the most recent period ( percent ) the U.S. standard of living will double in about years ; at the slower productivity growth rate experienced during the period ( percent ) doubling would take more than twice as long TABLE Implied Doubling Rates for the Level of Productivity Using Historical Growth Rates Productivity growth rate to to to to Doubling time ( in years ) % % % % Source : Department Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Council of Economic Advisers calculations This chapter reviews the sources of the recent strength in productivity growth highlighting the role that flexible markets and entrepreneurship play in explaining cross-country differences. It also explains the benefits of productivity growth and discusses how policymakers can further promote it. Key points are : Recent productivity growth has been primarily driven by efficiency growth ( growth in how well labor and capital inputs are used ) and by capital deepening ( growth in the amount of capital that workers have available for use ) Efficiency growth comes from developing new methods of production and new products. Entrepreneurship and competition make key contributions to such innovation Investment in information technology ( IT ) capital and innovative new ways of using it have been important sources of productivity growth in many industries with particularly high growth rates | Economic Report of the President Openness to international trade and investment is especially important for fostering competition and thus productivity growth Increases in the education and training of the U.S. workforce have been and will continue to be important to long-run productivity growth Policies that encourage capital accumulation research and development and increases in the quality of our educational system can boost productivity growth over the long run The Basics of Productivity Growth : Framework and Recent Facts Labor productivity measures the goods and services produced per hour of work. In the United States the most commonly used measure of labor productivity is that for the nonfarm business sector which excludes all levels of government nonprofit institutions households and farms. Because output from nonbusiness entities is particularly difficult to measure nonfarm business labor productivity is thought to best measure how labor productivity varies over time. For international comparisons of productivity total output per hour worked is often used because data on hours by sector are not always readily available Factors That Increase Labor Productivity What increases labor productivity ? Research on this question usually divides changes in labor productivity into three sources : capital deepening increases in skill and efficiency gains Capital Deepening Capital deepening happens when businesses invest in more or better machinery equipment and structures all of which make it possible for their employees to produce more. Matching employees with better capital increases the number of goods employees produce in each hour they work. Examples of capital deepening include the purchase of more sophisticated machine tools for workers in the manufacturing sector or a faster computer system for a travel agent. A business may add capital when it increases its workforce for example a travel agency might buy additional computers when increasing the number of travel agents it employs but that does not constitute capital deepening if the amount of capital available per worker does not increase Farming provides a classic example of the benefits of using more and better capital. In it took a farmer to hours of work to produce bushels of wheat ; in with the help of a horse-drawn machine the Chapter | time dropped to between and hours ; in with the use of large tractors and combines the bushels could be produced in just to hours. While it is most likely that farmers were more educated in than they were in the 1830s the change in the farmers skills alone could not be the source of this dramatic efficiency gain ; an important source is the use of better capital. Changing from a hoe to the tractor would be categorized as capital deepening and the resulting increase in output is capital deepening s contribution to productivity growth Increases in Skill Just as a worker who is paired with a better machine can produce more goods a worker who learns a skill needed for production can produce more output in less time. For example a worker who takes a class on how to use a computer increases the skill with which she uses the computer ; the computer is no faster but the worker s increased skill increases her output per hour worked and hence boosts her productivity. Workers increase their skills through additional education training on-the-job experience and so on Efficiency Gains Businesses achieve efficiency gains more output with the same amount of input when they devise better ways of organizing and using the equipment they own and the people they employ. Efficiency gains include both process innovations which increase productivity by reducing the capital or labor needed to produce a unit of output and product innovations which increase productivity by increasing the value of output. For example when Henry Ford began mass-producing Model T s the Model T itself was a product innovation while the moving assembly line was a process innovation. The combination of improved process and product allowed the Ford Motor Company to reduce its production costs and become more competitive A more recent example of process improvements that led to direct efficiency gains may also be helpful in illustrating this concept. Managers at a 3M tapemanufacturing plant increased productivity by reorganizing part of their production process. By moving machines such as glue coaters and tape slitters closer to the packing equipment and robotic transporters 3M substantially increased labor productivity at its plant. The reorganization reduced the need to move output around the plant and cut the length of the production cycle In addition with all the packing supplies located in one place managers could see when they had more than they needed and could cut costs by reducing excess inventories of supplies. This improvement is an efficiency gain because the plant produced more output without increasing capital or labor. This example is typical of the innovative process : companies purchase and install new machines from computers to conveyor belts but it takes time and further innovation to learn how to take full advantage of the new machines | Economic Report of the President Entrepreneurship ( developing new ways of doing business and making risky investments to implement them ) and competition partially determine the degree to which innovation contributes to labor productivity. If a business comes up with a new product or a new way of organizing production and spends the resources to try it out and if the new way improves on the old the business ends up with a higher level of profit and an incentive to expand Innovation by one business is likely to have little direct effect on a nation s productivity growth but competition forces other businesses to either come up with innovations of their own or to cede market share. When this happens capital investment and labor flow to businesses with better methods of production and productivity increases as a result Entrepreneurship occurs on both small and large scales ; many large multinationals spend large sums on research and development in order to innovate and expand but individual entrepreneurs who operate on a small scale may also innovate. The entry and growth of new businesses combined with the exit of older less productive businesses has been found to be responsible for a substantial share of efficiency growth Productivity Growth in Recent Years Chart illustrates how increases in skill capital deepening and efficiency gains have contributed to productivity growth in recent years. It is important to note that the relative sizes of these contributions are only approximate and that some increases in the quality of labor and capital may be counted as efficiency gains. For example economists can accurately measure education levels of the labor force but on-the-job training is also commonplace and measuring the impact of this training on skill levels is difficult. Similar issues arise in adjusting for the quality of capital particularly during periods of rapid technological changes. The net result is likely an understatement of skill increases and capital deepening and a resulting overstatement of efficiency gains Chart contrasts three periods ( when U.S. productivity growth was relatively slow ) ( when the pace of productivity growth quickened ) and ( shows the most recent growth rate ) Over these years skill increased at a fairly steady pace of about percent to percent per year. The sources of this increase are increased rates of college attendance and the increased experience of the workforce. Increases in skill have been an important source of long-run increases in labor productivity and help explain why the United States has high income levels relative to other countries. Continuing a steady increase in skill is vital to maintaining solid productivity growth into the future a topic discussed at more length in Chapter of the Economic Report of the President But even when educational attainment among the young rises substantially the skill level of the workforce as a whole evolves slowly. Because skill has Chapter | increased at a relatively steady rate it can not be the source of the recent acceleration in productivity growth. Instead capital deepening and efficiency gains have been the key productivity-raising factors. Between and increases in the quality and quantity of the U.S. capital stock accounted for percent per year in productivity growth in the United States more than doubling the contribution of capital to productivity growth relative to the to period. The surge in productivity in the late 1990s resulted not just from a rapid increase in the number of machines used in U.S. production but also from large quality improvements to the capital stock. Many of these improvements came from the revolution in information technology which is commonly accepted as the initiating force behind the acceleration But investment in IT capital alone was not the whole story. Firms needed to develop processes that best used the new capital. In many ways the first increase in productivity growth ( the higher growth rate between and ) was due to increased capital while the second boost ( in the period between and ) occurred as firms became better and better at using the new technology | Economic Report of the President Productivity Growth and Worker Earnings The previous section looked at the sources of recent productivity gains but did not discuss what productivity gains mean for a worker s paycheck. This section examines how productivity growth affects average compensation and which groups have gained the most over time Productivity and Average Earnings The economic gains from productivity growth reach workers directly through growth in employee compensation where compensation includes wages and the contributions that employers make for benefits such as health insurance and for government programs such as unemployment insurance and Social Security. Chart shows that over long periods of time productivity and real compensation grow at about the same rate. Real wages have grown somewhat more slowly than compensation and thus productivity over the last years. The reason for this difference is that non-wage compensation particularly employer contributions for health insurance has accounted for an increasing share of compensation over this time period Chapter | Productivity growth is not a smooth process. Chart shows that even in the recent time period to when average productivity growth has been high there are short periods of time where productivity growth appears to slow sharply or accelerate rapidly. Such changes in productivity growth are not uncommon. In addition productivity sometimes grows faster than compensation while sometimes compensation grows faster. Such short-term divergence in growth rates follows regular patterns and has been repeated many times. At times when productivity growth is particularly high compensation growth tends to lag behind for a period of time before catching back up Why does compensation tend to lag behind productivity growth ? When productivity growth is high economic growth can happen without substantial employment growth. In other words as productivity grows businesses are able to expand output in response to increased demand without hiring more workers ; the efficiency gains imply that each individual worker produces more output in the same amount of time. As the economy continues to expand businesses once again begin to hire new employees and the increased demand for workers begins to push up wages and compensation. Increased demand for workers leads to a period in which compensation growth exceeds productivity growth and the two variables then converge for a while When productivity grows faster than compensation businesses profits tend to rise because the value of the goods and services they sell rises faster than their payroll costs. As a result profits tend to rise during periods of rapid productivity growth. As tight labor markets bid up employee compensation the increase in labor costs cuts into profits and profits return to normal levels In this process profits vary more dramatically than employee compensation falling much more sharply during recessions and then growing much more quickly in the early parts of the recovery. Because profits represent returns to earlier investments very high profits in some years may not represent unusually large returns on investment because they may be offset by years of losses or unusually small profits Productivity and Income Differences The productivity and compensation numbers used in this chapter describe averages but over the last years the economic gains for some groups have not kept up with those averages while the gains for other groups have been well above the average. These uneven gains have led to growing disparity ( or inequality ) in compensation and wages. The same competition for workers that makes average employee compensation track productivity growth over the long term will occur for particular groups of employees within the overall labor force. The compensation for groups whose productivity has increased relative to the rest of the labor force will increase relative to average compensation. A number of studies have shown that factors associated with higher | Economic Report of the President productivity such as education and work experience have also been increasingly associated with higher wages. This is consistent with the view that growing compensation disparity has been driven by faster growth in productivity for skilled workers than for the less skilled In the 1980s the increase in disparity was seen both in falling wages at the bottom of the wage distribution and rising wages at the top. Since then wages in the bottom half of the distribution have either been flat or have grown modestly while disparity has continued to increase in the upper part of the distribution. For example between and the wage at the 10th percentile grew percent while the median wage grew percent so the difference between them narrowed somewhat. The wage at the 90th percentile of the distribution grew percent over that period widening the gap between the upper tail of the distribution and the median Why have wage levels grown increasingly disparate ? Changes in technology that increase the productivity advantages associated with skill often termed skill-biased technical change appear to be the most likely cause. That is technological advances increased the productivity of skilled workers more than the productivity of the less skilled leading employers to want to hire more skilled workers. In doing so employers bid up the wages of skilled workers widening the difference in pay associated with skill Why does skill-biased technical change appear to be the most reasonable explanation for this trend ? The main reason is that the price that employers pay for skilled workers trended upward even while the supply of skilled workers continued to grow. For example although the fraction of the workforce that is college educated has grown consistently over the past years ( an increase in supply ) the additional wages needed for an employer to hire a college-educated worker have also grown ( an increase in price ) Absent a shift in demand increases in supply should drive down prices so a price increase implies that demand has shifted toward skilled workers as well Do improvements in the way goods and services are produced necessarily lead to greater disparity in pay ? If changes in technology have increased disparity does that mean that technological change is always bad for those who are in the lower portion of the wage distribution ? There are two reasons to doubt that this is true. First economists studying earlier periods have found that wage disparity actually narrowed in the first half of the 20th century providing evidence that in some periods change has favored less skilled workers as opposed to skilled workers A second and more fundamental reason that productivity growth does not leave a whole class of workers behind in the long run is that if changes in technology raise the pay of relatively skilled workers they also increase people s incentives to invest in acquiring skills. Many of the factors that increase an individual worker s productivity depend on the worker s decisions to invest in Chapter | developing new skills. When the rewards to gaining skills increase workers have increased incentive to acquire additional skills. For example over the past years there has been a substantial widening in the difference between pay for workers with a bachelor s degree and pay for those with only a high school diploma. For men this difference grew from percent in to percent in If this widening in pay differences represents an increase in the amount a worker gains by getting a college education then it gives individuals a greater incentive to make such an investment in education. Over the last years there has been an increase in the percentage of people who choose to go to college rather than enter the workforce directly out of high school. In the size of the workforce with some college education was roughly the same as the size of the workforce with a high school diploma or less. By the workforce with at least some college had become percent larger than the workforce with no college. Other levels of education such as master s and doctoral degrees have shown similar increases in the rewards for obtaining such a degree and in the number of people choosing to make that investment From to wages for those with an advanced degree increased faster than for those of any other education group and since the mid-1990s the share of people age with an advanced degree has increased by percent. Thus increased demand for skilled workers has been followed by an increase in supply which raises the average skill level in the economy and leads to higher average productivity Understanding the Acceleration in U.S. Productivity : Industry Analysis Understanding why productivity growth in the United States has increased requires knowing what factors in the economy have changed. Chart demonstrated that most of the recent increase came about through greater capital deepening and efficiency gains. What the chart did not tell us is why businesses increased their rates of capital investment to bring about capital deepening and why efficiency gains have been higher in the past decade than they were for much of the previous two decades Productivity growth for the economy as a whole comes from investment and innovation in a wide variety of businesses. A lot can be learned about the sources of growth by looking at which kinds of investments have grown most quickly as well as which industries have had the fastest productivity growth The average rate of productivity growth hides substantial differences across industries. In particular the surge in productivity in the late 1990s appears to be a story of growth in industries making and using IT capital. Chart | Economic Report of the President illustrates that efficiency growth since has been particularly strong in the high-tech sector but that it has also been strong in the distribution sector which includes retail and wholesale trade transportation and warehousing Finance and business services also showed strong efficiency growth and hence strong productivity growth. Manufacturing which has made small investments in IT capital compared to the other sectors shown has had the slowest recent growth in efficiency The strong productivity growth in the distribution and financial services sectors highlights one of the most striking differences between the pre- and post-1995 periods. From the 1970s through productivity growth in goods-producing industries was generally greater than that in service-providing industries. However since productivity growth in service-providing industries has exceeded the growth in goods-producing industries ( such as manufacturing ) Given this difference one of the most important insights into the recent period of productivity growth comes from understanding why service-sector productivity growth accelerated after a long period of slow growth. As discussed above capital deepening and efficiency growth accounted for most of the acceleration of productivity growth for the U.S. economy as a whole over the last decade Chapter | In examining productivity growth rates over the recent period researchers have found it useful to characterize investments by whether they involve a purchase of IT equipment which is usually defined as computer hardware software and telecommunications equipment. Box discusses some of the potential mechanisms such as intangible capital accumulation through which IT capital leads to productivity improvements Box : Intangible Capital and IT Investment While information technology clearly accounts for a sizable share of productivity growth since the mechanisms through which it induced this growth are not as clear. The assumption has been that since efficiency growth has been the largest contributor to productivity in this recent period IT gains are embedded in this growing efficiency However hidden within these increases in efficiency may also be capital growth not captured in official measures Standard measures of capital primarily count physical capital but businesses expend resources on many other activities that aim to increase the value of future output. Some examples are research and development spending revamping a business s organization advertising aimed at improving consumers perceptions of a business s brand or developing a secret recipe. These kinds of activities are often called intangible investment because they build up assets that are valuable to firms but are not easily measured Conceptually these activities qualify as capital investment but they are not currently included in official capital measures because they are hard to measure. Why does this matter when discussing productivity ? Expanding the definition of capital by including intangibles would change the shares of the factors contributing to labor productivity growth increasing the share attributed to capital deepening and reducing the share attributed to efficiency gains. This shift would not only call into question the finding that IT investment contributed to productivity mainly through efficiency gains but would also help explain why productivity did not accelerate with early waves of IT investments. Indeed it is consistent with the hypothesis that for businesses to take full advantage of their IT investments they needed to develop innovative business practices. Only when they made intangible investments to complement their IT investments did productivity growth really take off | Economic Report of the President The industries that produce IT equipment had particularly rapid efficiency growth resulting in falling prices accompanied by rapid increases in the speed and power of IT equipment. These industries directly brought up the average rate of productivity growth for the economy but their advances also had significant indirect effects by driving a surge in IT equipment investment in other industries. The increase in capital deepening in the 1990s was led by large investments in IT equipment but productivity gains from these investments did not immediately emerge In the to period industries with above-average investment in IT equipment had significantly larger increases in their productivity growth rates than did other industries. For example the retail trade and financial services industries had much higher productivity growth over the to period than in the preceding period and had well-above-average investment in IT equipment. Box indicates that much of the retail trade productivity gains occurred because of supply chain improvements made possible by information technology. Research estimating the contribution of IT-related forces including both productivity growth in IT-producing industries and the share of productivity growth accounted for by IT investment in other industries shows that information technology accounted for more than half of productivity growth from to Box : Information Technology the Supply Chain and Productivity Growth in Retail Trade The retail trade sector shows how IT investment innovation competition and flexible markets interact to affect productivity growth Retailers have made heavy investments in information technology and have had rapid productivity growth but changes in the way that retailers use information technology both in their stores and with their suppliers were necessary to generate this surge in productivity growth. The focus here is on two types of innovations : changes in the organization of the supply chain of consumer goods and changes in the way retailers organize store operations Manufacturers and retailers of consumer goods have increased their use of electronic data interchange allowing manufacturers to help retailers manage inventories and avoid stockpiling and shortfalls Electronic data interchange also allows for automatic ordering billing and payment. Retailers benefit from lower costs of carrying inventory and reduced resources spent managing it and manufacturers benefit continued on the next page Chapter | Box continued from being able to smooth out production. Because these changes have enabled retailers to more reliably stock a wide variety of goods consumers have benefited from increased product variety. Making these changes required an investment in IT equipment by manufacturers and retailers and required them to change the way they exchanged information and interacted Large retailers also made internal changes that significantly increased productivity. One change was an increase in the scale of stores. Other important changes involved the use of information technology and improved management practices. Examples include an increased use of software to manage the flow of goods and staffing levels in stores and more cross-training of employees to make better use of store labor Rapid expansion of the largest firm put competitive pressure on other retailers leading them to cut costs and in many cases to emulate the process improvements introduced by the industry leader Why Has Productivity Growth Accelerated in the U.S. While Slowing in Other Countries ? The United States has experienced the fastest acceleration of productivity growth among major industrialized countries since the early 1990s. Chart shows that after lagging behind most of the countries in the G7 between and the United States has been the country with the fastest growth in GDP per hour worked in the G7 between and Only the United States and Japan had faster productivity growth in the most recent period than they did in the early 1990s and only the United States has shown consistent acceleration over this time period Since all of these countries have in principle approximately the same access to information and global markets why have the other major industrialized countries not been able to post productivity gains as large as those in the United States and Japan ? The major advances in this period appear to have come from opportunities that developed from the rapid advancement in information technology. While all developed countries had access to IT capital the existing economic environment in the United States put it in position to quickly make the most of these opportunities. International openness to investment and trade combined with highly flexible and lightly regulated markets and an environment that fosters innovation appear to be at least part of the answer | Economic Report of the President International Openness As discussed earlier capital deepening has played a significant role in U.S productivity growth. Over the past years the United States is second only to Canada in its annual growth rate of real private investment. Real investment in the United States over this period increased at an annual rate of percent nearly double the average rate of the other G7 countries ( excluding Canada ) The United States has been able to accomplish this level of investment because of its open and transparent investment environment While capital deepening played an important role in the productivity gains experienced in the late 1990s so did advances in information technology. To benefit from the IT boom firms had to invest large amounts in computers software and employee training. From through U.S. investment in information-processing equipment and software increased at an average rate of around percent per year and total investment grew faster than in any other country in the G7. To help fund these investments the United States received substantial flows of financial capital from abroad during this period. While the United States might have invested in IT capital without access to international financial markets and while Europe may not have invested more even if it was more open to international capital flows it is Chapter | almost certain that the United States was able to use its open investment environment to finance the increase in IT capital Access to international financial markets tends to lower borrowing costs and enable a country to increase capital investment rates without increasing domestic savings. This outcome would not be possible if businesses had access only to domestic financing International openness has also contributed in other ways to recent efficiency gains in the United States. Since the early 1990s the United States has increased its openness to international trade. From the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) ( signed into law in ) to the Trade Act of and the renewal of Trade Promotion Authority in the same year the United States has worked to break down trade barriers. Lower trade barriers have in turn increased the level of international competition in product markets. Some U.S. companies have suffered from the increased competition ; some have benefited. The increased competition forces firms to seek new ways of doing business to remain competitive and because of this international trade may contribute to growth in innovation Flexible Labor Markets Efficiency gains resulting from more flexible and competitive labor markets have been another important reason why the United States was able to benefit from recent shifts in technology. The United States ranks first among G7 countries in the World Bank s Rigidity of Employment Index indicating very flexible labor markets relative to other G7 countries. Japan for example ranks fourth among G7 countries while France ranks last. The index averages measures of the difficulty of hiring a new worker restrictions on expanding or contracting the number of working hours and the difficulty and expense of dismissing a worker. While other countries are tied with the United States on the latter two measures the United States owes its first place rank to the ease with which American employers can hire new employees Flexible labor markets allow workers to flow to high-productivity and highwage industries. Hiring and severance costs tend to increase unemployment by making firms reluctant to hire new workers. They encourage labor hoarding a practice in which firms hold on to workers not currently needed for production in order to avoid the costs of hiring new workers when the firm s workforce needs to expand. Labor hoarding lowers the level of productivity and reduces the average growth rate of productivity as firms find it more difficult to respond to innovations and shifts in demand Flexible labor markets improve productivity growth because they allow firms to more easily adjust the size and scope of their operations in response to economic developments. For example after an increase in efficiency a firm may become more competitive and decide to expand output and so need to | Economic Report of the President hire more workers. The firm may also wish to change the mix of workers it employs. Flexible labor markets allow these transitions to occur at a low cost Low Costs of Starting a Business Low costs of business entry with relatively few administrative hurdles have also contributed to greater efficiency gains in the United States. A recent study by the World Bank shows that the United States at days ranks behind only Canada and Australia in terms of the number of days required to start a business and has the fourth lowest administrative costs to start a new business. New businesses provide both a ready supply of new ideas and a source of competition that forces larger businesses to innovate. Both of these factors have likely given the United States an edge in taking advantage of new opportunities made possible by IT advances. As with flexible labor markets the ease of starting a new business helps with the level and the growth rate of productivity. Over long periods of time starting new businesses keeps the economic environment competitive which spurs innovation and helps push inefficient firms out of the market place Policy Implications What can the United States do to promote further productivity growth ? First the most important way to encourage capital deepening is to maintain the smallest possible difference between the before-tax and the after-tax rates of return to investments. Capital deepening makes workers more productive and leads to higher wages in the long run. Making the tax cuts on capital gains and dividends permanent would help in this regard. Chapter of this report discusses policy options affecting the taxation of capital Second policies must encourage investment in skills. One way to do this is to keep the tax rates on wage income low. If individuals see little return to going to college vocational school or graduate school because of high tax rates on moderate- to high-wage earners their incentives to invest in skill will be dampened. Chapter further discusses how tax policy affects investment in skill. Strengthening K-12 education reducing our dropout rates and ensuring that all children receive high-quality education will increase the skills of our workforce and better prepare our citizens for further skill investment as adults. The President s efforts over the past several years to improve education and training with the No Child Left Behind Act community college initiatives and job training reforms will help. Furthermore because learning begets learning the returns should continue into the distant future Third we must remain open to foreign investment. Openness to foreign capital has given the United States the flexibility it needs to deepen its capital Chapter | stock and improve its productivity without necessitating a corresponding increase in domestic savings. To maintain current growth rates we must keep pushing for freer trade especially in the area of services which has become a significant part of our economy. Chapter of this report discusses policies to increase our international openness Fourth we must encourage innovation and entrepreneurship. The President has outlined a competitiveness initiative that increases public investment in basic research an important complement to private sector innovation and strengthens math and science education to provide the skills needed for technological innovation Conclusion Maintaining a solid productivity growth rate is of great importance to maintaining and increasing U.S. standards of living. The surge in productivity growth since about has come from heavy business investment in information technology accompanied by large efficiency gains from innovation and competition. The United States has gained more from rapid advances in information technology than the other major industrialized countries because its culture of entrepreneurship and its flexible markets for products capital and labor have allowed American businesses to make the most of these changes | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R Pro-Growth Tax Policy T he word investment has different meanings to different people. In finance investment means the purchase of financial products or other assets such as mutual funds or gold with an expectation of favorable future returns. For businesses it can mean the purchase of a physical good such as a durable machine or inventory with the hope of improving future business In economics investment is defined as any use of resources intended to increase future production output or income. In particular capital investment is money spent on physical capital such as buildings equipment or machinery or on human capital such as education or job training. Because a larger capital stock makes labor more productive investment is a primary driver of greater economic growth and higher standards of living If governments pursue policies that involve the least amount of government interference necessary for a well-functioning capital investment market this will encourage an efficient amount of investment. One type of policy that is key to encouraging an efficient level of investment is pro-growth tax policy One of the goals of pro-growth tax policy is to finance government services in a way that minimizes the effect of taxes on the capital investment decisions of households or businesses. By taxing investment returns too heavily or by providing tax advantages to certain types of investment a tax system can discourage overall investment as well as prevent capital from being used efficiently. A tax system that affects investment decisions in these ways is called distortionary because it creates incentives for people to base their saving and investment decisions on taxes rather than making those decisions based solely on where they can use their resources most productively This chapter discusses the advantages of adopting a more pro-growth tax system. It reviews recent changes that have reduced tax distortions on capital investment decisions and evaluates options to further reduce such distortions It draws the following four main conclusions The goal of pro-growth tax policy is to reduce tax distortions that hamper economic growth. Most economists agree that lower taxes on capital income stimulate greater investment resulting in greater economic growth greater international competitiveness and higher standards of living The current tax code contains provisions that discourage investment and create distortions that affect the level structure and financing of capital investment. These distortions dampen capital investment and contribute to an inefficient allocation of capital throughout the economy Estimates from research suggest that removing these tax distortions to investment decisions could increase real gross domestic product ( GDP ) by as much as percent in the long run Since temporary changes in the tax code have reduced the tax on investment. These pro-growth policies have stimulated short-run investment and economic growth. However the temporary nature of the provisions eliminates desirable long-run economic stimulus Rationale for Pro-Growth Tax Policy All societies must decide on the amount of government services that best provides for the welfare of the citizenry. When deciding how to finance a given amount of government services two features of the tax system must be determined the appropriate tax base and the appropriate tax rate. The goal of pro-growth tax policy is to define a tax base and choose tax rates that finance government expenditures with the least distortionary effect on the economy. A tax system is distortionary when it creates incentives for people to make spending saving or investment decisions that are different from the decisions they would make in the absence of taxes. For example by taxing the sale of apples and not oranges a tax system would encourage people to consume more oranges and fewer apples than they otherwise would. Similarly by taxing a family s out-of-pocket health spending but not employer-paid health insurance premiums the tax system encourages inefficient consumption of health care by households. ( See Box in Chapter The Fiscal Challenges Facing Medicare for a discussion of the President s proposal to reform the tax treatment of health insurance. ) By comparison a tax system that taxes investment can create incentives that favor consumption over saving investment in certain types of capital over others or certain methods of financing capital investment. In the absence of distortionary taxes people would have made those decisions based solely on the best and most productive use of those resources Defining the Tax Base Most economists agree that the choice of the appropriate tax base is between taxing some measure of income or taxing some measure of consumption Broadly defined income is the increase in an individual s ability to consume during a period of time. Income can include labor earnings ( both cash and benefits ) interest payments rents royalties dividends increases in asset values alimony and pension payments. An important dimension of income taxation is that saving and investment are included in the tax base. Using income as the tax base is equivalent to taxing potential consumption. In effect | Economic Report of the President this taxes all resources that people put into the economy. A tax system with an income base is distortionary because taxes affect decisions on when how and how much to save and invest. For example in taxing household saving future consumption ( financed by saving ) becomes relatively more expensive compared to current consumption. As a result households tend to consume more and save less than they otherwise would if saving were not taxed By contrast consumption is defined as the actual amount that people and businesses spend buying goods and services today. When a tax system has a consumption base it only taxes what people take out of the economy. While there are several possible measures of a consumption tax base retail sales value-added and consumed income among others all of these measures share the attribute of excluding saving and investment from the tax base. Such a tax system is considered neutral and efficient because it neither encourages nor discourages savings and investment decisions ; it allows people to decide whether to consume now or to invest in the future based on market prices instead of on how to avoid paying taxes. Relative to an income tax the consumption tax base results in a larger more efficient stock of capital which in turn makes workers more productive. Output and wages rise resulting in higher standards of living. As a result many economists feel that consumption is a better base for pro-growth tax policy Our current tax system has a hybrid tax base with elements of both income and consumption tax bases. Some but not all of the return to saving and investment is excluded from the tax base through various provisions. For example individual retirement accounts ( IRAs ) employer-sponsored retirement savings plans lower tax rates on capital gains and dividends and accelerated depreciation for certain types of investment are some of the provisions in the current tax code that provide at least a partial consumption tax base. Recent estimates suggest that about percent of the return to household financial assets is taxed under an income tax base with the remainder receiving consumption tax treatment Choosing the Tax Rates A marginal tax rate tells how much tax is paid on an additional or marginal dollar of income. When assessing the effect of marginal tax rates on investment it is the effective tax rate rather than the statutory tax rate that matters. A statutory marginal tax rate is a legal definition of the amount of extra income needed to pay taxes due from an additional dollar of taxable income in any year. By contrast an effective marginal tax rate estimates the extra share of the total return from an investment needed to cover tax liabilities over an investment s useful life. A tax system with high effective tax rates on labor and capital income will dampen economic growth by reducing incentives to work and invest in capital formation Chapter | Pro-growth tax policy whether through adopting a consumption base lowering statutory tax rates on saving and investment or allowing individuals to fully deduct the cost of investment from taxable income stimulates new investment by lowering the effective tax rate on investment income Individuals and businesses will undertake more projects because lowering the effective marginal tax rate reduces the pretax rate of return necessary to make new projects profitable. In addition lowering the effective tax rate on the return to capital investment enhances the competitive position of the United States in today s increasingly global economy. This is because a lower effective tax rate raises the after-tax return to U.S.-based investment relative to foreign investment making U.S. investment relatively more attractive to both domestic and foreign investors The U.S. Tax System Previous Distortions and Recent Reforms The United States tax system has become increasingly distortionary and inefficient with hundreds of highly targeted tax provisions that erode the potential for tax system neutrality and greater economic growth. A major source of inefficiency is the treatment of capital investment both for physical capital and for human capital. The profusion of provisions has resulted in a system where taxes can be the primary determinant in whether to undertake new investment what form the investment should take and how to finance the investment Since several pro-growth tax policy changes have been enacted which have reduced the distortionary effect of taxes on investment decisions. This section discusses investment distortions in the tax system prior to and analyzes how changes since that time have reduced distortions and stimulated economic growth. Overall the pro-growth policies enacted since have helped lessen the impact of the recession and have led to greater investment and overall economic growth Tax Treatment of Physical Capital Investment This section discusses how two features of the tax system result in tax wedge distortions that contribute to physical capital investment inefficiency : depreciation schedules that result in an inefficient level and allocation of capital and the double taxation of corporate profits that affects the level form and financing of business investment | Economic Report of the President The Tax Wedge The tax system creates a tax wedge for investment making the pretax return on investment higher than the after-tax return on investment. This is important because investors require the pretax return to cover both the opportunity cost and the tax cost of investment. If the tax wedge is large fewer projects will be undertaken because the after-tax return for some projects will be below the opportunity cost of investment. For example consider an investment with a pretax return of percent and an after-tax return of percent meaning the tax wedge is equal to percent of the pre-tax return. If investors decide they require an percent after-tax return in order to cover the opportunity cost of the investment taxes will stop the otherwise profitable project from being undertaken. By lowering the effective tax rate on investment the pretax return is unaffected but the after-tax return will rise. For example if the effective tax rate is reduced to zero then the tax wedge is eliminated and the after-tax return rises to percent. Note that the tax wedge does not need to be eliminated for our hypothetical project to be financed the effective tax rate only needs to be reduced to the point where the after-tax return is percent. However completely eliminating the tax wedge removes taxes from the investment decision. Two main contributors to the tax wedge on investment returns are depreciation schedules and the double tax on corporate profits Depreciation Schedules A primary source of the inefficiency created by the tax wedge is the depreciation schedules that treat investments very differently depending on their business sector asset life and source of financing. Depreciation schedules tell how much of an investment s acquisition cost can be deducted from the taxpayer s taxable investment income in any year. There are two distortions associated with the tax depreciation system. First spreading the deduction for the acquisition cost over a number of years lowers the present value of the total tax deduction relative to fully deducting the cost in the year purchased. By lowering the present value of the deduction the depreciation system raises the tax cost and the total effective cost of investment. This makes some projects unprofitable and reduces the economy-wide level of investment. Second the depreciation system distorts the allocation of investment among various sectors of the economy because the depreciation schedules lead to sectoral differences in effective marginal tax rates. Under an income tax system the amount of investment cost counted each year should ideally equal the true economic depreciation of the asset. For example if an asset loses percent of its useful value per year then an ideal income tax depreciation schedule would allow percent of the cost to be excluded from income each year. When tax Chapter | depreciation is not the same as economic depreciation the tax system distorts investment decisions regarding the allocation of capital investment A common method of measuring the relative distortions caused by the depreciation system is to calculate the effective marginal tax rates on different types of investment. Under current law different types of investments are depreciated under various depreciation schedules ranging from to years Because acquisition costs are deducted from taxable income at different rates the amount of tax paid and the effective marginal tax rate varies by depreciation class. Table shows the effective tax rates on different assets for different types of investments with computer investment facing the highest effective marginal tax rate and petroleum infrastructure investment facing the lowest. Because marginal investments should provide the same after-tax rate of return the depreciation schedule distorts the allocation of capital by discouraging investment in assets with high effective marginal tax rates Even if we adopted a tax system with tax depreciation equal to economic depreciation there would still be a notable tax wedge that would distort investment decisions. To completely remove the investment distortions of depreciation schedules would require adopting a consumption tax base. With a consumption tax all investment costs are fully deducted ( fully expensed ) from taxable income in the period in which the acquisition occurs. This has the effect of reducing the tax wedge to zero if there are no other taxes on investment returns. This means that the tax system is neutral to the level and allocation of capital investment because taxes do not affect the decision to invest and all types of investment are treated equally The Double Tax on Corporation Profits The double tax on corporate profits which is inconsistent with either an income tax or a consumption tax also has a pronounced effect on investment TABLE Effective Marginal Tax Rates on Capital Income of Corporations by Asset Type Asset type Computers and peripheral equipment............................................................. Inventories Land Automobiles Educational buildings Residential buildings Medical equipment and instruments............................................................... Light trucks ( incl. utility vehicles ) Household appliances Aircraft............................................................................................................. Railroad equipment Petroleum and natural gas structures Source : Congressional Budget Office | Economic Report of the President Effective marginal tax rate ( % ) decisions. First corporations pay tax on net corporate earnings at a maximum marginal rate up to percent. Second individual investors are taxed on the returns they earn on corporate equity. These returns can take the form of a capital gain the difference between the purchase price and the sale price of an asset or a dividend which is a share of corporate profits distributed to shareholders after corporate income tax has been paid The total tax on corporate income is calculated by combining these two layers of tax. Prior to the tax on individual investment returns ( capital gains and dividends ) created incentives for investors to favor projects that paid returns in the form of capital gains or interest payments instead of dividends because long-term capital gains were taxed at a maximum statutory rate of percent while dividend payments were subject to a maximum individual statutory rate of percent ( both tax rates do not take state and local taxes into account ) For corporate income distributed to shareholders as dividends the double tax on corporate profits could approach the level of confiscation. For example given a maximum statutory marginal tax rate of percent for corporations and percent for individuals the combined effective marginal tax rate on distributed corporate profits could have been as high as percent ! Instead of paying out corporate profits as dividends a corporation could retain and reinvest the after-tax profit leading to an increase in its stock value. Prior to when a long-term capital gain was realized the combined effective tax rate on corporate profits was about percent after accounting for the deferral of tax on the accrued gains. All else equal investors tended to favor investment returns in the form of capital gains The high effective tax rate on equity-financed investment also created incentives that favored debt ( taking out loans or issuing bonds ) when financing new projects. As shown in Chart while the economy-wide effective tax rate prior to was percent the effective tax rate on business sector investment was percent. Chart shows that the effective tax rate on equity-financed investment was percent and the effective tax rate on debt-financed investment was almost zero. The reason for this large difference in effective rates is that corporations can deduct interest payments for loan and bond payments from taxable income but must include dividend payments and retained earnings in taxable income. Individual investors then must pay taxes on the interest payments from their debt holdings and the investment returns ( capital gains and dividends ) from their equity holdings This tax treatment results in a system where the return to corporate debt is taxed once but the return to corporate equity is taxed twice. The resulting overreliance on debt-financed investment could lead to greater bankruptcy risk during temporary industry or economy-wide downturns as well as to a misallocation of resources in the economy Chapter | | Economic Report of the President Tax Treatment of Human Capital Investment Human capital investment ( such as education and worker training ) is an important input in the production of final goods and services and investing in human capital is a cost of earning income. Prior to the tax treatment of education and training expenses was mixed. Some costs were fully deducted against taxable income while others were subject to varying degrees of taxation. In addition the treatment varied depending on whether the investment was paid for by businesses or households At the household level most human capital investment was fully deducted because the tax system does not tax the opportunity cost of education the foregone wages of working instead of attending school. For other human capital investment costs there was a complicated set of rules with the tax treatment primarily determined by the income of the individual taxpayer undertaking the investment. Some costs could also be deducted under both income and payroll ( Social Security and Medicare ) taxes The opportunity cost of working was fully deductible under both the income and payroll tax. Other costs fully deductible under both taxes were scholarships fellowships and reduced tuition. Costs that were fully deductible under just the income tax included education costs paid through Coverdell Education Savings Accounts ( Coverdell ESAs ) interest payments on student loans and Treasury bond interest. These costs were excluded from income tax so long as they were used for tuition and related expenses such as fees books supplies and the equipment required for courses of instruction At the firm level human capital investment received more efficient tax treatment than physical capital investment. Consider a $ investment in office equipment. For many businesses this cost was not fully deductible Instead the cost was recovered through depreciation provisions with a fraction of the cost deducted from taxable income over a 7-year period Alternatively the firm and workers could have agreed to reduce cash compensation by $ and invest the money in job training. In this case the firm would have deducted the cost of training from taxable income as an ordinary business expense and workers would not have claimed the cost as taxable income for income or payroll taxes. In this way the investment cost was fully deductible in the year the training occurred resulting in no tax distortions to the firm s human capital investment decision In addition to allowing partial deductibility of human capital investment the tax system had two human capital investment tax credits available for use by households. In the Hope credit provided a tax credit of up to $ per eligible student for the first years of post-secondary education. To qualify for this credit the student had to be pursuing a degree or other recognized educational credential. The Lifetime Learning credit provided a tax credit of percent of the first $ in household education expenses per Chapter | year. This credit was available for any post-secondary education investment for an unlimited number of years regardless of whether the student was pursuing a degree or educational credential Tax credits differ somewhat from tax deductions. A tax credit directly reduces the amount of tax you have to pay. By contrast tax deductions reduce the amount of income subject to tax. Tax credits can provide investment incentives that are equivalent to partial or full deductions and can also be more generous than full deductions. For example consider a person who has qualified education expenses of $ and receives a $ Lifetime Learning credit. If this person is paying taxes at a percent effective marginal tax rate then the credit is equivalent to being able to fully deduct the education cost from taxable income. If the person is paying taxes at a higher marginal tax rate then the credit is equivalent to a partial deduction For example if the student is paying tax at a percent marginal tax rate then the credit is equivalent to being able to deduct about $ of the investment cost. Similarly if the student is paying tax at less than percent then the credit provides more than a full deduction ( i.e. a tax subsidy ) Overall the tax system in place prior to can be characterized as relatively inefficient with respect to investment in physical and human capital Changes to this system were and are still necessary to eliminate distortions that keep the economy from reaching its full potential Pro-Growth Changes Since A number of pro-growth tax initiatives have been proposed and signed into law by President Bush since The initiatives enacted include provisions aimed at reducing the double taxation of corporate profits by lowering the tax rate on dividends and capital gains ; temporary bonus depreciation ; expansion of deductibility of higher education costs ; and several smaller provisions aimed at encouraging investment. Taken together these reforms reduced the effect of taxes on investment decisions Reducing the Double Tax on Corporate Profits The Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of ( JGTRRA ) proposed and signed by President Bush reduced the double tax on corporate profits by lowering the top individual tax rate on dividends and capital gains to percent through These changes promoted economic growth by increasing capital in the corporate sector and improving the allocation of capital throughout the economy. As shown in Chart in the quarters preceding JGTRRA real private nonresidential investment fell at an average annual rate of about percent and annual real GDP growth averaged percent. In the quarters after JGTRRA was enacted real private nonresidential investment grew at an average annual rate of about | Economic Report of the President percent with annual real GDP growth averaging percent. While it is too early to estimate the full effect of pro-growth tax policy on GDP recent estimates suggest that without the tax cuts the economy would have had as many as million fewer jobs and real GDP would have been as much as to percent lower by the end of Several studies indicate that prior to JGTRRA corporations had been steadily reducing dividend payments. The reason is that the tax system resulted in a strong tax bias in favor of retained earnings and capital gains Since passage of JGTRRA there has been an increase both in the average amount of corporate dividend payments ( Chart ) and in the percent of firms paying dividends ( Chart ) Reducing the double tax on corporate profits also slightly reduced tax-motivated incentives for debt finance because it reduced the effective marginal tax rate on equity finance. As seen in Chart the effective marginal tax rate on equity-financed corporate investment is now about percent a drop of about percent from the pre-2001 effective tax rate. While this rate is still substantially higher than the effective tax rate on debt-financed corporate investment the relative reduction reduced the distortion between debt and equity finance A major challenge facing this pro-growth change is the impermanence of the capital gains and dividend tax reductions. Originally scheduled to expire at the end of both provisions were recently extended until the end of in the Tax Increase Prevention and Reconciliation Act of ( TIPRA ) For Chapter | these changes to have lasting effects on investment and economic growth these pro-growth policies should be made permanent | Economic Report of the President Increasing the Deductibility of Capital Investment Another pro-growth change proposed and signed into law by President Bush was the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act of ( JCWAA ) This act included a provision for temporary bonus depreciation which allowed taxpayers an additional first-year depreciation deduction of percent from taxable income. In JGTRRA included a modification to the JCWAA bonus depreciation provision allowing taxpayers to take a first-year depreciation deduction of percent from taxable income. Both provisions were temporary and expired at the end of because the purpose of these provisions was to provide a temporary investment stimulus to speed economic recovery and promote short-term economic growth. By allowing investors to deduct more of the cost of investment from taxable income in the year of acquisition these provisions had the effect of lowering by one-half or more the effective marginal tax rate on qualifying investment Removing Distortions to Human Capital Investment President Bush proposed and signed into law a number of provisions that reduced tax distortions affecting human capital investment decisions. Among these provisions were statutory changes that allow households to deduct ( within limits ) higher education costs ; an expansion of the deductibility of student loan interest payments ; and an expansion of the full deductibility of employer-provided education expenses to include workers pursuing graduate school education. Other changes include an increase in the amount of money a household can contribute to a Coverdell ESA ; the removal of tax considerations from higher education costs paid through qualified tuition programs ( Section plans ) ; an increase in the amount of costs eligible for the Lifetime Learning credit ; and an expansion of eligibility for these various education provisions Other Changes Other changes that have been signed into law by President Bush over the past years are tax credits aimed at encouraging research investment ; an expansion of full deductibility of the acquisition cost of tangible property for small business ( called Section expensing ) ; full deductibility of brownfields projects ; and full deductibility of certain oil exploration costs. Some of these changes stimulated investment and greater short-run economic growth. Unfortunately the temporary nature of many of these provisions reduces their potential to stimulate long-run efficiency gains to investment and economic growth Chapter | Incremental Approaches to a More Pro-Growth Tax System Many economists agree that adopting a broad-based consumption tax would benefit the economy. There is a substantial body of research that estimates the economy-wide growth effects of this broad pro-growth tax reform The estimated effects can vary widely depending on the type of model used and the policy change considered. For example when considering the transition to a pro-growth consumption tax estimates of the short-run increase in the capital stock range from about percent to about percent with estimates of the long-run increase in the capital stock ranging from about percent to about percent. As a result of capital deepening ( the increase in capital per worker ) the long-run increase in real gross domestic product is estimated in the range of about percent to about percent ( about $ billion to about $ trillion in GDP ) In the absence of such broad reform and the transition to a consumption tax base there are two primary alternatives for adopting a more pro-growth tax system. One is to allow investors to completely deduct ( fully expense ) or substantially deduct ( partially expense ) the cost of their investments in the year in which the investments are made. The other alternative is to lower the statutory tax rate on investment income by reducing or eliminating the tax rate on corporate income capital gains and dividends or a mixture of both Both of these approaches would reduce the amount of tax paid on an investment return lowering the pretax rate of return necessary to undertake new investment. If one of the objectives of pro-growth tax policy is to move incrementally to a more efficient consumption-based tax system then expensing does a better job than rate reductions of meeting this objective. Indeed full expensing of investment is a necessary component of a consumption tax base By contrast reducing the statutory corporate tax rate or eliminating the tax on capital gains and dividends could be accomplished under the existing hybrid tax system There are a number of reform options that contain elements of these approaches. One option is a value-added tax ( VAT ) that replaces all or part of the corporate income tax ; another the Growth and Income Tax ( GIT ) proposed by the President s Tax Reform Panel would lower effective marginal tax rates on new investment. Other options focus on household saving as a means to remove investment distortions. However compared to a VAT or the GIT these options would provide relatively less stimulus for domestic growth within a rapidly expanding global market. The reason is that focusing on savings incentives tends to ignore the full effects that capital has on the economy. By reducing taxes on investment the economy develops more capital increasing labor productivity and wages. In addition reducing | Economic Report of the President effective tax rates on investment attracts more foreign investment because U.S.-based investment would offer relatively higher after-tax rates of return ( See Chapter International Trade and Investment for a discussion of the benefits to the U.S. of foreign investment. ) Expanding savings incentives can provide capital deepening but it will not encourage greater investment by foreign investors who do not receive the benefits of the reform. This section focuses on pro-growth options that would have the greatest impact on economic growth Expensing of Investment Allowing investors to fully deduct the cost of an investment from taxable income is called full expensing of investment. As shown in Box in the absence of other taxes full expensing reduces the tax paid on the normal return to capital investment to zero completely removing taxes from the investment decision. This happens for two reasons. First all assets face the same effective tax rate zero so that taxes no longer influence the decision about where or in what to invest. This results in a more efficient allocation of capital. Second with full expensing there is no difference between the pretax and after-tax rates of return to investment. As a result taxes do not discourage capital formation It is important to note that full expensing is equivalent to not taxing the ordinary normal return ( or opportunity cost ) of new investment. As shown in Box the reason is that full expensing is equivalent to an interest-free loan on the value of foregone tax liability. To see this result consider the example in Box Under the income tax the firm pays $ in tax on the cost of the investment whereas under full expensing the tax liability on the cost of the investment is zero. Assuming that the pretax return of percent equals the normal opportunity cost of funds the deferral of tax liability is worth $ to the firm which is exactly equal to the tax on the investment return. Because the opportunity cost of this loan is equal to the normal return to the investment full expensing of investment costs is equivalent to excluding the normal return portion of capital income from taxation However returns in excess of the opportunity cost ( called supra-normal returns ) are still subject to taxation. For our example if the total return of percent is composed as a normal return of percent and a supra-normal return of percent then the deferral of tax liability is worth $ to the firm This is equivalent to the firm paying $ in tax which is a tax of exactly percent on the $ supra-normal return Partial expensing of investment occurs when something less than percent of an asset s purchase price is excluded from taxable income in the year the asset is purchased. Partial expensing reduces but does not eliminate the amount of tax paid on the return to capital investment because costs Chapter | Box : Investment Returns Under Different Tax Systems : A Numerical Example Suppose a firm undertakes an investment in a new machine that costs $ and that earns a pretax rate of return of percent. Assume that the machine does not depreciate in value and that the firm sells the machine for $ after year. Under a system with a corporate income tax and no expensing the after-tax cost of the machine is $ because the firm receives no deduction from taxable income when it purchases the machine. At the end of the year the firm deducts the cost of the machine from the firm s total income and has a net income of $ With a corporate tax rate of percent the firm pays $ ( percent of $ ) in tax to the government. This leaves the firm with $ in after-tax income and results in an after-tax rate of return of percent on its investment of $ The corporate income tax creates a percentage point tax wedge between the pretax rate of return ( percent ) and the after-tax rate of return ( percent ) on the investment With full expensing the firm deducts the cost of the machine from taxable income at the time of purchase. This means the firm s after-tax cost of the machine is only $ As before the firm then sells the machine at the end of the year for $ Under full expensing the entire $ is included in taxable income because the firm deducted the cost of the machine when it was purchased. This means the firm pays $ ( percent of $ ) in taxes and makes an after-tax profit of $ The firm earns an after-tax rate of return of percent on the $ investment which equals the pretax rate of return. Because the firm is not taxed on the investment s return the result is an effective marginal tax rate of zero In contrast consider what happens when the government lowers the corporate tax rate to percent but allows no expensing. The firm sells the machine at the end of the year for $ and pays tax of $ ( percent of $ ) As such the firm s after-tax rate of return is percent and the tax wedge between the pretax and after-tax rate of return is percentage points. Lowering the corporate tax rate reduces the disincentive to invest but does not eliminate it unless the statutory tax rate is reduced to zero. By comparison reducing the statutory corporate marginal tax rate to percent would be equivalent in terms of the effective tax rate to about percent partial expensing of investment costs | Economic Report of the President Income Tax versus Pro-Growth Tax : A Numerical Example Cost of machine Pre-tax rate of return Value of asset in year Corporate rate tax Income tax : Net taxable income = Selling price Cost of asset Taxes owed = Corporate tax rate * Profit After-tax return = Net income Taxes owed After-tax rate of return = After-tax return / Cost of machine EMTR on investment income * = Tax paid / Investment income $ % $ % $ $ $ % * $ $ $ $ $ $ / $ % $ / $ % Pro-growth tax : Expensing New cost of machine = Old cost of machine * ( corp rate ) $ * ( % ) Net taxable income Taxes owed % * $ After-tax return $ $ $ After-tax rate of return $ / $ EMTR on investment income $ / $ $ $ $ $ % % Corporate rate cut ( new rate = % ) Net taxable income Taxes owed After-tax return After-tax rate of return EMTR on investment income $ $ % * $ $ $ $ / $ $ / $ $ $ $ % % * Note : EMTR refers to the effective marginal tax rate Chapter | in excess of those expensed are still subject to the tax depreciation schedules resulting in an inefficient allocation of capital There are several advantages to adopting full expensing as part of the current tax system. First full expensing reduces the tax wedge between the pretax and the after-tax rates of return on investments resulting in a more efficient level and allocation of capital throughout the economy. Second if coupled with the repeal of capital gains and dividends taxes full expensing completely removes taxes from equity-financed investment decisions. Third full expensing reduces distortions that affect the financing of new investment by reducing incentives to debt-finance investment. Fourth expensing is an integral part of many major tax reform proposals such as a transition to a VAT a consumed income tax or the GIT. Overall full expensing greatly simplifies the tax system and is an important step in the transition to a full consumption tax There are two important issues that must be resolved when adopting expensing as part of the tax system. The first issue is transition costs which pertain to how the tax system will treat existing capital called old capital at the time of the change. This is important because expensing can place a potentially heavy tax burden on the owners of existing capital. This tax burden arises because of the difference in the treatment of new capital ( which can be expensed ) and old capital ( which does not benefit from expensing ) As shown in Box the after-tax rate of return on new investment rises with full expensing. The increase makes new investment projects relatively more attractive to investors than purchasing existing capital projects. Consequently the relative value of the existing capital at the date of the change must fall in order for old capital to earn the same after-tax rate of return as an investment in new capital. The decline in value is equivalent to an unavoidable tax on existing capital and is considered a transition cost of full expensing The second issue is the treatment of interest payments under full or partial expensing. If expensing is to result in taxes being neutral in investment decisions interest payments must be taken out of the tax system. Otherwise expensing could result in negative tax rates and overinvestment in capital Removing interest from the tax base means that borrowers can not deduct interest payments from taxable income. Similarly lenders would not include interest payments in taxable income. The elimination of interest deductibility would help to equalize the tax treatment of different types of financing and would reduce tax distortions in investment decisions. However excluding financial transactions from taxation could create difficulties for financial services businesses and result in opportunities for tax arbitrage forming or consolidating businesses to take advantage of the difference in tax rates as the basis for profit. The taxation of financial services under a consumption tax is a perennially thorny problem that has yet to admit of an easy solution | Economic Report of the President Reducing Statutory Tax Rates An alternative to expensing of investment is to reduce statutory tax rates on investment income. Unless the tax rate is reduced to zero however lowering the statutory tax rate will not completely eliminate distortions affecting capital investment decisions. As discussed in Box the effect of lower statutory rates on investment is similar to that of partial expensing of investment. Lowering the statutory tax rate on investment can take many forms lowering the corporate tax rate lowering individual tax rates reducing or eliminating the tax rate on capital gains and dividends or some combination of these. All of these alternatives have the effect of reducing tax distortions on investment decisions but the economic effects will differ according to which tax rates are reduced One of the biggest misconceptions about pro-growth tax policy is that reducing the statutory corporate tax rate only benefits corporations. The main problem with this argument is that corporations are pure legal entities that can not themselves bear the burden of taxes. It is households in their role as owners and users of corporate capital who benefit from the reduction in corporate tax rates. As discussed in Box corporate tax burdens are distributed across all households. The long-run effect of reducing the corporate tax rate is to increase the capital stock making labor more productive. Ultimately reducing corporate taxes benefits labor through higher wages and benefits capital owners through higher after-tax returns An important goal of pro-growth tax policy is to promote a tax system that does not create distortions that affect the structure of business formation or business investment. By reducing statutory tax rates for corporations or households in an uncoordinated way the tax system can create incentives that favor certain forms of business. For example consider reducing the maximum effective corporate tax rate below the maximum effective individual tax rate This would make it relatively more attractive for businesses to incorporate rather than form as a sole proprietorship or partnership ( which pay tax using individual rate schedules ) Consolidating the business and individual tax bases would reduce or remove taxes from consideration in business decisions Reducing individual tax rates can also reduce tax considerations from capital investment decisions. Perhaps the most direct way to stimulate greater individual saving and investment is to reduce or eliminate the tax rate on capital gains and dividends. This is important because even with full expensing the effective tax rate on investment is positive as long as there are taxes on capital gains and investment income. Consider two effects from the recent reduction in taxes on capital gains and dividends. First there was an overall reduction in taxes on corporate income which stimulated greater investment. Second the changes reduced the tax distortion that favored returns in the form of capital gains. Prior to JGTRRA the double tax on corporate income was as high as percent and percent for corporate Chapter | Box : Who Bears the Burden of Corporate Taxes ? One key tenet of public economics is that businesses do not pay taxes people do. Businesses organize capital and labor to produce goods and services used throughout the economy and consumed by households. But businesses are owned by individuals hire individuals as workers and sell to individual consumers. While firms remit business taxes to the government it is individuals who bear the burden ( or incidence ) of business taxes. Investors may bear the burden through lower after-tax returns to investment workers through lower wages and consumers through higher prices Tax law provides no insight as to who bears the burden of the corporate tax. A corporation can be viewed as an institution comprised of its owners and creditors wage earners and customers. In this sense everyone belongs to the institution so everyone consequentially bears some portion of the tax burden. An important question is whether the tax burden is primarily borne by owners of capital or by labor. In analyzing the incidence of the corporate tax between capital and labor it is important to distinguish between the short-run versus the long-run burdens. In the short run increases in the corporate tax are borne by current owners of corporate capital through a drop in asset values and by investors through lower after-tax rates of return. In the long run labor bears most of the burden of the corporate tax. This is because for taxes on capital income an increase in the effective tax rate on new saving and investment leads to a reduction in capital accumulation. The resulting decline in the capital-to-labor ratio decreases labor productivity and leads to a fall in wages income distributed as capital gains and dividends respectively. After JGTRRA the double tax on corporate income fell to about percent and percent for capital gains and dividends respectively. As shown in Charts to following JGTRRA real private nonresidential investment rose substantially and there was an increase in the average amount of dividend payments and the percent of firms paying dividends Comparison of Effects of Different Pro-Growth Policies The primary objective of pro-growth tax policy is to stimulate new investment. New investment leads to a larger capital stock increases in productivity higher wages and economic growth. Full expensing of investment does a | Economic Report of the President better job than rate cuts in meeting this objective. As noted above rate cuts reduce but do not eliminate the effect of taxes on new investment decisions In addition a tax rate reduction applies to all investments new and old alike By contrast full expensing is carefully targeted towards removing tax considerations from new investment decisions One method of comparing policies is to estimate bang for the buck measures that show the amount of investment stimulus per dollar of tax cost These measures are derived by using sophisticated macroeconomic models to simulate the effect of pro-growth policy changes assuming that each policy change has the same budget effect. As shown in Table full expensing provides investment incentives that are times as large per dollar of revenue cost TABLE Effective Marginal Tax Ratestax Capital Income of Corporations compared to reductions in corporate on rates. The reason for this difference is that much of the revenueby Asset Type statutory rate reductions is from cost from reducing taxes on existing capital. Because expensingEffective marginal new capital applies to tax rate ( % ) Asset type only the potential for economic growth is much greater with expensing than Computers and peripheral equipment............................................................. for reductions in the statutory tax rates that have Inventories the same revenue cost Land As discussed above a major issue with expensing is the29.7 transition cost Automobiles Educational buildings during the transition to full imposed on existing capital. It is possible that Residential buildings expensing the government could provide tax relief to the owners of existing Medical equipment and instruments............................................................... Light trucks ( incl. utility vehicles ) this type of capital. However the revenue cost of providing transition relief Household appliances Aircraft.............................................................................................................. that could reduce the incen14.5 would require rate increases or other tax changes Railroad equipment tive to invest in new capital projects. Estimates Petroleum and natural gas structures .............................................................of the cost of transition relief range from about percentage point to about percentage points of the longSource : Congressional Budget Office run increase in real GDP depending on how and for how long transition relief is paid. Thus it is possible that providing transition relief to owners of existing capital could eliminate all of the efficiency gains from adopting a more pro-growth tax system TABLE Effective Marginal Tax Rates on Investment Effective marginal tax rate on investment Current law Policy change : % expensing % expensing Corporate tax rate lowered to % Tax rate on dividends and capital gains lowered to % Bang for the Buck : investment incentive relative to revenue cost ( present value ) % % % % % % % % % Source : Department of the Treasury ( Office of Tax Analysis ) Chapter | Conclusion The goal of pro-growth tax policy is to finance a given level of government services in a way that minimizes the drag imposed on the economy by tax distortions on investment decisions of households and businesses. Of particular importance is the effect a tax system may have on capital investment decisions. Taxing capital in a way that distorts investment decisions can affect the level allocation and financing of new projects. Reducing the tax on capital income will lead to a larger capital stock and higher standards of living. With more capital available labor becomes more productive and real wages rise An incremental approach to pro-growth tax policy would be a transition to a tax system that allows full expensing of capital investment. Research indicates that we could expect up to a 8-percent increase in long-run real GDP from adopting the pro-growth policy of full expensing. Full expensing provides relatively more bang for the buck because it targets new investment whereas rate cuts benefit old and new capital alike Reducing or eliminating distortionary capital taxation leads to a more efficient level and allocation of capital throughout the economy. This increase in efficiency in turn results in higher productivity GDP and standards of living While there have been recent changes to a more pro-growth tax system the temporary nature of the provisions reduces the long-run impact of these policy changes on investment and economic growth. Making these changes permanent would ensure a tax system that minimizes tax distortions to investment decisions that can keep the economy from reaching its long-run potential | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R The Fiscal Challenges Facing Medicare S ocial Security Medicare and Medicaid are three vital entitlement programs in the United States that provide people with important economic security against the financial risk associated with retirement disability and medical expenses. In the Federal Government spent $ trillion on these entitlement programs ; this amount is projected to grow to $ trillion by In the absence of reforms to either raise more revenue or restrain future spending excess growth in entitlement spending will need to be offset by reductions in discretionary spending putting significant pressure on other important programs. As history has shown there is no uncontroversial way to reform these entitlement programs. Reforms to increase tax revenue will have negative effects on the economy. At the same time it is crucial that any spending reforms preserve the protection against financial risk that these programs provide. Thus improving the efficiency of these programs is crucial to slowing the growth of entitlement spending This chapter focuses on Medicare. It begins with a brief overview of the program and then examines the main reasons for the projected financial pressures facing Medicare. It concludes with a discussion of ways to improve the efficiency of Medicare spending and thus the long-term financial outlook of this important program. The key points in this chapter are : The projected long-term growth in entitlement spending including Medicare is unsustainable because of the pressures it places on future Federal budgets and by implication on the economy Medicare spending is growing quickly primarily because of the demographic shift to an older society and the increases in per-beneficiary medical spending driven largely by new technologies Rewarding providers for supplying higher quality care and improving incentives for patients to choose higher value care can both increase the efficiency and slow the growth of Medicare spending Entitlement Spending and Medicare Social Security Medicare and Medicaid are entitlement programs ; that is individuals who are eligible for these programs are entitled to particular benefits. Social Security provides income to seniors the disabled and surviving spouses and dependents. Medicare provides health insurance to retirees and the disabled. Medicaid provides health insurance to certain lower income groups. Workers and their spouses are entitled to receive Social Security and Medicare benefits if they make sufficient payroll contributions while working and citizens and qualified aliens are entitled to Medicaid benefits if they meet certain income and other demographic criteria Chart shows spending on Social Security Medicare and Medicaid in as a percent of the total Federal budget. The $ billion in Federal spending on Social Security benefits was percent of total Federal outlays The $ billion in federal spending on Medicare benefits was percent of outlays. The $ billion in federal spending on Medicaid was percent of outlays. Because Medicaid is jointly funded by the Federal and State governments State governments also spent about $ billion on Medicaid For those not covered by Medicare or Medicaid the federal government also helps with the purchase of private health insurance coverage in a variety of ways including the exclusion of employer contributions towards health insurance premiums from personal income taxes. These tax expenditures are included in the Federal budget and are estimated to equal $ billion in The President s budget includes a proposal to replace the existing exclusion for employer-provided health insurance with a flat standard deduction to all families who purchase health insurance that meets minimum requirements for catastrophic coverage in order to improve the efficiency and equity of these tax expenditures. The President s policy proposal is described in Box | Economic Report of the President Box : The President s Proposal to Improve the Tax Treatment of Private Health Insurance The current tax treatment of private health insurance coverage is both inequitable and inefficient. Employer contributions ( and in most cases employee contributions ) toward private health insurance coverage are exempt from income and payroll taxes. This is inequitable because it does not offer the same tax break to families that do not have access to employment-based insurance and instead purchase a private plan in the individual health insurance market. It is also inefficient because it provides a larger tax break to families with more generous health insurance policies which in turn can drive the inefficient use of medical care of low value. For more detail about these inefficiencies see Chapter of the Economic Report of the President The President s Budget has proposed reforming the current open-ended tax exclusion for employment-based health insurance coverage effective in with a flat $ standard deduction for health insurance to all families ( or $ for individuals ) whether that insurance was obtained through their employer or on their own. The amount of this standard deduction would be independent of the actual amount spent on the premium so families who obtain insurance policies for less than $ ( but satisfying a set of minimum requirements for catastrophic coverage ) would still be able to exempt the full $ of compensation from income and payroll taxes. The annual increase in the standard deduction for health insurance would be linked to the Consumer Price Index and the policy would be roughly budget neutral This policy would reduce inequity in the tax code by providing the same tax treatment of health insurance purchases to families with or without access to employment-based health insurance. Those who are currently insured in the individual health insurance market would see a reduction in taxes commensurate with those insured in the group market and those who are currently uninsured would be given a strong incentive to purchase coverage. For instance for an uninsured family of four with $ in income facing a percent marginal income tax rate and a percent total combined payroll tax the value of the $ exclusion would be worth about $ and would thus offset the cost of roughly half of a health insurance plan costing $ This policy would also reduce the inefficiency of the current tax treatment of employment-based health insurance. An insured wage-earning family of four with $ in income currently receives a tax break of about $ toward a $ policy but about $ toward a continued on the next page Chapter | Box continued $ policy because the current value of their exemption equals their roughly percent marginal tax rate times the actual amount of the premium. The advantage of the standard deduction policy is that it provides the same tax treatment to all types of health insurance plans While it would provide a strong incentive to obtain at least some basic level of coverage it would not encourage families to obtain inefficiently expensive health insurance that covers low-value services Spending on Social Security Medicare and Medicaid is projected to increase and claim an even more significant share of the federal budget in the future. Examining total spending as a fraction of gross domestic product ( GDP ) is especially relevant because this measures the portion of the overall economy devoted to each particular program. For instance Social Security spending was percent of GDP in and is projected to be percent of GDP in Total Medicare spending was percent of GDP in and is projected to be percent of GDP in Total health care spending in the United States by private and public sources combined was percent of GDP in equaling almost $ trillion or $ per person. Although national health expenditures have grown at a slower rate than the previous year for the prior years health spending has still consistently grown at a faster rate than general inflation While Social Security Medicare and Medicaid share some common features each also poses its own opportunities and challenges warranting detailed specific analysis. Chapter of the Economic Report of the President examined Medicaid coverage for low-income families Chapter of the Economic Report of the President examined Social Security and Chapter of the Economic Report of the President examined health care spending generally. This chapter focuses primarily on Medicare The Basics of Medicare A primary motivation behind the passage of Medicare in was that many of the elderly at the time had no health insurance. Medicare was structured to mimic the prevalent form of private health insurance at the time Blue Cross and Blue Shield. Blue Cross plans covered inpatient hospital services and Blue Shield plans covered physician and hospital outpatient services The Blues were the basis for separate Part A and Part B plans that reimburse hospitals and physicians on a fee-for-service basis respectively. Seniors who have worked at least quarters in qualified employment are automatically | Economic Report of the President enrolled in Part A at age Seniors who lack quarters of employment can buy into Part A by paying a monthly premium. People under the age of with certain disabilities or end-stage renal disease are also eligible for Medicare. Enrollment in Part B is optional and requires a premium contribution although there is a penalty for not immediately enrolling and the amount is higher for individuals making more than $ per year. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ( CMS ) administers the Medicare program by implementing the statutes that determine the form of payments to hospitals physicians and outpatient providers Most outpatient prescription drugs were not covered by Medicare until the implementation of the Medicare Modernization Act ( MMA ) of which created Part D of Medicare. Like Part B Part D is optional requires a premium contribution and has a penalty for late enrollment. Unlike Part B however Part D is administered by private health insurance plan sponsors Seniors have the alternative option of enrolling in a private Medicare Advantage insurance plan if one exists in their region. These are private health insurance plans that provide Part A Part B and in most cases Part D services. These plans often provide additional benefits to seniors at lower costs The Medicare Advantage program is described in more detail in Box Box : The Medicare Advantage Program Approximately percent of Medicare beneficiaries are enrolled in private managed-care health plans including primarily health maintenance organizations ( HMOs ) but also preferred provider organizations ( PPOs ) and private fee-for-service plans. These Medicare Advantage plans contract with Medicare to provide the services covered by Part A and Part B and usually offer additional benefits such as relatively lower cost sharing and additional covered services. Enrollment into these plans is voluntary but requires that a local plan is available. As of all Medicare beneficiaries had the option of enrolling in a Medicare Advantage plan including plans that provide prescription drug coverage Prior to Medicare HMOs received a capitated payment based on percent of the average Medicare beneficiary spending in the county adjusted only for age gender Medicaid enrollment and disability status. Studies suggest that healthier beneficiaries were more willing to enroll in these plans because HMOs typically place restrictions on care As a result the program increased total Medicare expenditures because the payments to the HMOs were generally higher than the actual costs of their enrollees in the fee-for-service program continued on the next page Chapter | Box continued The Balanced Budget Act eliminated the direct link between plan payment rates and local fee-for-service expenditures and sought to expand the types of plans available to beneficiaries beyond the urban areas where they had generally been available. The Balanced Budget Act also mandated the use of risk adjustment to vary the payments to insurers based upon the health status of its enrollees by As a result incentives to engage in wasteful competition for relatively healthier enrollees were mitigated so that insurers would instead engage in competition to provide higher value care at a lower cost for all enrollees. Because of some of the limits on the growth in payments in the Balanced Budget Act many private insurers withdrew from the Medicare market. Enrollment declined by about percent from to The Medicare Modernization Act expanded the Medicare Advantage program in two important ways ( in addition to changing the name from Medicare+Choice to Medicare Advantage ) First the Medicare Modernization Act increased the payment levels to the plans to encourage participation across all Medicare Advantage plans. Second the Medicare Modernization Act created new regional preferred provider organizations that offer a uniform deductible and an upper limit on out-of-pocket spending to increase both the number of choices available to Medicare beneficiaries ( especially in rural areas ) and special needs plans to target certain beneficiaries ( such as those with dual eligibility those with chronic conditions and the institutionalized ) Medicare spending is financed by a combination of payroll taxes general revenue and premiums paid by beneficiaries. Part A of Medicare is financed by a Hospital Insurance ( HI ) payroll tax of percent. The HI payroll tax is split evenly between employees and employers but economists generally believe the employer tax is ultimately paid by workers in the form of relatively lower wages. Part A is a pay-as-you-go system in which payroll taxes on current workers wages finance the benefits of those currently retired. If the payroll tax revenues exceed spending for the year the difference is placed into the HI Trust Fund. If taxes are lower than spending money is withdrawn from the HI Trust Fund. Parts B and D constitute the Supplementary Medical Insurance component of Medicare and are financed by general Federal government revenues and beneficiary premiums which are set to equal approximately percent of total Part B and Part D spending respectively | Economic Report of the President Nations around the world provide various forms of social insurance for their elderly populations. One of the purposes of health insurance is to ensure that people are protected against the financial risk associated with uncertain medical spending. Economists generally attempt to justify government intervention into private market outcomes by suggesting potential market failures that may exist in the absence of any government intervention. Many economists would justify the existence of Medicare ( and its government provision of health insurance for the elderly and disabled ) with three potential explanations. The first potential explanation is that many people may lack sufficient information to plan properly for the financial hardships that would otherwise arise from expensive medical treatment when they age or become disabled Medicare requires workers to pay a premium during their working years toward future costs and thus the program can be considered a form of forced savings. In this way Medicare is similar to Social Security which requires people to set aside some of their wages now in exchange for a promise of income at retirement. But this reason alone is insufficient to explain the provision of health insurance as opposed to additional income A second potential explanation for government intervention in the provision of health insurance for seniors is to avoid having seniors in poor health pay considerably more toward their health care. In the United States most people participate in health insurance plans through their place of employment. Most people lose these plans upon retirement. ( Private retiree health insurance plans only cover what Medicare does not. ) Because about percent of people at age have at least one serious preexisting chronic health condition initiating coverage in a private individual health insurance market after retirement ( under the assumption that the Medicare program did not exist ) would force insurers to charge higher premiums to those in poor health. Younger people face uncertainty that they may develop a chronic condition in the future ( and thus they would face variable premiums in the absence of Medicare ) This suggests that there may be efficiency gains from providing future insurance coverage with pooled contributions. ( Private health insurance markets handle this intertemporal uncertainty of developing a chronic health condition with guaranteed renewal at class average rates provisions that ensure that premiums do not vary with the onset of illness for those with coverage. ) A third potential explanation for government intervention in the provision of health insurance is related to the redistribution of resources toward lowincome people. Economic theory suggests that unconditional transfers of wealth are generally more efficient than in-kind transfers of goods or services for achieving any desired redistribution. In an ideal world the poor would use some of this transferred wealth to purchase health insurance. However if the poor believe that society will provide them with additional resources in the Chapter | event of an uninsured loss they may have an incentive to forego buying insurance. This precommitment problem sometimes called the Samaritan s Dilemma has been demonstrated to be alleviated by the direct provision of health insurance rather than a direct transfer of wealth. This economic argument however justifies the subsidization of or requirement for insurance but does not justify a government-run plan Increases in Medicare Spending over Time Projections of Future Medicare Spending and Revenue Sources of Spending Since Medicare was created in total spending on all of its programs has grown steadily. As noted above total Medicare spending was percent of GDP in and is projected to be percent of GDP in These values for Medicare spending however actually understate the total spending for Medicare beneficiaries because the private payments for cost sharing are not included. For instance in Part A requires individuals to pay $ of the cost of each hospitalization ( this $ is called a deductible ) and Part B generally requires them to pay percent of the Medicare-approved payment ( this percent is called coinsurance ) in addition to a deductible Some beneficiaries pay Medicare deductibles and coinsurance amounts from their own pockets while others obtain private insurance to cover these costs Some of this private coverage is included in employer-sponsored retirement benefits while some is provided by directly purchased Medigap plans. Some low-income Medicare beneficiaries are also eligible for Medicaid. For these dually eligible people Medicaid covers most of these cost-sharing amounts required by Medicare Chart shows historical and projected private and public spending for Medicare-covered services as a percentage of GDP for through Including private spending by Medicare beneficiaries and Medicaid spending on Medicare beneficiaries presents a more complete picture of beneficiaries total consumption. In beneficiaries bore about percent of Medicarerelated spending and about percent was financed by payroll taxes and general revenues. However these amounts shown here do not include the portion of Medicaid spending on long-term care services such as nursing homes because this type of care is not covered by Medicare. More detail about coverage of long-term care is provided in Box | Economic Report of the President Medicare Solvency The Medicare program does not have enough projected revenue to cover projected future spending. Under current projections made by the Medicare Actuaries and presented in the Medicare Trustees Report the Medicare HI Trust Fund is projected to be exhausted in The projected 75-year deficit for the Medicare HI Trust Fund is percent of taxable payroll. That is the Medicare HI payroll tax would have to be immediately increased from percent to percent to cover all projected spending over the next years. Alternatively a reduction in Medicare Part A expenditures by percent would be necessary to make the Medicare Trust Fund solvent. As a comparison this Medicare deficit is relatively larger in magnitude than the Social Security Trust Fund deficit. An increase in the Old Age Survivors and Disability Insurance ( OASDI ) payroll tax from percent to percent or a reduction in Social Security benefits by percent is projected to make the Social Security program solvent over years The Medicare Supplementary Medical Insurance ( SMI ) program is considered to be solvent by the Medicare Trustees only because Part B and Part D spending is required by law to be financed by general revenues However the consequences of increased spending on Medicare SMI may be Chapter | Box : Long-Term Care Nine million people use long-term care ( LTC ) to alleviate the hardships accompanying old age or disability. LTC is medical care required over a long period of time by someone with a chronic illness or disability. An estimated percent of people who reach the age of will need some form of LTC before they die. Medicare does not have a large LTC component as it only covers post-acute care in skilled nursing facilities and some home health care which total less than percent of all LTC. Private noninsured spending covers about percent of LTC expenditures while private insurance pays for less than percent. Many Medicare beneficiaries obtain LTC after they have depleted their assets and become eligible for Medicaid. Medicaid LTC eligibility is often tied to receiving Supplemental Security Income and having very few assets but states have the discretion of easing eligibility criteria. Medicaid covers over percent of all LTC expenditures. About one-third of Medicaid expenditures go to LTC The average price for year in a nursing home is $ This cost is high enough to strain even middle-income families yet few people prepare financially for potential LTC expenses. Studies generally attribute failure to purchase LTC insurance to a lack of awareness about the potential costs of LTC the benefits of coverage and a misperception that Medicare covers all LTC. Adverse selection in the market ( by those who expect to use long-term care being more likely to purchase insurance ) results in very high premiums and relatively fewer insurance companies offering LTC policies. Many seniors forgo obtaining private coverage and instead become Medicaid-eligible by sheltering their assets through income annuities trusts for their children and asset transfers to family members. In response to these loopholes States and the Federal government have tightened Medicaid eligibility Because of the pressure LTC places on State budgets many policymakers believe that changes should be made to LTC administration Encouraging the purchase of private long-term care insurance may be a valuable step in reducing Medicaid spending on LTC while protecting seniors from poverty. For example New York currently has a percent tax credit available toward the purchase of LTC insurance Such a subsidy should generally make LTC insurance more attractive to middle-aged people. Medicaid spend-down insurance which permits people who purchased and used LTC insurance to keep some assets and still qualify for Medicaid could also increase the attractiveness of private LTC coverage | Economic Report of the President just as dire. Without large reductions in Medicare SMI spending or increases in taxes either Federal budget deficits will grow rapidly or dramatic reductions in spending for other Federal programs will have to be made Spending on Medicaid is also funded by general revenues. The elderly and disabled covered by Medicare account for about one-quarter of Medicaid enrollees but they account for about two-thirds of Medicaid spending mainly because of spending on acute and long-term care. An additional challenge for funding Medicaid is the inverse relationship between the proportion of the population eligible for benefits and the tax base available to fund the program. During economic downturns lower personal income causes State governments with balanced-budget requirements to face the strain of both a decrease in tax revenue and a higher number of residents who meet the low-income eligibility threshold and are thus in need of assistance Implications for Reform In light of the mounting fiscal pressures on entitlement spending it is critical to increase the efficiency of spending on benefits. Reforms of the Medicare program should aim to reduce the growth of spending by redirecting resources toward the highest value uses and away from inefficient care of low value. Controlling cost growth while preserving the vital financial and health protections offered by the program is particularly important in light of the large negative consequences of raising taxes. An increase in the payroll tax rate would decrease incentives to work increase efforts to receive compensation in forms not subject to taxation and be a drag on economic growth As noted above Medicare taxes on current workers wages essentially fund an insurance pool from which benefits are paid on behalf of retired or disabled workers. A pay-as-you-go system of intergenerational transfers is consistent with the basic idea behind insurance if the aggregate amount paid into the pool ( in the form of taxes on workers ) equals the aggregate amount of expected benefits to be paid from the pool. In private insurance markets policyholders must have confidence that future claims will be covered by the insurer. To help alleviate consumer concerns government regulations often place solvency requirements on insurers that require them to have enough assets to cover their liabilities. Thus for Medicare s pay-as-you-go financing mechanism to function as a social insurance program younger generations must have confidence that the government will indeed meet its future insurance obligations to them. The rapid increase in Medicare spending over time clearly threatens the confidence that younger generations have in the solvency of the program. Indeed a recent survey found that almost two-thirds of workers are not too confident or not at all confident that Medicare will continue to provide benefits of at least equal value to the benefits received by retirees today Chapter | The next section of this chapter examines the reasons behind this projected growth in Medicare spending. The average annual growth rate of Medicare spending is projected to be percentage points higher than GDP growth per year between and Part of this increase in spending is due to growth in the number of Medicare beneficiaries and part of this increase in spending is due to growth in real ( inflation adjusted ) Medicare spending per beneficiary Reasons for the Changes in Medicare Spending over Time Increases in the Number of Medicare Beneficiaries The proportion of the United States population covered by Medicare has increased over time. This has resulted from the normal eligibility age remaining fixed at combined with the aging of the population. The aging of the population is due to both increased life expectancy and decreased fertility. In 65-year-old retirees could expect to live for more years ; by they could expect to live for more years. In the fertility rate was births per females aged to ; by it had fallen to births ( These changes in demographics have a similar effect on Social Security. ) The worker-per-beneficiary ratio illustrates the portion of the population which provides revenue to cover the needed spending on Medicare beneficiaries. In there were about workers for each Medicare beneficiary. In there were about workers for each Medicare beneficiary. In there are projected to be only workers for each Medicare beneficiary In addition to being affected by long-term increases in longevity and decreases in fertility the worker-per-beneficiary ratio during the upcoming years is also affected by the aging of the baby boom generation which is made up of those born between and ( The baby boom generation can be viewed as a temporary change in fertility rates. ) The baby boom generation explains the relatively steady worker-per-beneficiary ratio between and and the dramatically decreasing ratio between and After most benefits owed to the baby boom generation will have been paid and the worker-per-beneficiary ratio is projected to be relatively steady though as long as current assumptions hold Unlike Medicare the full retirement age for Social Security is for those born in and earlier and will rise slowly to for those born in or later. However the effect of increasing the eligibility age for Medicare would not have a very large effect on total Medicare spending because Medicare | Economic Report of the President spending increases with age as people become less healthy. For instance while people ages and represent about percent of the Medicare population they are the recipients of only about percent of total Medicare spending Increases in Spending per Beneficiary Real growth in Medicare spending per beneficiary has averaged about percent per year between and roughly percentage points greater than real per capita growth in GDP. For the Medicare Trustees Report the Medicare actuaries assume that the annual growth rate of Medicare spending per beneficiary during the period between and years from now will decrease to equal the growth rate of GDP per capita plus an average of percentage point. In addition to this so-called intermediate assumption these actuaries also consider a low-cost assumption in which annual Medicare spending growth equals per capita GDP growth and a high-cost assumption in which annual Medicare spending growth equals per capita GDP growth plus percentage points One way to evaluate the affordability of these projected increases in Medicare spending is to consider the effect of applying this growth rate to overall medical spending in the United States and examine the resulting growth in consumption of all other goods and services in the future economy ( that is nonmedical consumption ) One study estimated that applying the intermediate assumption of long-term medical spending growth equal to the growth rate of per capita GDP plus percentage point would still result in positive real growth in the level of nonmedical consumption over the next years. However the high-cost assumption of long-term medical spending growth equal to the growth rate of per capita GDP plus percentage points ( and as noted above roughly equal to the growth rate of Medicare spending in recent history ) would cause the level of real nonmedical consumption to increase only until year and decrease thereafter. During the period between and an average of over percent of the annual increase in income would be allocated toward health care spending Research suggests that most of the increase in medical spending over time has been driven by the advent of new technologies. New technologies make available new treatments some of which are more effective than others Research also suggests that the increased medical spending has on average resulted in improvements in health with additional value exceeding the additional costs. For instance the real cost of treating heart attacks increased by about $ for Medicare beneficiaries between and driven by technological advances such as catheterization and angioplasty. Life expectancy for heart-attack patients increased by about year during this same period. Although it is difficult to measure the value of human life and Chapter | it is not clear that this relationship is causal an estimate of the value of these added health benefits is about $ far in excess of the added costs Economists have suggested that an increase in medical spending over time is not necessarily problematic in and of itself so long as the marginal benefits exceed the marginal costs. A simple cross-national comparison of the fraction of GDP devoted to health care spending suggests that the United States is a high-expense outlier relative to other developed countries However it is plausible that the marginal benefits of improved health are dependent on income so that as a country s GDP increases it may be rational for that country to devote a relatively higher share of its GDP to health care This perspective suggests that it may make sense for the United States to spend more than other countries because it has higher per capita income and health care can be a valued use of those higher resources Improving the Efficient Allocation of Resources in Medicare The remainder of this chapter considers ways to improve the efficiency of spending in the Medicare program in order to slow the projected growth in spending. Policymakers face the challenge of enacting policies that limit inefficient health care spending but do not limit efficient health care spending or the development of beneficial new technologies. This section begins by providing several examples of sources of inefficiency in health care spending and concludes by suggesting several ways to improve the incentives that providers and Medicare beneficiaries face. Improving the efficiency of health care spending is critical to improving both the long-term fiscal strain on the Medicare program and the quality of care to patients and it is likely that a multipronged approach will be necessary Inefficient Health Care Spending While some of the greater health care spending may be attributed to technological improvements that enhance the quality of care and to increases in national wealth there are also many findings that are consistent with some degree of inefficiency associated with relatively higher health care spending Health outcomes in the United States are often not substantially better than those in other developed countries that spend far less on health care. The Rand Health Insurance Experiment found that increased medical spending led to only limited health improvements. The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care shows wide variations in Medicare spending within the United States without associated variation in health or health outcomes | Economic Report of the President It may at first appear to be difficult to reconcile the research findings that new technologies over time produce valuable health benefits with the research findings that higher spending does not yield better outcomes. It is likely that there is significant overconsumption of health care that provides little marginal benefit. Consider a costly new technology that provides very large health benefits to specific patients in need. Suppose however that it is also consumed by patients who benefit very little from the treatment. If the benefits to appropriate patients are very large the increase in spending over time on both appropriate and inappropriate patients combined can still imply that the new technology is cost effective. However because some inappropriate patients also receive the treatment some of the variation in spending is due to inefficiency. If this characterization is accurate the technology is not as cost effective as it should be This overconsumption of health care is frequently thought of as being caused by poor incentives such as overly generous health insurance coverage That is patients often face marginal prices for costly treatments that due to insurance coverage are lower than the true marginal costs of treatment. ( More detail on optimal forms of private health insurance and the effect of increasing cost sharing by consumers is provided in Chapter of the Economic Report of the President. ) The presence of generous health insurance may also influence the research and development of certain technologies with questionable cost effectiveness There is also evidence of significant underuse of valued health care. For example there is a large body of medical literature demonstrating the cost effectiveness of beta blockers for patients recovering from a heart attack. Due to their effectiveness they are prescribed in over percent of cases. However studies have shown that persistence in use of beta blockers declines rapidly even in the first year of treatment. Moreover the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends that all women over receive mammograms every to years that all adults over receive regular colorectal screenings to detect colon cancer and that all adults over receive annual immunizations against influenza. Compliance however is low : percent of women receive recommended mammograms percent of adults receive recommended colorectal cancer screenings and percent of adults over receive annual influenza vaccines These data suggest that there are two main ways in which the efficiency of Medicare spending could be improved because there is both a relationship between the insurer and beneficiaries and a relationship between the insurer and providers. One is to encourage the use of cost-effective care that is currently underconsumed. Medicare now covers an initial preventive physical examination and many preventive screenings but there are still potential improvements to be made. Policies to achieve this goal should aim to improve Chapter | the incentives for health care providers and insurers to provide high-quality care. A second way to improve the efficiency of Medicare spending is to discourage the use of ineffective care that is currently overconsumed. Policies to achieve this goal should aim to improve the incentives that Medicare beneficiaries face regarding their consumption of care. More detail on these policies is provided in the next two sections Better Incentives for Health Care Providers and Insurers Medicare generally pays providers of the same service the same fee regardless of the quality of care. If hospitals and physicians were paid amounts that reflected objective measures of the quality of care provided with differential payments tied to higher quality and more efficient care ideally many problems of underuse and misuse of care could be reduced. In practice while pay for performance holds a great deal of promise it may be difficult to fully implement because of the complexity of producing objective measures of quality. For instance tying payments to process measures such as rewarding cardiac physicians based on the proportion of their heart attack patients using beta blockers may cause providers to place too much emphasis on limited aspects of providing high-quality care. Alternatively tying payments to outcomes measures such as rewarding cardiac surgeons whose patients have lower post-discharge mortality rates may cause providers to face perverse incentives to avoid treating high-risk patients most in need. Adequate payfor-performance measures will require sophisticated techniques to control for underlying differences in patient health which highlights the importance of developing systems to collect detailed information about the kind of care that patients receive. With the advent and adoption of better health information technology and the development of rigorous and well-tested measures using pay-for-performance techniques to reimburse providers may become a vital contributor toward higher quality and more efficient care High-quality health care may also be encouraged by providing patients with valuable information so they may compare various providers to one another. Competition among health care providers may improve incentives to provide high-value care in two ways : higher quality and lower price. If patients have access to the providers price and quality information they will have incentives to choose those providers with the highest value of care and physicians and hospitals will have strong incentives to reduce their fees and improve the quality of care to attract more patients. There are two parts of Medicare where this kind of information is available and these incentives are in place. Private Medicare Advantage plans have strong incentives to offer higher quality care at lower beneficiary premiums to encourage enrollment The new Part D prescription drug benefit provides information about the | Economic Report of the President price of prescriptions by plan and by pharmacy provides access to customer service information by plan and also benefits from price competition among insurers. More detail on the structure of and experience with the new Medicare Part D benefit is provided in Box Box : Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Benefit The Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit went into effect January as a result of the Medicare Modernization Act Prior to that date there was almost no coverage for outpatient prescription drugs in Medicare except in Medicare Advantage plans. ( Part B does cover drugs in certain instances. ) Part D beneficiaries may now enroll in their choice of plans in their region. In the regions will offer between and standalone prescription drug plans at different prices with varying levels of coverage at or above the minimum benefit package. If an individual seeks greater benefits they will generally pay a higher premium. Individuals with incomes below percent of the Federal Poverty Level who meet eligibility requirements receive additional assistance in the form of reduced premiums deductibles and coinsurance. The premium subsidies are on a sliding scale to better target those with the lowest incomes. By June of over million Medicare beneficiaries had some form of prescription drug coverage One important feature of the Part D program is the competitive premium bidding process by insurers. Each year insurers submit premium bids for the following year to Medicare. These premium bids are weighted by enrollment to determine the weighted average bid ; this amount is referred to as the benchmark premium. The basic premium that nonpoor Medicare beneficiaries pay for a specific plan is the difference between the plan s bid and percent of the weighted average bid ( that is the federal direct subsidy ) Some low-income beneficiaries are automatically enrolled in plans whose premiums are at or below the regional enrollment-weighted average. Thus there are significant incentives for insurers to submit low bids. Early projections suggested that the average premium in would be $ per month but premiums ultimately averaged $ per month. In the average premium is expected to remain about the same Competitive bidding appears to be a successful model for providing low costs to both beneficiaries and the government without government interference in determining drug prices. Satisfaction with the Part D program is high. Several surveys have shown that at least percent of enrollees are pleased with the Part D benefit Chapter | Better Incentives for Medicare Beneficiaries In addition to the competition induced by the new Part D benefit its pricing structure and associated subsidy for premiums provide good incentives for Medicare beneficiaries to obtain relatively more efficient forms of insurance coverage. Because the Federal subsidy toward the prescription drug plan is generally a fixed proportion of the average premium bid each year beneficiaries receive the additional benefits of choosing plans that are less generous than the average benchmark plan. Thus beneficiaries appropriately receive the full marginal benefits from either a higher amount of cost sharing or a more restrictive list of covered medicines. This mechanism for having Medicare beneficiaries pay lower amounts for less generous coverage therefore improves the incentives for insurers to design more optimal products A potential downside to this mechanism for determining beneficiary premiums however is that it could lead to relatively higher premiums for people with higher expected expenses due to chronic health conditions if these high-risk people gravitate toward plans with relatively more generous benefits. As a result these plans higher premiums would reflect a relatively sicker pool of people covered by the plan in addition to the underlying value of more generous benefits. However these potential problems can be alleviated by the use of risk-adjusted payments to plans as described in Box This mechanism for determining the premium contribution toward different plans currently in place for Part D could potentially be applied to the entire Medicare program. Providing beneficiaries with a choice of comprehensive plans and having the premium contribution for each plan vary in relation to a benchmark plan has potential for improving the efficiency of overall Medicare spending. A key difference between Medicare Part D and the entire Medicare program however is the combination of the government-run fee-for-service and Medicare Advantage components of the latter. This benchmark mechanism is likely to be successful only if the same premium contribution is made toward both the fee-for-service component of Medicare and the private Medicare Advantage plans putting them on equal footing Just as described above this mechanism for determining premium contributions would cause beneficiaries to receive the appropriate marginal benefits when choosing plans with levels of coverage that are less generous than the benchmark plan. It could therefore help to allow beneficiaries to determine the optimal forms of out-of-pocket cost sharing and the optimal adoption of new technologies over time. These two specific issues are explored below Premiums versus Out-of-Pocket Payments The level of out-of-pocket cost sharing that would induce beneficiaries to consume the optimal level of care is difficult to determine. The share of outof-pocket spending that will lead to an efficient amount of care would be set | Economic Report of the President at the level at which the marginal cost of being exposed to more financial risk through relatively more cost sharing is less than the marginal benefits from reducing the overconsumption of medical care resulting from relatively more cost sharing. In practice it is difficult to quantify these competing interests Nevertheless Medicare currently may be missing this balance at both the high-cost and low-cost extremes. Medicare currently does not provide protection against certain catastrophic health care costs ( except in some Medicare Advantage plans ) For example there is increased beneficiary cost sharing after a hospitalization exceeds days and a cessation of benefits after days. While these upper limits on benefits presumably have the advantage of reducing incentives to over consume they appear to expose beneficiaries to excessively high levels of financial risk While many seniors have private retiree health or Medigap plans to cover Medicare s gaps in catastrophic coverage these plans also frequently cover the first-dollar cost sharing such as the hospitalization deductible and the percent of physician fees. These plans limit the cost-consciousness of consumers and therefore increase total spending. However neither insurers nor consumers bear the full marginal costs of the increased spending induced by these generous Medigap plans because Medicare covers most of the increased spending If beneficiaries were to receive the marginal benefits of less generous coverage in a way that puts the fee-for-service component and the Medicare Advantage component on equal footing there would be improved incentives for private plans to offer and beneficiaries to select plans with more efficient levels and forms of cost sharing. Beneficiaries rather than Medicare administrators should be the ones to decide the optimal mix of deductibles coinsurance and out-of-pocket maximums that best meets their needs and preferences under neutral incentives Appropriate Levels of Spending Over Time If Medicare beneficiaries were to receive the marginal benefits of choosing a more efficient plan the incentives to adopt costly new technologies would be improved over time. As noted earlier costly new technologies are efficient if the value of the additional benefits from improved health exceed the additional costs of that technology. People may not be willing to spend a great deal of money on new treatments with very minor benefits. If Medicare beneficiaries were to receive the marginal benefits when selecting less technology-intensive plans that delivered higher value care at lower cost the adoption of new technologies by health plans over time would be driven by whether new technology delivers substantial enough health benefits. As a result consumers rather than the government would decide the extent to which health care spending should increase over time Chapter | Conclusion Medicare has significant long-term unfunded obligations. Although Social Security spending is currently much greater than Medicare spending the unfunded obligation for Medicare is much greater than that for Social Security Eliminating the projected 75-year actuarial deficit for Medicare Part A would require an immediate percent increase in the HI payroll tax or a reduction in projected Medicare expenditures by percent. Projected increases in Medicare Supplementary Medical Insurance ( SMI ) funding may appear less transparent because they are funded out of general revenues but the economic significance of these obligations for Medicare SMI is just as great Policymakers face the challenge of reducing the growth of Medicare spending while preserving access to life-saving health care and the important financial protections that Medicare provides and they can not do so without ensuring that Medicare funds are spent more efficiently. Increases in Medicare spending over time are driven by an increasing population of aged Americans and increasing per-beneficiary spending on health care. While much of the increase in medical spending over time is driven by valuable new technologies there also appear to be significant inefficiencies in the system. Therefore future policies to control the growth in Medicare spending should target the sources of inefficient spending but not discourage the use medical care that is costly but delivers greater health benefits. This tension is the primary dilemma that policymakers face Policymakers may want to consider restructuring Medicare so that the direct spending by Medicare beneficiaries in the form of premium contributions and out-of-pocket spending for medical care yields a more efficient allocation of resources. Revising the Medicare fee-for-service program and the Medicare Advantage program to be more like Part D with a fixed-dollar subsidy provided toward the premium has the potential for improving incentives for Medicare beneficiaries to consume optimal levels of care. When individuals receive the full benefits of selecting less expensive coverage they will be more likely to select plans with optimal arrangements that balance both financial protection and technological adoption | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R Catastrophe Risk Insurance I nsurance plays a vital role in America s economy by helping households and businesses manage risks. Individuals purchase insurance so they can sleep well at night ; they gain comfort from the knowledge that they and their families are protected from some of the adverse effects of future events beyond their control. Businesses purchase insurance for much the same reason. It allows them to reduce the uncertainty associated with future costs and revenues which enables them to plan for the future more effectively. Today one can purchase insurance protection against a myriad of economic hazards from poor health to motor vehicle accidents to legal liability to lightning strikes Insuring economic losses arising from large-scale natural and manmade catastrophes such as earthquakes hurricanes and terrorist attacks poses special challenges for the insurance industry and for Federal and State governments. This chapter examines the economics of catastrophe risk insurance. It draws the following main conclusions In insurance markets as in other markets prices affect the way people weigh costs and benefits. Insurance prices that are artificially low can discourage people from adequately protecting against future losses. For example subsidized property insurance prices may stimulate excessive building in high-risk areas potentially driving up future government disaster relief spending Government intervention in insurance markets can have unintended consequences such as limiting the availability of insurance offered by private firms Private insurers manage catastrophe losses by being selective about which risks to insure by designing insurance contracts to provide incentives for risk-reducing behavior and by charging prices that are high enough to enable them to diversify risk over time or transfer risk to third parties By adopting private sector risk management and pricing practices government insurance programs could reduce the burden they impose on taxpayers and minimize negative effects on private insurance markets The Economics of Catastrophe Risk Insurance In the United States insurance is provided through a variety of private and public entities. Insurance companies owned by investors or policyholders sell insurance in the private sector. State-sponsored insurance pools have characteristics of both private and public entities. They are typically owned by a group of private insurers but they are governed under charters that grant them special rights and impose responsibilities not required of private insurers. Finally the Federal Government operates at least different programs that provide insurance-like benefits to individuals and businesses To understand how insurance works imagine a large group of homeowners scattered throughout the country each of whom faces a risk of property damage from a variety of identified hazards such as fire or severe weather. The likelihood that any particular member of the group will experience a loss is low but the economic costs to that individual should a loss occur are significant. Each member of the group can reduce uncertainty about future economic losses by agreeing to pool risk with other members. One way of accomplishing this is through a mutual insurance agreement. At the beginning of the year each member agrees to make a payment called an insurance premium into the pool. In exchange for their premiums members are allowed to file claims with the pool should their houses incur damage from a covered hazard. Even if the insurance pool has no other resources as long as the total value of premiums paid into the pool is at least as large as the value of insured losses over the year all property damage will be fully covered. In this way members of the pool gain security through diversification. Because any member s losses are paid for with premiums collected by all members no member faces uncertainty about how much he will have to pay to cover property damage in the coming year The process of evaluating a risk exposure determining whether or not to insure it and setting terms and conditions for any insurance provided is called underwriting. Through underwriting insurance providers seek to tie the premiums charged for insurance policies to the risks those policies cover Effective underwriting serves an important social function because when insurance prices accurately reflect underlying economic costs they can encourage a more efficient allocation of scarce resources. For example suppose a member of a coastal community must decide where to build a new home. She may prefer to live as close to the ocean as possible but a home located nearer the ocean may be exposed to a higher risk of damage from windstorms and flooding. If homeowners insurance premiums are appropriately risk sensitive then she will need to determine whether the benefits of living closer to the ocean are worth the cost of higher insurance premiums Underwriting is critical to the efficient functioning of insurance markets In general insurance markets function best under the following conditions : Either all members of a pool face similar risks or differences in risks can be observed and incorporated in insurance premiums Insurance does not dissuade those who are insured from avoiding risks The total value of insured losses for a pool can be forecast with precision | Economic Report of the President In many insurance markets one or both of the first two conditions may not hold. Violations of the third condition are a particular feature of catastrophe-risk insurance markets. Through effective underwriting insurers can reduce though perhaps not eliminate problems that arise when these conditions fail to hold Effective Underwriting Reduces Information Problems Insurance markets may fail to work effectively when differences in the risks faced by policyholders can not be incorporated in insurance premiums. To see why consider again the example of homeowners pooling risk. Suppose now that there are two types of homeowners : those who live in coastal areas that are at relatively high risk for windstorms and floods and those who live in inland areas at lower risk for these hazards. If all homeowners were charged the same insurance premium and if premiums were set equal to the average loss rate for all homes then homeowners in inland regions would rightly feel that they were being overcharged. They face less risk from windstorms and floods than owners in coastal regions yet they are asked to pay a premium equal to average losses for a pool that includes houses in both regions. Owners living in coastal areas would be attracted to the pool because it offers insurance at a premium that does not reflect their homes higher risk. If the insurance policy were offered to all homeowners a disproportionate share of those in coastal regions would accept the policy while a disproportionate share of those living inland would seek insurance elsewhere or would choose to go without insurance. As a result the average loss for those who chose to participate in the pool would be higher than the premium charged This example illustrates a general property of insurance contracts which economists call adverse selection. When premiums do not reflect differences in risk that are known to potential policyholders insurance pools tend to attract members who are at greatest risk for the hazards covered. The solution to this problem is to charge policyholders with different risk exposures different premiums. In the example above adverse selection could be avoided if homeowners in inland areas were charged lower premiums than those in coastal regions. Insurance providers generally try to set premiums commensurate with risk but this is not always possible. In some cases it may simply be too costly for an insurance provider to identify differences in risk but as discussed later in this chapter efforts by policymakers and insurance regulators to keep premiums for some high-risk policyholders low can also play a role Inefficiencies can also arise when insurance discourages those who are insured from taking actions to reduce potential losses. Consider the incentives faced by a homeowner thinking about how best to prepare for future windstorms. Many homeowners can reduce the damage caused by windstorms by installing storm shutters but storm shutters are costly. If a homeowner is fully insured against the economic losses arising from future windstorms she may Chapter | be less likely to purchase shutters. The tendency of those who are insured to work less hard to avoid losses is called moral hazard Insurance providers are well aware of the potential for moral hazard and they attempt to address it through effective underwriting. Many insurance policies only cover losses in excess of a specified amount called a deductible or they require that policyholders pay a fixed share of any losses incurred. By insuring some but not all economic losses these types of policies strengthen policyholders incentives to work to reduce the risks they face. Insurers may also require that specific action be taken as a precondition for receiving coverage or they might provide pricing incentives for risk-reducing investments. For example an insurer might refuse to cover windstorm risks for homes without storm shutters or it might charge those homeowners a higher premium Catastrophe Losses Are Difficult to Forecast Adverse selection and moral hazard problems are common in many insurance markets. Catastrophe risk insurers face an additional challenge which arises from the fact that the total value of losses for a pool of insured properties or individuals is often exceptionally difficult to predict Forecasting annual losses from hazards like automobile accidents that only affect one or two members of a pool at a time is much easier than forecasting losses from large-scale catastrophes such as floods hurricanes or terrorist attacks. When the losses incurred by individual members of an insurance pool are more or less independent of one another the average loss rate per policy is likely to be stable over time. Chart illustrates this point by showing the annual nationwide accident rate per registered passenger cars. While the accident rate has gradually declined over the past years it changes relatively little from year to year. It is difficult to predict whether any particular vehicle will be involved in an accident but based on the data presented we can forecast with high confidence that about percent of all passenger cars will be involved in some kind of accident over the next year. Because largescale catastrophes have the potential to affect many members of an insurance pool simultaneously spreading risk across a large number of members may not be sufficient to ensure that average losses per policy are stable over time Compare Chart with Chart Chart reports the number of loss claims filed per homes and businesses insured for flood losses under the Federal Emergency Management Agency s National Flood Insurance Program ( NFIP ) Flood losses are not independent of one another ; a single flood event can damage hundreds or even thousands of properties. Even though the NFIP insures a pool of millions of properties the average loss rate per policy varies considerably from year to year | Economic Report of the President Chapter | In some catastrophe-risk insurance markets forecast accuracy also suffers from a lack of relevant historical data and experience. This is a particular problem when catastrophes are rare and when the character of those events is likely to change over time. For example U.S. commercial property and casualty insurers had almost no experience forecasting losses from large-scale terrorist attacks prior to September A recent report by the President s Working Group on Financial Markets on the availability and affordability of insurance for terrorism risk found that while modeling of terrorism risk has improved since insurers continue to have limited confidence in the models they use for evaluating this risk exposure When annual losses for a pool can be forecast with reasonably high precision it is relatively easy for an insurance provider to manage risk. As long as its underwriting procedures ensure that the average premium paid by members of the pool is at least as large as the average loss rate per member it is likely that in any given year total premium revenues for the pool will be sufficient to pay all claims. If as in our automobile accident example losses are independent across members of a pool increasing the size of the pool actually makes it easier for an insurer to manage risk because the more members that are included in the pool the more stable will be the average loss rate per member Losses from catastrophes are not independent across exposures and therefore they are much more difficult to manage. A severe hurricane for example can cause damage over tens of thousands of square miles so even if an insurer provides windstorm coverage for properties scattered throughout a state average losses per property are likely to be exceptionally high in hurricane years. Since catastrophes are infrequent but costly annual premium revenues for a pool of exposures that exceed the value of claims in most years may not be sufficient to pay all claims in those rare years when a severe event occurs. Insurance providers work to address this problem by pooling risk across time or by diversifying the risk exposure more broadly by sharing it with other insurers Managing Catastrophe Losses One way to manage the financial risk of insuring catastrophe hazards is to retain a portion of excess premium revenues collected in years when losses are low to pay claims in years when catastrophes generate large losses. Equity capital set aside to pay potential claims is called surplus. In practice building surplus large enough to pay catastrophe losses can be difficult for private insurance companies. Owners of insurance companies expect to earn a market rate of return on their equity investments including equity held as surplus to cover future claims. Moreover income flowing from insurance company assets is subject to corporate income tax that effectively adds to the cost of accumulating and holding surplus | Economic Report of the President An alternative to using surplus to cover catastrophe losses is to transfer risk to third parties. Some insurers transfer risk directly to capital market participants such as hedge funds and institutional investors ( Box ) More commonly insurers negotiate risk-sharing agreements with specialized insurance companies called reinsurers. Reinsurers are internationally diversified companies that make a business of selling insurance to primary insurers. In a typical reinsurance arrangement a primary insurer pays a fee to a reinsurance company that agrees to cover some of the insurer s costs in the event that claims exceed a prespecified threshold. In essence reinsurance arrangements work much like other types of insurance. Through reinsurance a primary insurer subject to the risk of high claims caused by a catastrophe can pool its risk with other primary insurers that are exposed to different hazards. As with other types of insurance problems of adverse selection and moral hazard can impede the efficient functioning of reinsurance markets Box : Catastrophe Bonds and Sidecars Accessing Financial Markets to Better Manage Catastrophe Risks Though reinsurance agreements between primary insurers and specialized reinsurance companies remain the most popular method for transferring and pooling risks posed by large-scale catastrophes the capital available to reinsurers is only a tiny fraction of the total capital invested in financial markets. By one estimate reinsurance companies worldwide had accumulated about $ billion in shareholder funds by year-end which is only about percent of the market capitalization of the world s public equity markets. To spread catastrophe risks more broadly financial markets have developed mechanisms to allow investors who do not directly hold shares in insurance companies to assume some of the catastrophe risk exposure of primary insurers or reinsurers in exchange for an appropriate investment return. Two notable examples are catastrophe bonds and sidecars Catastrophe bonds ( CAT bonds ) also called acts of God bonds are risk-linked securities that offer a return to investors similar to that on high-yield corporate junk bonds. In a typical CAT bond transaction a firm that wants to transfer some risk to outside investors issues a bond and invests the proceeds in safe securities. If a specified catastrophe event occurs the proceeds from the bond issue are released to the issuer. If no event occurs during the term of the bond the principal is returned to investors. Payouts from CAT bonds are often tied to industry-wide loss estimates or defined catastrophe events such as whether or not a hurricane makes landfall on a particular stretch of coastline. Because these types of events are presumably beyond the continued on the next page Chapter | Box continued control of the bond issuer investors are protected from moral hazard A drawback of these types of CAT bonds however is that they do not protect the issuer against all possible catastrophe losses. For example an insurer that issues a bond with a payout tied to a hurricane event could be exposed to large losses from a tropical storm that does not meet the definition of a hurricane. The market for CAT bonds has grown rapidly over the past decade though the value of bonds outstanding remains small relative to the value of insured losses in recent catastrophe events. About $ billion in CAT bond capital was outstanding as of year-end a percent increase over the level Sidecars provide an increasingly popular alternative to CAT bonds A sidecar is a special-purpose financial entity usually designed to last to years. Under a sidecar arrangement a group of investors partners with an existing reinsurance company : the investors provide the necessary funds for deployment and the reinsurance company contributes its infrastructure business relationships and the skills of its staff. Sidecar investors receive a portion of the reinsurance company s premium revenue from a particular reinsurance contract or line of business and the reinsurer gains access to the investors capital to cover potential catastrophe losses. Through sidecars investors can decide to assume particular catastrophe risks without being exposed to all of the risks covered by a given reinsurance company. Sidecars have helped Bermuda-based reinsurance companies to expand their capacity to cover catastrophe risk exposures in the United States despite incurring significant losses in About $ billion in capital was reportedly raised through sidecars organized with Bermuda reinsurers from December to June Through CAT bonds sidecars and other innovative financing mechanisms insurers and private investors are finding new ways to spread the risks posed by large-scale catastrophes. These financing mechanisms currently contribute only a relatively small share of the total capital available to cover catastrophe losses but the volume of capital they have raised has grown rapidly in recent years. It is likely that as these markets mature the base of investors willing to bear some catastrophe risk will continue to expand ultimately lowering the cost of insuring catastrophe risks | Economic Report of the President What happens if an insurance provider lacks the resources to pay claims following a catastrophe ? Private-sector insurance companies that can not afford to pay claims are usually forced into receivership. In contrast many government-sponsored insurers can raise additional funds to pay claims after an event has occurred. Government-sponsored insurance programs often do not face the same financial constraints as private insurers because they have special rights to compel third parties such as taxpayers or private insurers to bear a portion of their financial risk. The NFIP for example is authorized by Congress to borrow from the U.S. Treasury which increases taxpayer liabilities and the Federal Government s terrorism-risk insurance program and several State-sponsored catastrophe insurance providers are empowered to levy surcharges on policies sold by private insurers Federal Catastrophe Insurance Programs In Congress passed a law granting the victims of a fire in Portsmouth New Hampshire extra time to repay certain debts owed to the Federal Government. Though the Federal Government has assisted Americans harmed by disasters throughout the Nation s history prior to the midtwentieth century aid was generally provided on an ad hoc basis ; a disaster would strike and Congress would then determine whether and to what extent Federal aid would be provided. Acts of Congress passed in and regularized the process by which the Federal Government extends assistance to disaster-affected communities and additional legislation enacted since then has clarified and expanded the Government s role in disaster relief One problem with a variety of government relief efforts is that they can make it more difficult for private insurers to sell policies for some catastrophe hazards at prices commensurate with underlying risks. People have less incentive to pay sometimes high insurance premiums if they expect to receive aid from the government when a catastrophe strikes. Policymakers have sought to address this moral hazard problem in several different ways. The Federal Government provides insurance coverage for certain catastrophe hazards often at prices lower than those that would be charged by private insurers. In addition in some cases the Government requires that individuals purchase insurance policies or mandates that private insurers offer policies for sale The National Flood Insurance Program The National Flood Insurance Program ( NFIP ) was established in to make flood insurance more widely available to homeowners and businesses to encourage local communities to prepare better for flood hazards and to reduce reliance on direct Federal disaster relief following floods. The NFIP Chapter | currently provides flood insurance for million policyholders nationwide many of whom might not be able to obtain coverage without the program Residential and commercial property owners in some participating communities are eligible to purchase flood insurance policies under the program. Homeowners with mortgages issued by federally regulated lenders on property in communities identified to be in flood hazard areas are required to purchase flood insurance on their dwellings. Property owners can purchase policies either directly from the Federal Government or more commonly through local insurance companies who sell NFIP policies under their own name but pass their risk on to the Government. Whether policies are sold directly by the Federal Government or by insurance companies the NFIP receives premium payments for the policies and bears all financial risks associated with the insurance they provide. The program is administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) FEMA relies on Flood Insurance Rate Maps ( FIRMs ) when underwriting flood insurance. These maps identify areas within a community that have at least a 1-percent chance per year of being inundated by high water. These areas are called 100-year floodplains. Federal flood insurance is only made available in local communities that agree to adopt zoning ordinances building codes and other planning measures designed to reduce future damage caused by floods. For example communities must require that new buildings be elevated above the level that flood waters are expected to reach on average once per years. According to FEMA buildings that meet its floodplain management standards suffer percent less damage from floods each year than those that do not. Not all structures insured under the NFIP meet these standards however ; structures completed prior to a community s decision to participate in the program or prior to the publication of a community s FIRM are eligible for insurance under the program even if they do not meet FEMA standards The NFIP charges different premiums for different properties. A structure built or substantially renovated after or after a community s FIRM was completed ( whichever is later ) is charged an actuarially fair annual premium equal to an estimate of expected annual claims under the property s flood insurance policy. Policyholders who pay actuarially fair premiums year after year should in the long run end up paying premiums that are just sufficient to cover their claims on average. About one-quarter of NFIP policies cover properties built prior to or prior to the publication of a community s FIRM. By law these pre-FIRM properties are charged subsidized premiums. Pre-FIRM properties are much less likely to comply with modern flood risk mitigation standards since most were built before such standards were widely applied. Because of their higher risk pre-FIRM properties are assessed higher premiums on average than newer properties but even these | Economic Report of the President higher premiums are not adequate to cover expected losses. On average premiums for pre-FIRM properties represent only about percent of those properties actuarially fair rates Not surprisingly the NFIP pricing scheme has led to serious adverse selection and moral hazard problems. On the one hand FEMA estimates that one-half to two-thirds of structures in floodplains do not carry flood insurance. On the other hand some exceptionally high-risk properties continue to receive NFIP coverage at subsidized rates even though they have been damaged by floods multiple times since entering the program. Some properties insured by the NFIP as of September had incurred flood damage resulting in claims of at least $ more than once during a 10-year period. While these properties only represented about percent of all structures then insured under the program repetitive-loss properties have historically accounted for percent of all program claims payments Amendments to the Flood Insurance Act passed in authorized a pilot program to remove some of the most severe repetitive-loss properties from the NFIP insurance roll by allowing FEMA to fund work to elevate or relocate some of them or in extreme cases to purchase and demolish them The NFIP illustrates how underwriting standards can either enhance or impede loss mitigation. By providing coverage only in communities that agree to adopt flood-risk mitigation measures the NFIP may have induced some communities to take steps that FEMA credits with reducing flood damage by an average $ billion annually. At the same time by providing insurance to pre-FIRM properties at less than actuarially fair rates the program may have discouraged some policyholders from relocating or renovating structures at high risk for flood damage. The availability of flood insurance has lowered the risk to banks of financing real-estate investment in locations vulnerable to flood losses. As a result it is not clear whether the NFIP has reduced the size of Federal appropriations for flood disaster relief as intended. Demand for Federal disaster aid may arguably be higher than it would have been had the NFIP not facilitated development in high-risk areas Chart shows that since NFIP premiums exceeded annual losses in most years but were woefully inadequate to cover losses from Hurricanes Katrina Rita and Wilma in The hurricanes resulted in about $ billion in NFIP program claims some of which were not paid until Even so claims paid in exceeded premiums collected in that year by a factor of nearly six to one. Unlike private sector insurers who would need to accumulate surplus or purchase reinsurance to pay claims in excess of premiums the NFIP is permitted to borrow from the Federal Government As of August just before Hurricane Katrina struck the NFIP had accumulated a relatively modest $ million in debt owed to the U.S. Treasury but the program will need to borrow an additional $ billion to pay claims Chapter | filed in Though the NFIP is supposed to repay this debt using future premium revenue it is unlikely that this will be possible. The Congressional Budget Office estimates that by the interest on NFIP debt will grow to about $ billion annually which is about percent of the projected annual premium revenue. Even if future hurricane seasons are milder than those experienced in recent years projected premiums are not expected to be large enough to cover both the interest on the outstanding debt and the projected future claims. The NFIP s current dire financial situation amply demonstrates that in insurance as elsewhere there is no free lunch. Annual premium revenue from the NFIP was able to cover losses in most of the program s recent history but the subsidized insurance program exposed the American taxpayers to a huge potential financial liability which became an actual liability in Terrorism and War-Risk Insurance Programs The Federal Government provided billions of dollars in disaster assistance following the September terrorist attacks on New York and Washington DC including about $ billion in aid to the airline industry and about $ billion in aid to the New York City area. To date about $ billion | Economic Report of the President in loss claims have been paid by private insurers. Though insured losses represented only a fraction of the total economic costs of the September attacks they were far greater than those arising from any prior terrorist event Following September commercial property and casualty insurers reevaluated their policyholders exposure to risk from possible future attacks. Many insurers canceled policies began explicitly excluding coverage for terrorist attacks from new policies or increased premiums charged to policyholders. In response to what was believed to be a temporary contraction in the supply of insurance available for terrorism risk the Administration and Congress undertook measures to ensure that the airline and commercial real estate sectors would not be adversely affected Less than two weeks after the September attacks the Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) began selling insurance policies directly to U.S. airlines to cover third-party liability ( e.g. harm to individuals or property on the ground ) arising from acts of war or terrorism and in November of the Homeland Security Act expanded this program to provide insurance coverage for loss of aircraft and airline passenger liability as well. The program has been reauthorized several times since its inception and it remains in effect today As of October policies under this program provided airlines with insurance coverage for potential losses ranging from $ million to $ billion each The Terrorism Risk Insurance Act ( TRIA ) passed in November of established a second much broader Federal program to encourage privatesector commercial property and casualty insurers to provide terrorism risk coverage. The program was originally designed to expire after three years but in Congress elected to extend the program with some modifications through TRIA has two main components. First it mandates that insurance companies that sell commercial property and casualty insurance make available to customers policies that do not explicitly exclude coverage for losses caused by acts of terrorism. Insurers may exclude losses on other grounds however so not all losses arising from terrorist attacks must be covered. According to the President s Working Group on Financial Markets commercial insurance policies generally do not cover losses arising from chemical nuclear biological and radiological events whether or not these events are caused by acts of terrorism. Second TRIA authorizes the Treasury Department to provide reinsurance to cover a portion of insurance loss claims arising from certified acts of international terrorism against U.S. targets. Under the reinsurance program a primary insurer must cover percent of its loss claims up to a specified deductible. The Federal Government then pays a fixed share of losses in excess of the deductible. For an insurance company is required to cover all losses up to percent of its prior year s premiums on qualifying Chapter | lines of business and percent of losses above this deductible. TRIA imposes a cap of $ billion on total insurer losses from terrorist attacks. Under the statute Congress would determine the procedures to govern any payments for losses beyond $ billion in separate legislation Since no claims have been filed under either the FAA s aviation war-risk insurance program or the Treasury Department s terrorism-risk reinsurance program but like the NFIP both of these programs expose U.S taxpayers to large potential losses. Because they were intended to be temporary neither program is designed to ensure that premiums will be sufficient to pay future claims. Premium revenue collected under the aviation war-risk program is subject to a cap mandated by Congress. As a result premiums charged by the FAA are significantly lower than those that would be charged for comparable policies sold by private-sector aviation insurers. Airlines pay a total of about $ million in premiums to the FAA each year ; by one estimate without the program these airlines would need to pay $ million annually in premiums to private insurers. TRIA does not require property and casualty insurers to pay any premiums for the reinsurance protection they receive Instead claims under the program are expected to be paid with Federal outlays and then recouped after the fact through surcharges levied on future premiums for property and casualty insurance policies. Given that the program was established in part to address problems arising from high insurance premiums following the September attacks there are real questions as to whether surcharges would be set high enough to recoup expenditures following a future terrorist attack. Any surcharges would likely be spread over several years to reduce the impact on premiums and since the Treasury Department is only required by law to recoup up to $ billion there is no guarantee that the full costs of the program would ultimately be recovered State Property Insurance Markets Although the Federal Government is actively involved in insuring risks from floods and terrorist attacks most homeowners and businesses look first to their local property insurers to obtain financial protection against a variety of hazards including potential catastrophes. State governments are responsible for regulating insurance markets. Though laws differ from state to state all states insurance regulators exercise some control over who is permitted to sell insurance what terms and conditions can be attached to insurance policies and how much insurers can charge. Insurance regulations are intended to protect consumers who may have difficulty evaluating complex insurance contracts and to ensure that insurers maintain sufficient financial resources to pay future claims. While regulation plays an important role in protecting | Economic Report of the President consumers from fraud and poor risk management practices poorly conceived and executed regulation can create long-term problems for the operation of state catastrophe-risk insurance markets Every state regulates property insurance premiums charged to homeowners and small businesses. Many states require that premiums be approved in advance by regulators. Others allow insurance regulators to review existing price schedules and empower regulators to force companies to reimburse policyholders when premiums are found to be excessive. Rate regulations can make it difficult for insurance companies to set premiums that accurately reflect available information about risks which can exacerbate moral hazard and adverse selection problems. In some states the rate review and approval process can take many months so insurers can not rapidly adjust premiums when new information becomes available. The rate review process may also discourage insurance companies from proposing complex pricing plans which though difficult to explain and justify to state rate boards more accurately reflect detailed information about the risks associated with individual insurance policies Efforts by regulators to keep property insurance prices artificially low can make it difficult for individuals and businesses to obtain insurance on private markets at any price. To ensure that they will be able to pay claims after a catastrophe private insurers need to set premiums high enough to enable them to build surplus or transfer risk to reinsurers. If regulators do not allow insurers to charge rates sufficient to accomplish these tasks the insurers will be discouraged from taking on catastrophe risks. They may choose to sell insurance only in areas at low risk for catastrophe hazards or they may seek to exclude coverage for such hazards under the terms of the property insurance policies they offer. Regulation can also deter insurers from competing for customers thereby reducing the range and quality of insurance options available Many states that face risks from hurricanes or earthquakes have established special entities to provide insurance to those who can not obtain coverage from private insurers. In California established a quasi-public company the California Earthquake Authority to sell earthquake insurance policies to California residents backed by funds contributed by a number of private insurers operating in the state. Several states maintain residual pools to cover windstorm risks. These pools operate like traditional insurance companies but they are required to sell policies to property owners in high-risk coastal areas and they are empowered to levy surcharges on primary insurers operating in a state Some state-sponsored insurance programs use complicated procedures for setting premiums and many claim to charge premiums that are actuarially fair but they all have one thing in common : they provide insurance only to policyholders who either will not or can not obtain insurance from the Chapter | Box : Gulf Coast Property Insurance Markets After Hurricanes Katrina Rita and Wilma was a terrible year for communities located along the U.S. Gulf Coast. Hurricane Katrina devastated a land area the size of Great Britain and displaced more than people. The total value of property damage and business interruption caused by Hurricane Katrina has been estimated at $ billion. Hurricane Katrina was followed a few weeks later by Hurricane Rita which caused an estimated $ billion in damage and Hurricane Wilma which caused an estimated $ billion in damage. The President and Congress responded by appropriating about $ billion for disaster relief and recovery aid to affected communities. Property insurers have also played an important role in recovery efforts by paying billions of dollars of loss claims but there are concerns that rising insurance premiums for coastal properties may be a barrier to redevelopment. The response of property insurance markets to the unprecedented losses caused by the hurricane season underscores the role of effective underwriting in managing catastrophe risks Hurricanes Katrina Rita and Wilma resulted in an estimated $ billion in insured property damages not including claims filed with the National Flood Insurance Program. Despite bearing enormous losses most private-sector primary insurers operating in the Gulf Coast emerged from the hurricane season in reasonably sound financial condition. At least four primary insurers failed as a result of the storms but the share of property and casualty insurers listed as financially impaired by a major insurance company rating agency actually dropped to a 25-year low while the aggregate value of surplus available to insurers for paying future claims increased. Primary insurers fared well as a group in part because they had transferred a significant share of their catastrophe risk exposure to reinsurers. According to one industry association reinsurance covered about percent of insured hurricane losses Though the U.S. property and casualty insurance sector as a whole remains healthy property insurance markets in several coastal states are under stress. Information collected during the and hurricane seasons revealed deficiencies in industry-standard catastrophe risk models used in underwriting property insurance. These models are now being adapted to reflect expectations of more violent hurricane seasons revised analysis of the costs of repairing property damage following major catastrophes new findings about the effects of hurricane-generated storm surges and other factors. As a result primary insurers and reinsurers are increasing their estimates of probable losses on windstorm policies in areas at risk for hurricanes. A leading | Economic Report of the President catastrophe-risk modeling firm reports that revised forecasts of the severity of Atlantic hurricane seasons alone will increase estimates of loss rates from future hurricanes in the Gulf Coast and southeastern U.S. by percent As assessments of the potential costs of future hurricanes have increased primary insurers and reinsurers have sought to limit their exposure to windstorm hazards and increase the premiums charged for insuring this hazard. Reinsurance companies many of whom lost capital in to hurricane-related claims have significantly increased premiums. Unlike reinsurance premiums premiums charged by primary insurers for homeowners and commercial property policies are regulated by state insurance commissions. Primary insurers have petitioned state regulators to allow them to raise premiums to cover rising reinsurance costs and to more closely reflect new information on the risks posed by windstorms. Where possible some insurers have also attempted to reduce their exposure to windstorm hazards by refusing to renew existing policies in high-risk areas or by adding conditions to policies that exclude coverage of windstorm damage. In several states government-sponsored insurance programs that are required to provide windstorm coverage to property owners who are unable to obtain insurance through the private sector have grown dramatically Recent developments in coastal property insurance markets have the potential to discourage some investment in areas at high risk for hurricanes since property owners in these areas will likely have to pay higher insurance premiums or bear greater risk than in the past. For this reason some have argued that Federal and State governments should take action to ensure that insurance for windstorm coverage in hurricane-prone regions is widely available and that the premiums charged for this insurance are relatively low. However as discussed in the text efforts to keep premiums for windstorm insurance artificially low may discourage property owners from taking action to lessen future windstorm losses while potentially encouraging excessive development in high-risk areas private market. These programs tend to attract exactly those members whose high risk makes them unattractive to private insurers. For example in some states residual pools are the main providers of windstorm insurance for homeowners in coastal areas exposed to high risk from hurricanes In recent years a number of state-sponsored insurance programs have had difficulty paying claims following major catastrophes. Different states have dealt with this problem in different ways. A few states have used government money to provide new funds for insolvent programs thereby passing the cost Chapter | of covering losses on to taxpayers. More commonly states have levied surcharges on premiums for policies sold by private insurers. This approach effectively forces property owners in relatively low-risk areas who can obtain insurance from private providers to pay higher premiums to cover insured losses for property owners in higher risk areas who obtain insurance through the residual pool. By effectively raising the cost of insurance in the private market these surcharges may actually encourage more property owners to seek insurance from the residual pool so that the pool is exposed to even higher losses the next time a catastrophe strikes Since people consider the cost of property insurance when deciding where to live and conduct business the use of rate regulations or state-sponsored insurance programs to keep property insurance prices in high-risk areas artificially low can have significant negative consequences. All else equal commercial and residential development will tend to be greater in those areas where insurance prices are lower. As a result artificially low premiums for catastrophe risk insurance can lead to excessive development in catastropheprone areas putting lives and property in harm s way Conclusion All insurance markets are susceptible to problems arising from adverse selection and moral hazard but insurers of catastrophe risks must also deal with the fact that total insured losses are difficult to predict and are potentially quite large. While it may not be possible to eliminate these problems their effects can be moderated through prudent underwriting. Adverse selection and moral hazard problems can be lessened by being selective about which risks to insure by setting premiums to match observable differences in risk and by requiring policyholders to bear a share of the financial risk posed by the hazards they are insured against. Insurance providers deal with uncertain losses by charging premiums that are high enough to enable them to build surplus and/or transfer excess risk to third parties such as reinsurers Regulations that constrain private insurers underwriting flexibility can undermine their ability to provide insurance coverage for catastrophe risks Government-sponsored insurance programs that can borrow from the U.S Treasury or levy surcharges to pay claims after a catastrophe has occurred do not face the same financial constraints as private insurers. Nonetheless government programs that do not apply prudent underwriting standards expose taxpayers to large liabilities Effective insurance underwriting serves an important social function by tying the premiums and terms of insurance policies to the risks covered. When insurance prices reflect underlying economic costs they can encourage a more | Economic Report of the President efficient allocation of resources. Efforts to keep premiums for insurance against catastrophe hazards artificially low whether through regulation or through subsidized government programs can encourage excessively risky behavior on the part of those who might be affected by future catastrophes Chapter | C H A P T E R The Transportation Sector : Energy and Infrastructure Use E nergy is a $ trillion industry representing percent of the U.S. economy The two biggest consumers of energy from fossil and renewable fuels are electric power and transportation. While electricity can be generated from diverse sources coal nuclear fission natural gas water petroleum and increasingly wind and sun percent of transportation whether by plane train ship or automobile is currently powered by petroleum. The transportation sector alone accounts for two-thirds of the petroleum consumed in the United States. Thus key to understanding the transportation sector is understanding the petroleum market and the ways in which consumers and firms in the transportation sector respond to changes in world oil prices The lack of substitutes for oil means that in the short run oil consumption in transportation is particularly unresponsive to price changes. This makes the economy vulnerable to sudden increases in oil prices. Perhaps more importantly the world s reliance on oil creates an external cost in terms of national security In addition to petroleum the transportation sector relies on infrastructure The United States has close to million miles of roads bridges and highways to support a wide variety of economic and social activity. Over time however demands on this infrastructure have outstripped its capacity. While the miles of urban roadways built have increased by nearly percent since vehicle miles traveled on urban roadways increased by double that amount The primary reason for this shortfall is that a well-functioning market that puts a price on roadway use is largely nonexistent. As a result traffic in most metropolitan areas has become increasingly congested costing both time and fuel. In alone Americans were delayed about billion hours and used billion extra gallons of fuel ( hours and gallons per rush-hour commuter ) in stop-and-go traffic. Like the costs exacted by oil use on national security and the environment the full costs of congestion are not taken into account by individuals when they drive : each driver usually decides when and where to drive based on his or her own private needs and ignores the costs imposed on others This chapter discusses several developments in the use of energy and infrastructure for transportation and reviews strategies that have been used to reduce oil use and better manage the existing infrastructure. Key points in this chapter are : Recent increases in the price of oil and the external costs of oil have led to renewed interest by markets and governments in the development of new alternatives. Government can play a role in ensuring that external costs are taken into account by markets but ultimately markets are best suited to decide how to respond Cars and light trucks are the largest users of petroleum. As a result the fuel economy of the vehicles purchased and the number of miles that they are driven have a large effect on oil consumption Congestion is a growing problem in American urban areas. Cities and states have shown a growing interest in and capacity for setting prices for road use during peak periods to reduce the full economic costs of congestion Fuel Markets and the Transportation Sector Over the past years petroleum use in the industrial utility and building sectors has been relatively flat while petroleum use by the transportation sector has grown by percent. This trend is expected to continue. While new more energy-efficient technology has reduced the energy needs of most sectors gains in vehicle engine efficiency have been more than offset by a shift to heavier more powerful cars and light trucks and increases in driving Cars and light trucks accounted for percent of U.S. roadway travel in and account for percent of petroleum devoted to transport Department of Energy projections suggest that these modes of transportation will continue to be important and that light truck usage will show significant growth in the years to come ( see Chart ) Heavy trucks consume almost percent of the petroleum used for transport. Air rail marine and off-road vehicles currently account for the remaining percent. Air travel is one of the fastest growing modes of transportation. Energy consumption for air travel is projected to increase nearly percent by or about more barrels of oil per day | Economic Report of the President Responding to Changes in the Price of Oil In well-functioning markets the price of a good or service reflects all of the associated costs and benefits for example the costs incurred in extracting transporting and refining the oil or the benefits from using gasoline to drive The market then uses price to achieve the most efficient level of production and consumption. Transportation has largely reacted to changes in energy markets in this way High demand for oil due in part to rapid economic growth in China and India has helped push oil prices to record levels. The real average monthly price of oil to the refiner was $ between and ( see Chart in U.S. dollars ) In the price to the refiner began to climb approaching $ per barrel in ( other oil price measures were higher ) For the transportation sector this is a significant increase in the cost of one of its primary inputs. Normally as the price of a good rises consumers reduce how much they use. However it typically takes years before the transportation sector s consumption of oil is substantially reduced in part due to the lack of easily available substitutes. Eventually though consumers do react to high prices. For instance hybrid vehicle sales have tripled since while light truck sales have fallen by percent Chapter | When high oil prices are sustained as has been the case recently the market shows renewed interest in investing in new technologies for developing alternatives to oil and improving vehicle fuel economy. Such research and development investments tend to recede when oil prices fall. During the period of high oil prices in the late 1970s and early 1980s the private sector invested billions of dollars in energy research and development before the price of oil declined. A recent study finds that private investment in alternative fuel technologies again has increased in response to higher oil prices doubling between and constituting percent of the total investment in energy. Because of the transportation sector s delayed response to oil prices these increases are likely to continue for some time The lack of alternatives to oil also means that sudden major oil supply changes such as when oil production in an entire region is unexpectedly shut down can lead to large and sudden price increases in the months following the shock. Since oil trades in a global market the impact on the economy from such shocks does not depend on how much we import only on how much we consume and our consumption has been growing. The market has adapted to this threat by investing in more energy-efficient modes of production investing in alternative energy sources and increasing holdings of private oil inventories | Economic Report of the President External Costs of Oil Use Prices determine which goods and services are produced in the marketplace. In the absence of government policy ( such as taxes or regulations ) the price of a good or service accounts for all private costs incurred by those who have produced or purchased the product. In the case of oil this includes everyone from the oil company that extracts the oil to the shipper refiner retailer and driver who fuels her car. In the case of oil the price reflects most of the costs but there are some costs to society that remain unaccounted for Eighty-one percent of the world s remaining proven petroleum reserves are currently controlled by members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) ( including Iran and Venezuela ) and Russia and nearly all of these reserves are controlled by national oil firms. Since oil trades in a world market oil consumption anywhere in the world affects the price of oil for Americans. The importance of oil to the world economy gives the major oilproducing countries disproportionate diplomatic leverage in world affairs. Oil resources can also fuel corruption in developing countries. Air pollutants and carbon dioxide from burning gasoline also contribute to concerns about air quality human health and climate The purchase of a gallon of gasoline imposes these national security and environmental costs on everyone not just on the buyer and seller. Though State and Federal gasoline and diesel fuel taxes and regulations help account for these other costs many studies suggest that the total external costs of oil may be higher. Carefully crafted government policy may be a useful way to account for these additional costs. However this objective should be balanced against additional inefficiencies that government involvement introduces into the market. Once policies are in place that ensure that individuals account for the full costs of the goods and services they consume e.g. national security and environmental concerns competitive markets are the most efficient means to determine how goods are produced as well as which goods are produced in the future Transportation Fuel Supply Motor gasoline and diesel fuel will continue to be the main sources of power for cars and trucks in the near future. In motor gasoline accounted for percent of fuel used in highway vehicles and diesel accounted for percent ( alternative fuels made up the remainder ) Diesel cars and light trucks are uncommon in the United States only percent of new cars and light trucks sold use diesel engines ; the majority of diesel fuel is used by commercial vehicles Chapter | Ethanol an alternative fuel is currently used as an additive in gasoline to increase octane and help gasoline burn more completely reducing emissions of carbon monoxide and other pollutants. In many states and metropolitan areas gasoline sold at the pump contains between and percent ethanol depending on State requirements. Using such alternatives to oil can reduce the environmental costs of transportation as well as the national security consequences of oil use. To further encourage alternative fuel use a provision in the Energy Policy Act of ( EPAct ) known as the Renewable Fuel Standard requires a certain quantity of renewable fuel to be used by gasoline producers each year. In producers were obligated to use billion gallons per year ; this obligation will gradually increase to billion gallons in ( Americans consumed about billion gallons of motor gasoline in ) One of the strengths of this policy is that it does not choose which renewable fuel to promote but allows the standard to be met with any renewable fuel that accomplishes the goal of reducing oil use. However it does not extend to oil alternatives beyond renewable fuels such as electric cars or hydrogen fuel cells. The Renewable Fuel Standard also allows imports to satisfy the standard allowing U.S. consumers to take advantage of cheaper production of renewable fuels in other countries although this is impeded by an import tariff on such fuels A more significant regulatory change has been applied to diesel fuel Starting in diesel fuel sold in the United States is required to have a sulfur content of no more than parts per million ( ppm ) down from ppm in the previous standard. This reduction results in the most stringent diesel fuel standard in the world and enables U.S. consumers to purchase vehicles with engines that meet clean air requirements using clean diesel fuel Diesel engines are between and percent more fuel efficient than comparable gasoline engines ( even accounting for the fact that a gallon of diesel contains more energy than a gallon of gasoline ) EPAct also grants tax credits to buyers of diesel cars that meet stringent emission standards Alternative Fuels and Advanced Technologies To date changes in petroleum usage have been driven primarily by the increasing price of oil and by regulatory concerns. The greatest potential for large reductions in gasoline consumption stems from new technologies that could transform how transportation is powered. Over million advanced technology cars and light trucks were sold in the United States in About | Economic Report of the President two-fifths of these were flex-fuel vehicles that can use conventional gasoline or an alternative fuel called E85 which is approximately percent ethanol and percent gasoline. U.S. consumers also purchased hybrid vehicles in Hybrid vehicles use an electric motor in conjunction with a gasoline engine to increase fuel economy Use of advanced technology vehicles in the United States is projected to grow over time ( see Chart ) The Department of Energy projects that over million advanced technology vehicles will be sold in and that by they will make up more than percent of all light-duty vehicles sold. Of these advanced technology vehicles percent are expected to be either gasoline electric hybrids or vehicles that can be powered by ethanol and other plant-based fuels. Though alternative fuels currently power only a small fraction of our transportation needs private-sector investments combined with government policies are expected to fundamentally change the energy landscape Chapter | Ongoing research explores a wide variety of vehicle fuel technologies such as electricity hydrogen fuel cells and biofuels. Significant technological barriers exist that prevent the development of these as commercially viable alternatives. For instance the wide-scale deployment of hydrogen fuel cells devices that combine hydrogen with oxygen in the atmosphere to yield electricity will depend on reductions in expense and weight as well as on the development of clean cost-effective sources of hydrogen Private markets tend to underinvest in innovation of all kinds because inventors only capture a fraction of the benefits from discovery Underinvestment is particularly likely for basic scientific research where the application to the marketplace may not be evident at early stages Underinvestment is also likely when the results of research mainly reduce the external costs of consumption ( such as national security and environmental costs associated with oil ) instead of directly benefiting consumers. In response the President s Advanced Energy Initiative proposed an increase in annual funding for alternative energy research of percent for fiscal year adding to the $ billion of government spending devoted to such research since Several studies find that Federal research and development ( R&D ) investment in energy has yielded sizeable societal benefits not only in economic terms but also in terms of knowledge creation and pollution reduction. Still the government s ability to predict which technologies will best meet a given goal is questionable so the most effective government policies allow the market to choose the path of innovation Demand for Transportation Fuel The United States is a vehicle-dependent society. More than out of American households own at least one vehicle and most households own two In vehicles in the United States traveled close to trillion miles up more than percent from Commuting and other business-related activities account for about percent of vehicle miles traveled ( see Chart ) Americans also use their cars and trucks to go shopping ( percent of miles driven ) attend to personal and family business such as medical appointments and dropping children off at school ( percent of miles driven ) and for social and recreational activities including vacations ( percent of miles driven ) | Economic Report of the President In spite of widespread vehicle use the proportion of the American household budget spent on transport fuel is small ( less than percent ) That said Chart shows that a significant share of vehicle miles traveled are related to nonwork activities indicating that households may have some flexibility to quickly adjust when the costs of travel are high. In response to higher prices drivers make two adjustments : they drive less and they purchase more fuel-efficient vehicles. Several studies have found that these two effects combined imply that a percent increase in the price of gasoline will result in about a percent decrease in gasoline consumption in the long run Compared to other commodities households gasoline consumption may take several years to respond to price changes State and local initiatives that encourage use of mass transit and carpooling focus on encouraging people to drive less. In New York City the most densely populated of all cities in the United States mass transit accounts for percent of all commutes into the central city. New York however is Chapter | unique. Many U.S. cities such as Phoenix and Los Angeles are spread out over a large area making it difficult to design mass transit corridors that effectively meet the commuting needs of travelers. Public transportation also has difficulty competing with the flexibility and convenience of car travel in these types of cities. In the entire United States percent of commuters rely on public transportation One way many urban areas try to encourage carpooling is through the designation of high-occupancy vehicle ( HOV ) lanes. This method rewards carpooling by allowing vehicles with two or more passengers to travel in lanes not open to vehicles with only one person in them. In this way HOV drivers can reduce travel time when roads are congested. Unfortunately HOV lanes are often underutilized and the popularity of carpooling is not increasing. In percent of American commuters drove to work each day but of these drivers only about percent carpooled down from almost percent in This trend makes it unlikely that initiatives focused on carpooling will make large strides in reducing vehicle fuel use Improving Fuel Economy Evidence shows that drivers switch to more fuel-efficient vehicles in response to higher gasoline prices. One study finds that higher gasoline prices accelerate the retirement of older less fuel-efficient vehicles and shift new purchases toward more fuel-efficient vehicles. Government policies have also been used to influence vehicle fuel economy. The Corporate Average Fuel Economy ( CAFE ) standard passed in mandates a minimum mile per gallon ( mpg ) requirement for each manufacturer s fleet of new cars and a minimum requirement for each manufacturer s fleet of new light trucks. If a given vehicle is less fuel efficient than the requirement the manufacturer must offset it by producing a vehicle that is more fuel efficient so that the average fuel economy for all cars ( or for all trucks ) the manufacturer sells is above the required miles per gallon level. One rationale used to justify increasing the stringency of the CAFE standard is to further induce improvements in the fuel economy of vehicles sold to consumers reducing the demand for transport fuel and the external costs associated with oil use It is important to note that while improvements in fuel economy translate into gasoline savings it is not a one-to-one relationship. Higher CAFE standards encourage increased driving. Since higher fuel economy vehicles can go the same distance using less gasoline the cost of driving a mile is reduced. As the per-mile cost of driving declines the quantity of miles driven by individuals tends to increase. This rebound effect reduces potential fuel savings from improvements in fuel economy by to percent. Recent estimates suggest that as incomes grow driving decisions will depend less on the cost of driving and therefore the rebound effect is expected to shrink in the future | Economic Report of the President In CAFE mandated mpg for cars and mpg for light trucks The CAFE standard became increasingly stringent until after which it remained virtually unchanged. It only recently became more stringent for light trucks. Currently the CAFE standards are mpg for cars and mpg for light trucks ( including SUVs ) The Federal government has increased the CAFE standard for light trucks through two separate regulations raising it in increments each year beginning in By new light trucks will meet a mpg standard reflecting a 16-percent increase Also by the largest SUVs those weighing between and pounds will be subject to the CAFE standard for the first time. The Department of Transportation based the new standard for light trucks on vehicle footprint a measure of size in line with a recommendation by a National Academy of Sciences panel as a way to mitigate safety concerns. The footprint-based CAFE standard for light trucks is also an improvement over its previous configuration because it ensures that all manufacturers make fuel economy improvements instead of only those producing a wide mix of vehicles. The Department of Transportation is seeking similar authority to reexamine CAFE for new passenger cars ( see Box ) The fuel economy of new vehicles rapidly increased over the first years of CAFE. In part this was a market response to the dramatic increase in gasoline prices between and By the late 1980s however overall fuel economy had stagnated. While the fuel economy of cars has continued to slowly increase over time and has been above the CAFE standard since consumers have bought an increasing number of SUVs and light trucks whose fuel economy has remained close to the mandated level of the light truck standard. Half of all vehicles sold in were light trucks including SUVs compared to percent when CAFE was first put in place. This shift in consumer preferences is a rational response to more than a decade of low real gasoline prices rising household incomes and incentives created by CAFE requirements. Manufacturers also responded to changing consumer preferences and CAFE requirements. For instance while station wagons and minivans have similar fuel economies the former are counted as cars and the latter are counted as light trucks. In the late 1980s many manufacturers took advantage of the difference in the stringency of CAFE standards across cars and light trucks to phase out the station wagon a relatively fuel-inefficient car and replace it with the minivan a relatively fuel-efficient light truck This shift improved the individual fuel economy of both the car and light truck fleets but did little to change overall fuel economy. While the CAFE standard has contributed to improved fuel economy since its inception understanding its precise impacts and its interaction with gasoline prices is a matter of some debate. A recent National Academy of Sciences study also finds that CAFE may have led manufacturers to produce smaller and lighter cars posing a risk to safety Chapter | Box : The President s New Energy Initiatives The President has announced several energy initiatives designed to increase the country s energy security by reducing projected gasoline consumption in the light-duty vehicle transportation sector by percent within a decade About three-fourths of this goal will be met by greatly increasing and expanding the Renewable Fuel Standard. The new standard will mandate that percent of transportation fuels come from alternative fuels. In about percent of fuels used in light-duty vehicles were not petroleum-based. Under the revised standard billion gallons will be alternative fuels in This initiative reflects the belief that technological change is the key ingredient to diversifying America s energy portfolio. Energy security will increase as the dominance of oil use in the transportation sector diminishes The standard will continue to allow refiners importers and blenders to use renewable fuels to meet the standard but will expand to allow for current or future viable alternatives to petroleum to compete Expanding the alternatives that meet the standard makes it easier for blenders and refiners to comply and affords the market broad flexibility to find the most cost-effective non-petroleum-based fuel options. In the event that production of alternative fuels proves more costly than expected the President has built in two safety valves to protect consumers. First the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Secretaries of the Department of Energy and the Department of Agriculture will have the authority to waive or modify the standard if refiners and blenders have difficulty finding alternative fuels for purchase. Second an automatic mechanism will be in place to prevent the price of gasoline from rising above a threshold due to this policy. These two provisions ensure a degree of market stability as use of alternative fuels expands in the marketplace The percent goal will also be met through increasing the fuel efficiency of automobiles. This will occur through reforming and modernizing CAFE standards for cars and further increasing light truck and SUV standards. These changes are predicted to reduce consumption of gasoline by an estimated percent based on the assumption that increases in the standard of percent each year starting in for cars and for light trucks prove warranted. Three reforms are key to the President s proposal of increased stringency of CAFE. First paralleling recent changes for light trucks the law for cars should be changed to allow the standard to be based on a vehicle attribute ( such as footprint ) to address safety concerns. Second CAFE for both cars and light trucks should allow manufacturers the option of increased flexibility in how they meet the standard by allowing them to trade | Economic Report of the President credits. Any manufacturer that increases fuel economy by more than what is mandated could generate credits that other manufacturers could purchase to reduce their costs of meeting the standard. The benefit of trading credits is that it allows the same overall goal of improved fuel economy to be met at a lower cost. Third the rate of increase of the CAFE standard as well as how fuel economy improvements will be divided between cars and light trucks should be at the discretion of the Secretary of Transportation as is currently done for light trucks. The Department of Transportation will employ the regulatory process to determine these increases based on sound science and an assessment that balances the costs and benefits The President has also proposed a new $ million initiative to give State and local governments the opportunity to explore innovative ways such as roadway pricing and increased use of real-time traffic information to reduce traffic congestion and save fuel In addition to improving the nation s energy security profile these initiatives will also produce significant benefits by reducing air toxics associated with petroleum-based fuel. They will also help confront the challenge of climate change by potentially stopping the projected growth of carbon dioxide emissions from this sector Transportation Infrastructure and Management of Existing Traffic Flow In addition to its reliance on oil the transportation sector also relies heavily on the existing infrastructure of roads and highways. Under the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of the Federal government plays an important role as overseer of the National Highway System to ensure that the highway system is economically efficient and environmentally sound provides the foundation for the Nation to compete in the global economy and will move people and goods in an energy-efficient manner. In recent years however the road and highway infrastructure has not kept pace with the number of miles driven in the United States. When more people use a roadway than the capacity for which it is built traffic slows. Commercial trucking the most common method of moving freight across the United States is increasingly reliant on urban interstate highways many of which are congested. Between and the share of roads in U.S. urban areas that are congested rose from percent to percent. Changes in Chapter | commuting patterns have also spread congestion to more roads. The traditional suburb-to-city commute has diminished in importance : As of half of all commuters drove to jobs in the suburbs while only percent drove to jobs in central cities Congestion is defined as the marked slowing of traffic as a roadway reaches capacity. Congestion in the United States manifests itself primarily as a bottleneck on a roadway ( see Chart ) A bottleneck is a hindrance to vehicle movement because it involves delays at key intersections backed-up traffic or narrow or obstructed sections of a roadway. Unexpected events such as accidents or other traffic incidents also cause congestion on crowded roadways Together they are responsible for percent of all congestion It is important to note that roadways are not congested at all hours of the day. For instance on one particular roadway in the Seattle area a trip that occurs prior to a.m. or after p.m. takes about minutes ( see Chart ) That same trip takes about percent longer at a.m. and almost twice as long at p.m. due to slowing traffic. This general trend appears in many U.S cities and suggests that it is the timing of vehicle miles traveled more than their growth that is at the root of the congestion problem | Economic Report of the President One underlying reason why congestion exists on U.S. roadways is the lack of a private market to price roadway use. Most roads in the United States are provided by the government are open to all and are free of charge Economists generally believe that a good may be better provided by the government when it is difficult for private markets to charge for its use Because one motorist s use of a congested road reduces the road s value for other drivers and drivers can be selectively prevented from entering the roadway through the use of gates or technologies that monitor use it is increasingly appropriate to charge drivers for some roadway use in the same way the private market charges for other goods and services A driver decides which road to use based on private needs : for instance the shortest distance or fastest route between destinations or the closest most accessible highway. The fact that each driver decides on a route independently of other drivers is not a problem when the number of drivers is well below the roadway s capacity. However when drivers have free access to roads crowding occurs at times of high demand decreasing vehicle speed and flow. Each additional driver slows down other drivers on the roadway causing them to lose time and to burn extra gasoline. However drivers typically do not consider the added costs they impose on others. This is a get in line or queuing approach to allocating road space. When there is a shortage of something Chapter | for instance space on a ski lift or attendants at the Department of Motor Vehicles those willing to get in line and wait eventually receive what they want. This approach to road-use management is inefficient because it allocates road space to those with the time to wait in traffic not necessarily to those who value its use most highly If a roadway is priced that is if drivers have to pay a fee to access a particular road then congestion can be avoided by adjusting the price up or down at different times of day to reflect changes in demand for its use. Road space is allocated to drivers who most highly value a reliable and unimpaired commute. This arrangement encourages drivers to consider the tradeoff between the price of using the road and the additional time and inconvenience of using a nonpriced alternate route or driving at a noncongested time Drivers who place a high value on the predictability and reduced time of commuting for instance a doctor who has been called to the hospital for an emergency have the option to pay for access to noncongested roads. Drivers with more time flexibility for instance a person doing his or her grocery shopping can avoid the road and the fee. They can use alternative but more congested roads shift when they drive to nonpeak hours or use mass transit when it provides a cheaper alternative to driving. The average cost to each driver falls because drivers have a choice in how they pay for roadway use in time or in money The Cost of Congestion Over time slowing traffic exacts heavy costs on drivers. On average congestion caused hours of delay for U.S. commuters and commercial truck drivers in urban areas during peak hours in For America s largest cities this number is much higher : hours. Extra fuel is consumed on congested roads because of the effect that waiting in stop-andgo traffic has on fuel economy. In sitting in traffic wasted about billion gallons of fuel or almost percent of all fuel consumed by lightduty and commercial vehicles that year. Waiting in traffic can also increase the cumulative amount of pollution emitted from a vehicle s tailpipe which contributes to poor air quality and more greenhouse gas emissions Aggregating over the most congested U.S. cities the cost of time wasted in traffic and extra fuel consumed by commuters and commercial truck drivers due to congestion is estimated to have exceeded $ billion in ( see Table ) In Los Angeles the city with the worst congestion the fuel and time cost of waiting in traffic was calculated to be almost $ per traveler in In Philadelphia congestion is noticeably less than in Los Angeles but the estimated cost to travelers is still high : $ per traveler per year. In addition businesses that rely on regular and on-time delivery of supplies have begun to maintain larger inventories to safeguard against | Economic Report of the President TABLE Cost of Congestion in Wasted Time and Fuel in the largest Urban Areas Metro area Annual delay per traveler ( in hours ) Total cost ( $ in millions ) Cost per peak traveler Los Angeles Long Beach Santa Ana CA San Francisco Oakland CA........................................ Washington DC VA MD............................................. Atlanta GA.................................................................. Houston TX................................................................. Dallas Fort Worth Arlington TX................................ Chicago IL IN............................................................. Detroit MI................................................................... Miami FL Boston MA NH RI...................................................... Phoenix AZ New York Newark NY NJ CT Philadelphia PA NJ DE MD $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Source : Texas Transportation Institute Urban Mobility Report unanticipated delays caused by congestion. A recent study conducted by the Department of Transportation confirms that congestion has resulted in higher transportation prices and less reliable pickup and delivery times for freight Building More Roads Expanding road capacity may be an important component of any longterm strategy to accommodate traffic growth in urban areas. However there are a number of reasons why a construction-only strategy to alleviate congestion is likely not the best solution. First increasing capacity can take years to complete and is expensive one study found that a lane costs between $ million and $ million per mile to build. Second new lanes are often needed in densely populated areas but these are often also the areas where it is most difficult to find unoccupied space for expansion making new lanes politically controversial. Third a body of evidence suggests that the addition of a nonpriced lane to an already congested roadway may do little to alleviate congestion. This happens for two reasons : new roads generate additional traffic as drivers take trips to destinations that previously took too long to reach. And since traffic flow improves initially drivers who were previously using alternative often less congested routes now find the highway with the added lane more attractive. Drivers continue to redistribute themselves across the various routes until the costs of using the new route and the costs of using the existing route are about equal. At this point no driver can be made better off by changing routes. Ultimately the reason why building more roads is insufficient is because it does not address the underlying problem : roads are not priced and are therefore subject to overuse Chapter | Pricing Road Space There is reason to believe that reductions in traffic congestion would be relatively easy to attain. Small changes in the number of cars using a particular roadway at a given time can result in large improvements in the flow of traffic. For instance the addition of just a few school buses makes traffic flow noticeably worse on the first day of school while traffic flow is noticeably better on some State holidays when only a small number of residents stay home from work Congestion pricing dampens demand for roads during peak hours and spreads usage over a longer time period. Differentiating the price of a good by the time of day effectively allocates limited space during periods of higher demand. This approach is used by many providers of goods and services : movie theaters charge more in the evening than they do midday ; ski runs charge more during weekends than they do on weekdays ; airlines raise prices on tickets during peak seasons ; taxi cabs charge more during rush hour ; and railroads often charge lower prices for offpeak traveling In addition to improved allocation of road space charging a fee also provides urban planners with useful information about when and where to invest in the expansion of existing road capacity. Expansion should be focused on roads where drivers demonstrate a willingness to pay that is higher than the costs of construction. Revenues from roadway pricing may also prove a viable alternative to taxes as a way to fund the building of new roads in urban areas. As is the case in other markets those who use the roadway would pay for its maintenance and expansion In general there are two ways to price road space to address congestion : cordon pricing and roadway pricing. Cordon pricing charges a toll to vehicles for access to a congested area regardless of which roads in the area are used. It is typically in effect during the work week and varies by time of day. Cordon pricing has been implemented in a number of cities including London Stockholm and Singapore. While cordon pricing has been considered for several cities in the United States it has not yet been implemented here. It is likely to be less effective in cities that are less dense do not have adequate public transportation systems and have multiple areas of centralized economic activity ( such as Phoenix or Los Angeles ) Evidence suggests that cordon pricing fees have been effective in reducing congestion where they have been tried. After the first year that cordon pricing was imposed in London for instance congestion fell by percent average vehicle speed increased by percent and bus travel became more reliable ( see Box ) One important mechanism for reducing congestion appears to be the ability to substitute some form of public transportation for driving | Economic Report of the President Box : Cordon Pricing Experiences in London and Stockholm In London drivers pay an 8-pound fee for daily access to a portion of downtown between the hours of : a.m. and : p.m. on weekdays There are no toll booths around the perimeter of this area. Instead cameras record the license plates of vehicles and check them against a list of prepaid vehicles. Drivers have a variety of choices in how they pay : they can pay at designated service stations through the Internet by text message or phone or by mail. Weekly and monthly charges also are available for regular commuters. If drivers have not prepaid they have until midnight of the next day to do so. Anyone who drives within the zone without paying during this time period is fined pounds through an automated system Stockholm also recently implemented cordon pricing but it differs from the London system in two ways. First it charges vehicles via a card mounted on the windshield that is read electronically by roadside beacons when cars drive past them. Second Stockholm uses a variable pricing system which means that the fee is higher during rush hour periods A recent report on the London policy indicates that cordon pricing has led to a percent reduction in delay time for city commuters Initial reports from Stockholm s 6-month test period indicate that there were decreases in traffic of about percent due to cordon pricing Large reductions in London and Stockholm traffic were due in part to increased use of bus transit. In spite of early criticism from drivers and businesses within the central city cordon pricing has grown in popularity in London. In Stockholm this has also been the case : a majority of residents voted to retain cordon pricing after the test period ended Roadway pricing aims to limit congestion on certain routes by charging variable fees ( tolls ) to access a particular lane or road regardless of the final destination. Ideally road tolls should be responsive to the actual level of congestion at each moment. By increasing the fee during periods of high demand and reducing it during periods of low demand the variable tolls reduce congestion by encouraging offpeak driving and the use of alternative routes Variable tolls are rare in the United States. Most of the over miles of toll roads in the United States have flat tolls designed to generate revenue rather than variable tolls to relieve congestion. Where they do occur they are typically limited to a single road or freeway. On the congested bridges and tunnels connecting New York and New Jersey tolls are discounted by Chapter | percent ( $ ) during nonpeak hours. Results of a small survey indicate that about percent of drivers changed their behavior as a result of these variable tolls. The most common changes were to switch to mass transit carpool or to increase offpeak driving Recently the Department of Transportation helped fund a small pilot project in Seattle to examine how drivers would respond if the entire road system in the city were subject to a variable tolling system. Where and when participants drove was automatically tracked and transmitted by a device installed in their car. Participants received prepaid accounts between $ and $ to pay the tolls. At the end of the pilot they were allowed to keep whatever they did not spend. Tolls ranged from to cents per mile and varied by road and time of day. Preliminary results show that nearly percent of participants decreased the amount they drove or changed when they drove. On average participants took percent fewer trips by automobile and drove percent fewer miles each weekday due to tolls. Participants took percent fewer trips and drove percent fewer miles during the morning commute Currently there are about six U.S. highways that use high-occupancy toll ( HOT ) lanes many of which incorporate variable pricing and were piloted using Federal funds. HOT lanes are variations of the high-occupancy vehicle ( HOV ) lanes discussed earlier in the chapter but they have greater potential to reduce congestion since they are less likely to be underutilized. Similar to HOV lanes they allow carpoolers to use the road for free or at a discount but charge a toll to single occupancy drivers for access. The toll frequently varies by time of day. Some tolls set variable prices based on historical highway use and adjust rates monthly or quarterly. Other tolls use real-time information on congestion conditions to adjust tolls dynamically over the course of the day. In locations where HOV lanes are underutilized conversion to HOT lanes is suggested as a way to increase use and to provide more choice to drivers. For instance in San Diego conversion of HOV lanes to HOT lanes on a portion of Interstate increased usage by percent over a 3-year period. Several studies confirm that there are substantial gains in societal welfare from allowing solo drivers to pay for access to existing HOV lanes. Others caution however that when only one HOV lane is converted to a variable toll and other lanes are free of charge any temporary decrease in congestion on the remaining free lanes may be offset by the redistribution of traffic The use of real-time or historically based variable tolling on HOT lanes may have a significant effect on traffic flow. For instance San Diego s variable toll uses real-time pricing which changes every minutes to reflect the amount of traffic on the road. Computerized electronic signs make information on the toll amount and the speed and flow of traffic available to drivers before they have to decide between the free and priced lanes. Results show that travel times | Economic Report of the President vary little on San Diego s variable toll lanes because free-flow conditions are almost always maintained. In Orange County the tolls vary by hour and day of the week but are based on historical information. While they are adjusted several times each year the toll does not convey actual conditions to drivers only average conditions. Thus unexpected events such as accidents can cause major delays on the variable toll lanes and because drivers do not have up-todate information on road conditions travel time is less predictable Despite their potential benefits toll lanes are sometimes portrayed as Lexus Lanes. The contention is that tolled roadways supply faster routes only to high-income drivers who can afford to pay the tolls while lower income drivers continue to be stuck in traffic. One study finds that drivers with higher incomes tend to use HOT lanes more often than lower income drivers but that lower income drivers rely on toll lanes when on-time arrival at their destination is important. For instance you can imagine a case where a parent is running late but needs to be at the daycare to pick up his or her child by a certain time. If the parent is late and the daycare fines him or her $ then paying a $ toll to arrive on time saves $ A recent survey also finds that support for or opposition to HOT lanes is unrelated to income Another study finds that lower income bus commuters were some of the largest beneficiaries of cordon pricing in London. Bus riders are exempt from paying the cordon fee but their commute times greatly improved. Not surprisingly the number of bus passengers during morning hours increased Experts note that implementation of congestion pricing faces less resistance where motorists are unaccustomed to free and unrestricted roadway access For instance it may be more feasible to implement congestion pricing on a new road than on an existing road. Likewise it may be easier to convert HOV lanes to HOT lanes. The advent of new technologies that electronically charge the toll by sensing a microchip placed on the windshield of the vehicle eliminates the need for a driver to stop and physically pay the toll. These are increasingly used to charge drivers tolls on existing roadways making congestion pricing systems easier and less costly to implement Historically one of the largest hurdles to variable price tolling on roadways in the United States has been the Federal-aid highway program which has prohibited states from collecting tolls on interstates or other roads that receive Federal funding. Federally funded pilot projects that explored variable price tolling brought the advantages of congestion pricing to the attention of policymakers. Policymakers also began to explore the use of pricing mechanisms to reduce congestion in other contexts such as for allocation of runway access at airports ( see Box ) A transportation bill signed into law in ( The Safe Accountable Flexible Efficient Transportation Equity Act : A Legacy for Users ) provides states with increased flexibility to use tolling to manage congestion and finance infrastructure improvements and provides ways to Chapter | participate in pilot demonstrations of variable tolling. States such as Texas and Colorado have passed laws allowing the formation of toll authorities at local levels that can then construct and operate toll roads. States such as Washington California Florida and Minnesota have identified candidate freeways for variable tolling Box : Airport Pricing to Decrease Congestion Though traffic jams are easily observable manifestations of congestion flight delays and runway bottlenecks also waste time and fuel Landing fees at most U.S. airports are directly related to the weight of the plane even though lighter and heavier planes tend to consume approximately the same runway time. This contributes to airport congestion because it encourages smaller lighter planes ( which can use smaller satellite airports ) to overuse the airport displacing larger heavier passenger planes and reducing the number of passengers that an airport can serve at a time A short-lived experiment at Boston s Logan airport in demonstrates how a change in the landing fee structure can effectively reduce airport congestion. Boston changed its runway use fee from one based only on aircraft weight to one that combined a non-weight-based fee and a smaller weight-based component. The fee for a small singleengine plane increased from $ to about $ while the fee for a large jumbo jet decreased from $ to less than $ By flattening the landing fee Logan made it relatively more costly to land small planes decreasing their volume. This allowed it to more easily accommodate the larger planes that carry more passengers. The result was that Logan airport reduced delayed landings from percent to percent in less than months. Despite a reduction in congestion the new landing fee structure abruptly ended when the program was deemed to be in violation of the Federal Aviation Act The auctioning of runway access for planes may prove to be an even more effective way to reduce congestion at airports. An auction would award landing rights to the carrier that values the slot the most. Such auctions have been successful in other contexts such as to allocate radio waves while still accommodating smaller local and public radio stations | Economic Report of the President Conclusion The transportation industry relies overwhelmingly on petroleum for fuel In spite of its reliance the market largely functions as it should ; while transportation is particularly unresponsive to changes in oil prices in the short run due to the lack of readily available substitutes it does eventually respond Also the price reflects the costs to the firm of producing the oil and the benefits to drivers from consuming the oil. That said the use of oil by the transportation and other sectors generates costs to national security and the environment that users typically do not take into account. Likewise the full costs of congestion are not taken into account by individual users when they drive since roadway use is not priced by the market. Carefully crafted policies could help address these costs but care should be taken as government action itself imposes inefficiencies Chapter | C H A P T E R Currency Markets and Exchange Rates I n the modern economy firms buy and sell products from more than just local or national markets. Often a firm s supplier is located in a different country. To make purchases and sell their own goods internationally firms need to change units of one currency for units of another currency. For instance when a British firm trades with a U.S. firm the U.S. firm may pay in U.S. dollars. However the British firm needs to pay many of its costs in British pounds. When the U.S. firm pays the British firm then one of two things has to occur : the U.S. firm must convert its dollars to pounds and then pay the British firm in pounds or the British firm must accept dollars from the U.S. firm and then convert the dollars into pounds to pay its workers And to be sure that the sum in pounds is equivalent to the sum in dollars all parties to the transaction must know the value of dollars in terms of pounds Now multiply this single transaction by the number of countries and firms involved in all aspects of the production of all internationally traded goods and services and one can see that multiple currencies make international trade far more complex and difficult than domestic trade The desire to transact internationally provides the impetus for a huge well-functioning market that facilitates such currency conversions and allows global economic integration and trade to take place smoothly and quickly at low cost. Both by volume of trade and ease of making transactions currency markets today are the world s deepest most liquid markets in the world Currency markets range from simple markets where parties simply exchange one currency for another to sophisticated markets where parties buy and sell currency far into the future In the United States imported and exported over $ trillion worth of goods and services. In addition gross sales and purchases of long-term U.S securities such as corporate and Treasury bonds to residents of foreign countries amounted to around $ trillion. Most of these transactions either directly or indirectly required a foreign-exchange transaction. A foreignexchange transaction is a trade of any two currencies. For example a purchase of Japanese yen with U.S. dollars is a foreign-exchange transaction As cross-border transactions have become larger and more frequent foreign-exchange markets have become increasingly important to the global economy and have grown in relative size : whereas U.S. cross-border trade in goods and services and long-term securities are measured in trillions of dollars per month or year turnover in foreign-exchange markets is measured in trillions of dollars per day. Daily average turnover in global foreign-exchange markets averaged $ trillion in April ( Note : Unless otherwise noted all foreign-exchange transactions data in this chapter are from April the latest date for which global turnover data are available. ) Foreign-exchange transactions vary in size and complexity. A foreignexchange transaction is simply a trade of one country s currency for that of another whether the amount traded is a few dollars or a few billion dollars ; whether the entity making the exchange is a tourist changing money at the border for a short holiday or a foreign company building a new factory needing to exchange millions in domestic currency to pay for materials and labor ; or whether the form of money being acquired is foreign currency notes foreign currency bank deposits or assets such as stocks or bonds denominated in foreign currency. Key points of this chapter are : Foreign-exchange markets not only allow firms to trade goods and services across borders but also allow firms to manage the risks they face from fluctuations in the price of their domestic currency As with any other good the exchange value of a currency is determined by its supply as well as the demand for the country s assets goods and services Over much of the 20th century countries tended to favor fixed exchange rates. In recent decades there has been a shift away from fixed regimes toward freely floating exchange rates Monetary and exchange-rate policies are tightly linked. A nation s government must decide between controlling its exchange rate and controlling its domestic inflation rate Currency Markets Are Large On an average day in April an amount equivalent to $ trillion was traded in the foreign-exchange market. These trades occurred between different agents ( individuals firms banks governments ) and for different reasons varying from tourist demand for currency to firms needing payment for goods in local currency. To put this number in perspective on average in every trading days a sum greater than the entire value of the U.S annual GDP changed hands in the foreign-exchange market. Not surprisingly turnover in the foreign-exchange market is larger than turnover in most other financial markets. For example the dollar value of average daily trading on the New York Stock Exchange the largest exchange in the world was around $ billion in roughly percent of the turnover in all world foreign-exchange markets When currencies are traded in the foreign-exchange market participants need to know the value of their currency relative to other currencies just as participants in a traditional stock market need to know the value of the stocks they wish to buy or sell. In foreign-exchange markets this price is known as | Economic Report of the President the exchange rate the number of units of one nation s currency that must be traded to acquire one unit of another nation s currency. For example on October a person wanting to acquire one British pound would have had to pay $ in U.S. dollars. By November a person wanting to make the same trade would have had to pay almost $ for one British pound. In this case the dollar is said to have depreciated. After the depreciation more dollars are required to buy the same number of pounds. If the transactions are viewed from the perspective of the pound the pound is said to have appreciated ; fewer pounds are required to purchase each dollar In principle an exchange rate exists between each possible pairing of the individual currencies in the world. Among the nations ( out of a world total of nations ) that reported formal exchange-market transactions in there are possible bilateral exchange rates. If the European nations that share the euro as their national currency had separate currencies this number would be even higher In reality a substantial portion of foreign-exchange trading occurs through an intermediate or a vehicle currency that is a currency that is widely used throughout the world. For example the U.S. dollar serves as a global vehicle currency and the euro is becoming an important vehicle currency in Europe A Turkish bank that wishes to exchange Turkish lira for Swedish krona may first exchange lira for euros and then exchange the euros for krona. Vehicle currencies reduce transaction costs in foreign-exchange markets because a bank wishing to provide foreign exchange for its customers need not keep stores of large numbers of currencies on hand. Instead it need only maintain stores of its own domestic currency and one or two other vehicle currencies The U.S. dollar is the most important vehicle currency in the world. The dollar has served as an important vehicle currency in part because it has remained remarkably stable over time. This stability is in part a result of the United States long history of flexible exchange markets and its commitment to improving capital market and trade access to the United States. As of the U.S. dollar was used in almost percent of world currency transactions ; its average turnover was over $ trillion per day more than twice as much as the next most-used currency the euro. Most of this trading occurs outside of the United States Just as a few vehicle currencies dominate the transactions two trading locations dominate foreign-exchange market transactions. In over half of the world exchange-market transactions occurred either in London ( percent ) or New York ( percent ) The next-largest location in terms of trading share was Japan with percent of transactions. Foreign-exchange market transactions are also concentrated among a few large banks. In the United States percent of transactions were conducted by only banks in In the United Kingdom banks captured percent of foreignexchange market transactions Chapter | Innovations in technology such as computers and international communications networks and breakthroughs in economic theory that have improved our understanding of the value of currencies have made foreignexchange markets among the most sophisticated markets in the world Investors can easily take advantage of small differences in exchange values across the different global markets buying a currency for a lower amount in one location and selling it for a higher amount in another making the global currency market one global exchange The sophistication of modern currency markets also helps multinational firms protect themselves or hedge against currency risk. Because costs and revenues of multinational firms are often denominated in different currencies currency risk is a fundamental part of international trade and changes in the exchange rate affect the cash flow of the firm. For example a Mexican manufacturer may enter into a contract with a U.S. firm agreeing to sell its product at a fixed dollar price for a set period of time for example year. The Mexican manufacturer must pay its employees in Mexican pesos but will receive a fixed dollar stream of revenue. If the peso appreciates over the year ( that is if the peso becomes more valuable so that it takes fewer pesos to buy one U.S. dollar ) the manufacturer s dollar-denominated revenue will fall in value relative to his peso-denominated costs. If the peso appreciates sufficiently the manufacturer may not be able to cover his costs. To see this dilemma more clearly suppose that when the Mexican firm enters into the contract with its U.S. counterpart the exchange rate is pesos per dollar. If the firm has costs of pesos and it receives $ then the firm is able to cover its costs and has pesos of profit after the transaction. However if the peso appreciates over the year from pesos per dollar to pesos per dollar after the firm receives payment of $ it will only hold pesos The firm would not be able to cover the costs from the revenue it receives. If the firm has no way to hedge this risk its owner may be unable or unwilling to enter into the contract and thus the opportunity for Mexico and the United States to realize gains from this trade may not be realized. Advances in economic theory that have helped companies learn how to price risk appropriately have enabled financial markets to develop contracts that allow firms to sell their currency risk. Boxes and provide more detail Box : Types of Currency Market Transactions A spot transaction is an immediate exchange of one currency for another. A tourist exchanging currency upon arrival at an airport is an example of a person making a spot transaction. Spot transactions between professional currency traders specify a clearing date that | Economic Report of the President requires the actual exchange of currency within business days ; the days gives each side of the transaction ample time to move funds. As a share of total foreign-exchange market turnover spot transactions have declined from percent in to percent in The share of spot market transactions has not shrunk because the spot market is smaller the volume of spot transactions almost doubled between and but because the growth rate of other types of foreignexchange transactions has grown at a much faster rate. For example over the same time period transactions with clearing dates in the future have increased almost eightfold A forward transaction is similar to a spot transaction except that the clearing date ( also called the settlement date ) is in the future. The price at which the parties agree to exchange currency on the settlement date is known as the forward exchange rate and it almost always differs from the spot rate at the time the contract is entered into. In a forward transaction no currency changes hands until the settlement date. The primary purpose of a forward transaction is to allow multinational firms to hedge their currency market risk. A foreign-exchange futures transaction is virtually identical to a forward transaction. The main differences between a forward and a future transaction lie in the institutional details of the transaction For example futures contracts tend to be much more standardized than forward contracts and are sold on organized centralized exchanges Foreign-exchange swaps combine a spot and a forward transaction into one transaction. Foreign-exchange swaps are typically used by banks and other dealers when they wish to temporarily reallocate their portfolio into or out of a currency without incurring any exchange-rate risk. In the swap one currency is swapped for another for a prespecified period of time. In about two-thirds of foreign currency swaps the swap period is less than week. In foreign-exchange swaps accounted for about percent of the foreign-exchange market turnover. A foreignexchange swap is particularly useful for a firm that has payments and expenses payable in the same currency but payable at different dates For example a U.S. firm may receive a euro-denominated payment from its German affiliate. The firm plans to use the payment to purchase euro-denominated goods in 1-month s time. However over the month the firm would like to invest the money in the United States. This firm could use a foreign-exchange swap in which it trades the euros for dollars today and trades the dollars for euros at the end of the month A foreign-exchange or currency option gives the buyer the right but not the obligation to purchase a prespecified amount of currency at a prespecified price. Depending on the type of option the contract can either specify a date on which the option may be exercised ( European option ) or may specify an expiration date where the buyer may exercise the option anytime prior to the expiration date ( American option ) Chapter | Box : Hedging Against Foreign-Exchange Rate Fluctuations In Volkswagen a German automobile company announced to the world that it was going to increase its hedging of foreign-exchange risk. Volkswagen was exposed to foreign-exchange risk because the majority of its operating costs in particular a portion of its labor costs were denominated in euros while a substantial share of its revenues were denominated in U.S. dollars. In other words Volkswagen paid its workers in euros and received U.S. dollars for the cars it sold in the United States Between and the euro appreciated considerably relative to the dollar. That is more dollars were required in order to purchase each euro. Since Volkswagen was unable or unwilling to change the price of cars sold in the United States enough to offset this swing in the exchange rate the company s dollar revenues from sales in the United States lost substantial value in terms of euros. With costs holding steady and revenues falling Volkswagen s profits on U.S. operations were reduced by an unfavorable change in the euro/dollar exchange rate To avoid similar losses in the future the company chose to combat the appreciating euro by increasing its hedging of foreign-exchange risk. Between and Volkswagen more than doubled its use of a variety of currency market contracts. In essence this hedging strategy involved buying forward contracts for euros at a predetermined rate so that if the euro were to appreciate relative to the dollar and cause an unexpected reduction in dollar revenue the company would receive an offsetting profit from its forward contract. If the euro were to depreciate and cause an unexpected increase in dollar revenue the company would incur an offsetting loss from its foreign currency position. In this way Volkswagen was able to shield its revenue flow from foreignexchange volatility for the duration of its futures contracts Volkswagen s strategy highlights the benefits of hedging against the currency risk posed by short-term fluctuations in exchange rates. When faced with a permanent shift in the exchange rate however companies operating in multiple currencies are forced to either change their prices which are in one currency or change their costs which are in another Volkswagen has therefore shifted some of its euro costs into dollar costs by expanding production facilities in the United States. This strategy known as natural hedging permanently eliminates the currency mismatch between revenues and costs | Economic Report of the President What Determines Currency Values ? The exchange rate is a market price and like other market prices it is determined by the interaction of buyers and sellers in the market. In the foreign-exchange market the demand for a country s currency arises from two sources : demand for a country s assets and demand for a country s goods and services. When analyzing foreign-exchange markets the supply of a country s currency is usually taken as given and fixed at an amount determined by the country s central bank. The role of the central bank and the supply of money will be revisited when exchange-rate policies are examined later in this chapter The concept of parity is central to any analysis of how exchange rates are determined in the foreign-exchange market. Two types of parity are particularly important : interest rate parity and purchasing power parity ( PPP ) Exchange rates and prices that move too far from either concept of parity will tend to move back toward the level implied by interest rate parity and purchasing power parity as economic agents try to exploit pricing differences across countries. In this way the prices for currencies in the foreign-exchange market adjust. Just as prices across markets within a country tend to move toward each other as buyers tend to go to the lower priced market and sellers tend to go to the higher priced market until prices are equalized. The absolute volume and speed of asset trading tends to make interest rate parity a shortterm condition while purchasing power parity tends to hold over a somewhat longer time horizon Interest Rate Parity For the United States the volume of international trade in assets is many times larger than the volume of international trade in goods and services. As a result day-to-day fluctuations in the exchange rate tend to be driven much more by the value and desirability of a nation s assets than by the value and the desirability of goods and services the nation is selling. That is demand for assets tends to determine the value of a nation s currency in the very short run because asset trade drives such a large part of the day-to-day transactions in the foreign-exchange market Goods and services are purchased for use today while assets are bought in order to purchase goods in the future. A financial asset is at its most basic a contract that offers a payment at some future date. For some assets the contract is explicit : U.S. Treasury notes contain a promise to pay the face value of the bond at a certain date in the future as well as a fixed sequence of interest payments over the life of the note. For other assets the contract is implicit : buying a stock in a company gives the holder the right to sell the stock at a future date but not at any explicit price. Because assets involve a future payment the return on an asset the return is the future payment Chapter | divided by the purchase price is typically uncertain. Assets differ in the amount of risk they offer. For example a Treasury bond is considered to be less risky than a stock. For any given level of risk assets with higher future payments are more desirable and tend to have higher prices Further because the payment of an asset may vary depending on the conditions at the time the payment is due the stock may have a high price or a low price when the holder sells the stock information about the likely amount of the future payment also affects how much of the asset people want to hold today. For example when a firm announces an increase in future dividend payments the price of the firm s stock often increases. This increase in price reflects an increase in the desire to hold the stock. Every time new information is released investors reevaluate their holdings of assets The foreign-exchange market plays an important role in determining the value and return to foreign currency assets. When buying assets that are denominated in a foreign currency investors must take into consideration both the future payment in terms of the foreign currency and any change in the relative values of the two currencies the exchange rate. For example in August the interest rate paid on 10-year U.S. Treasury bonds was percent and the interest rate paid on to year German Treasury bonds was percent a difference of percentage point ( see Chart ) Does this difference imply that investors should have preferred U.S. Treasury bonds to German Treasury bonds ? | Economic Report of the President Not necessarily. The expected return for a U.S. resident who purchases a German bond includes both the interest paid on the bond in euros and the expected change in the exchange rate over the period during which the bond is held. In other words the return on a German bond from a U.S. investor s perspective includes both the explicitly defined interest rate and the value of this return once converted back to U.S. dollars an effect that can increase or decrease the return to the bond An example will clarify the concept. A German investor wishes to calculate the expected return on investing in a savings deposit at a bank in the United States for year. She needs three pieces of information to calculate the expected return : the current exchange rate between the dollar and the euro the interest rate paid on the savings deposit and the exchange rate that will prevail year in the future. The investor knows the first two variables ( today s exchange rate and the interest rate ) with certainty. The one element of the calculation that is not readily available is the future exchange rate. For this example let s first assume the investor knows all three variables : today s exchange rate is $ per euro the interest rate to be paid on the savings deposit is percent and the future exchange rate is $ per euro ( the euro depreciates relative to the dollar ) The calculation of the investor s return is straightforward : after exchanging her for dollars she has $ in hand and deposits it in the U.S. bank account. At the end of one year she withdraws $ from the bank account and takes it to the foreign-exchange market to trade the $ dollars for ( $ / = ) The effective return on the savings deposit was percent : the $ in interest earned by the $ at percent plus the gained because the euro depreciated by percent In the example the future exchange rate was taken to be a 1-percent depreciation of the euro relative to the dollar. Holding the U.S. interest rate fixed changes in the future exchange rate have large implications for the rate of return. For example if the euro had appreciated by percent the return would have been just under percent : the $ in interest earned by the $ at percent minus the lost because the euro appreciated by percent. Had the future exchange rate been the same as the initial exchange rate the return would have been the percent paid on the deposit. Investors must take into consideration future changes in the exchange rate in order to decide which asset has a higher expected return Now what happens if investors all decide that the expected return the return considering both the exchange rate and the interest rate is higher on German bonds than on U.S. bonds ? In this case U.S. investors will sell U.S dollars and purchase euros and then use the euros to purchase German bonds The investors will keep doing this until they no longer perceive German bonds as having a higher return than U.S. bonds. That is investors keep buying German bonds until prices adjust. In this example there are three Chapter | prices : the two interest rates and the exchange rate. Here the euro would appreciate because the demand for euros is rising ; the yields on German bonds would fall ; and the yields on U.S. bonds would tend to rise Interest rate parity is one of the key equilibrium relationships in international economics : The foreign-exchange market is in equilibrium when deposits of all currencies offer the same expected risk-adjusted rate of return. Interest parity is expected to hold except when countries prevent the free flow of assets. If in the example above German and U.S. residents could only buy their own domestic bonds interest parity would not necessarily hold. The return on the bonds would be determined independently in each country. This issue is revisited in Box later in the chapter Purchasing Power Parity The last section focused on the influence the return on a country s assets tends to have on the country s exchange rates. Purchasing power parity is a second equilibrium concept that also helps determine exchange rate. PPP also relies on the concept that prices ( and returns ) must be consistent internationally. At a weekend farmer s market the price of corn can not vary too much between any two vendors. If there is a large difference in price for the same corn most of the corn sales will be at the cheaper booth. In other words people at the market perceiving the corn to be the same quality will tend to buy from the cheaper vendor until either that vendor s supply is exhausted or the prices at the two booths adjust so that they are closer together. Purchasing power parity is an extension of this simple concept on a global scale. That is prices of goods sold in any two countries should exhibit about the same price once those prices are converted to a common currency. If goods are sold for different prices in different countries then either the prices of those goods or the exchange rate would be expected to change until the exchange-adjusted prices in the two countries were similar An example may clarify how this process works. Imagine a farmer s market with three booths. One booth sells corn in U.S. dollars the second booth sells identical corn in euros and a third booth ( the foreign-exchange market ) sells and buys euros at a posted price. A buyer arrives at the market with a single U.S. dollar in his pocket and wishes to buy corn. The prices are as follows : bushel of corn from the U.S. dollar booth sells for $ the same bushel of corn sells for at the euro booth and at the foreign-exchange booth $ can buy Therefore the buyer finds that euro-corn is cheaper ; he exchanges his U.S. dollar for and is able to buy bushels of corn instead of the bushel he could buy at the dollar market. If nothing changes all buyers who show up to the market will prefer euro corn. In response to this preference two things are likely to occur. The price of corn at the dollar booth will begin to fall as the dollar booth sees less demand for its corn and the | Economic Report of the President foreign-exchange booth will raise the price of euros relative to dollars as it perceives an increased demand for euros The above example is quite stylized ; however the economic forces in the global marketplace work in exactly the same way. Buyers and sellers search for the best location to sell their goods. However unlike asset markets in which the adjustments can happen on a large scale very quickly purchasing power parity depends in part on the adjustment of goods markets which tend to take place over a relatively long period of time. Therefore purchasing power parity tends to hold over a very long time horizon months and years rather than day-to-day. In addition because there are real costs to shipping goods internationally very small differences in purchasing power parity will not necessarily disappear. Nevertheless purchasing power parity is a powerful concept Fixed versus Floating Exchange Rates The previous sections assumed that currency values could immediately adjust as the demand for either goods or assets changes. In reality some countries do not allow the value of their currencies to fluctuate. Instead by systematically changing the supply of their own currency through changes in monetary policy they control the changes in the value of their currencies and limit exchange-rate movements. The choice of exchange-rate policy is often called the exchange-rate regime of a country. This section discusses the two most basic categories of exchange-rate regimes fixed and floating. Defining a country s exchange-rate regime is in practice not an easy task. For example in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) identified eight distinct exchange-rate regimes ( see Box ) Using the simplification of fixed versus floating allows a simpler discussion of the links between the exchange rate and monetary policy a topic discussed in the next section Floating Exchange-Rate Regimes Floating exchange-rate regimes are regimes in which the government takes no action to influence the exchange rate. Under this regime the exchange rate is completely determined by the general market forces discussed above. One advantage of a floating exchange rate is that the government does not have to have any knowledge over what the correct or true exchange rate should be Market forces drive the exchange rate toward its true value Over the past years there has been a general trend away from fixed exchange rates and toward floating exchange rates. Chart illustrates this general trend. The chart shows that the number of countries using floating exchange rates has risen gradually over time. In over percent of the Chapter | Box : A Description of the IMF Classification of ExchangeRate Regimes Exchange arrangements with no separate legal tender : A country gives up its own currency and allows the currency of another country to circulate as the sole legal tender. This exchange regime is often referred to as dollarization. This classification includes countries such as members of the euro area that form currency unions : arrangements by which the same legal tender is shared by the member countries Currency board arrangements : An exchange-rate regime in which a country commits to exchange domestic currency for a foreign currency at a preannounced price. Currency board arrangements feature restrictions on the nation to ensure that it will abide by its legal obligation Conventional fixed peg arrangements : A regime in which a nation announces that it will buy or sell its currency in exchange for a foreign currency at a preannounced price. This regime differs from a currency board arrangement only in the legal structure of the regime Pegged exchange rates within horizontal bands : A regime in which a country allows only limited movements in the exchange rates. The nation announces a high and a low value for the currency and only agrees to sell the domestic currency at the high price and to buy the domestic currency at the low price Crawling pegs : A crawling peg is essentially the same as a pegged exchange rate except that the price at which the currency is traded changes over time. For example a nation that wishes to allow a longterm appreciation of its currency may choose to do so by adopting a crawling peg that allows the currency to appreciate on average Exchange rates within crawling bands : This regime is a combination of a crawling peg and a pegged exchange rate with horizontal bands Independently floating : The exchange rate is driven by the market The country does not attempt to influence the value of the exchange rate. For example the United States has an independently floating exchange rate Managed floating : The exchange rate is driven by the market part of the time but on occasion the government seeks to systematically influence the exchange rate through purchases or sales of the currency | Economic Report of the President countries listed in the IMF exchange classification maintained a specific target for their exchange rate. By this number had dropped to percent Even among countries that are considered to be freely floating the government may occasionally or even periodically intervene in the exchange market. For example Turkey listed as freely floating in the IMF classification system does not have a fixed exchange rate but reserves the right to intervene in the exchange market to limit volatility in its exchange rate ( and has done so many times over the past few years ) Fixed Exchange-Rate Regimes A fixed exchange-rate regime is a regime in which a nation s government announces the price at which its currency will trade for another currency. To maintain the exchange rate the government must stand ready to buy or sell unlimited quantities of currency at the preannounced price. To keep the exchange rate from appreciating the government sells its domestic currency in exchange for foreign currency. The increased supply of the currency lowers the value of the currency. To keep the exchange rate from depreciating the government buys its domestic currency using foreign currency. To make these transactions the government must have sufficient supplies of both domestic and foreign currency. Maintaining a supply of domestic currency is simple as Chapter | the government has the right to print unlimited quantities of its own currency. However supplies of foreign currency must be held in reserve and the government does not have the option of increasing its supply. The possibility of running out of foreign currency and being unable to keep the currency from depreciating is one of the reasons that many nations have given up fixed exchange-rate regimes Fixed exchange rates have been used by a large number of countries and for a large portion of modern economic history. Following World War II the major industrialized countries agreed to fix the value of their currencies with respect to each other. This agreement was known as the Bretton-Woods agreement and the IMF was established in to monitor this system of exchange rates. To a greater or lesser degree this system remained in place until the early 1970s when countries began to allow their exchange rates to drift Following the breakdown of the Bretton-Woods agreement the Western European nations joined together in a fixed exchange-rate regime. After suffering several major exchange-rate crises of the European nations preferred so strongly to maintain a fixed exchange rate that they agreed to give up their national currencies and the euro area was established. By giving up their national currencies and forming a monetary union the member nations hope to avoid future crises. While the euro area is still relatively young ( it was formally established in ) the currency union has not yet suffered a major crisis The Links Between Monetary and Exchange-Rate Policies A nation s choice of exchange-rate policy is tightly linked to a nation s choice of monetary policy. They are tightly linked because exchange-rate policy is a form of monetary policy. Monetary policy broadly defined is the policy that controls the growth rate of the money supply. In order to fix the exchange rate a government must use its ability to control the money supply to sustain a fixed level of the exchange rate. If the supply of money is dedicated to controlling the level of the exchange rate it can not simultaneously be dedicated to controlling inflation. Given the earlier discussion of interest rate parity the choice of monetary target is essentially a choice between stabilizing domestic prices and stabilizing the exchange rate. If the exchange rate is fixed then domestic prices both asset prices and goods prices must do all of the adjusting The increase in the number of economies preferring floating exchange rates and the rise of independent central banks with mandates to maintain price stability is not a coincidence. An increasing number of countries have come to desire central banks charged with maintaining low and stable inflation To achieve this goal central banks need a nominal target to automatically stabilize the money supply. Most modern central banks have chosen a domestic short-term interest rate for the nominal target. The short-term | Economic Report of the President policy rate allows the central bank complete autonomy over choosing the rate of domestic inflation The short-term policy rate is not the only nominal anchor available to the central bank however. The central bank could choose to fix the domestic price of gold or any other commodity. The use of the gold standard has a long and reputable history. A nation s exchange rate with another country can also be used as the nominal anchor for monetary policy. By fixing the value of the domestic currency against another currency a country essentially adopts the monetary policy of the foreign country ; one of the problems of using a strict fixed exchange rate is that the monetary policy of the foreign country may differ from what the central bank would have chosen given complete autonomy. That is the bank could be forced to print either more or less currency than it would have otherwise chosen Thinking through a specific example will help clarify the relationship between exchange-rate policy and overall monetary policy. For a long time China had a fixed exchange rate with the United States. To maintain its fixed exchange rate the Chinese government had to stand ready to buy or sell yuan China s domestic currency for U.S. dollars at a fixed price. From to July this price was set at approximately yuan per dollar. Over this time period Chinese productivity growth was much higher than U.S. productivity growth and Chinese prices on average grew much more slowly than U.S prices. High productivity growth implies a high return to investment in China relative to the United States. The slow growth of Chinese prices implies that holding the exchange rate constant Chinese goods were becoming cheaper relative to goods in the United States. Therefore both in terms of maintaining interest rate parity and in terms of maintaining PPP there was pressure for the yuan to appreciate relative to the U.S. dollar. How did the Chinese authorities prevent the appreciation ? The Chinese authorities prevented the appreciation by buying U.S. dollars and exchanging these dollars for yuan. The pressures for appreciation of the yuan implied that the yuan was facing higher demand that more goods could be purchased for dollars converted to yuan and investments in China delivered on average a higher return. To offset the increase in demand the Chinese government effectively increased the supply of Chinese assets and decreased the supply of U.S. assets. Chinese foreign-exchange reserves increased from around $ billion in early to almost $ trillion by September a truly remarkable increase. In other words the Chinese prevented an appreciation of the exchange rate by effectively printing yuan and using those yuan to accumulate U.S. dollar assets By fixing the exchange rate the Chinese monetary authority is unable to use monetary policy for any other goal. By printing yuan the Chinese raise the amount of currency in the country which in turn holding all else equal raises the domestic price level thus raising the economy s inflation rate Chapter | But if they are just printing enough to buy and hold U.S. assets from where does the domestic price pressure arise ? The price pressure arises as the yuan which are used to purchase the dollar assets flow back into the Chinese economy. In other words the prices increase because of foreign demand for Chinese goods. On the surface this foreign demand appears to arise as a result of the Chinese exchange-rate regime ; however this demand is the same demand which was originally putting pressure on the Chinese exchange rate At the old prices there was not enough supply of Chinese goods to meet all of the demand. Because the exchange rate was unable to adjust the price of Chinese goods had to adjust Could the Chinese conduct a monetary operation to lower inflation ? To lower inflation the Chinese would need to remove yuan from circulation perhaps by selling domestic bonds. This transaction is sometimes referred to as sterilization. The action however will tend to raise the value of the currency : the currency would become scarcer as a result of the reduction in supply. As the currency becomes more valuable the foreign-exchange value of the currency would tend to appreciate. Any monetary action the Chinese undertake to reduce domestic inflation tends to undo their exchange-rate intervention ( see Box ) This example also illustrates why the Chinese intervention does not systematically change the relative real prices between the United States and China Had the Chinese government not intervened Chinese domestic prices would have remained the same in terms of yuan and become more expensive in terms of dollars through a change in the exchange rate. With the intervention Chinese domestic prices rose in terms of yuan and became more expensive in terms of dollars even though the value of the nominal exchange rate was unchanged. This outcome occurs any time a country takes actions to fix its exchange rate : fixing the nominal exchange rate does not necessarily have any impact on the relative prices between two countries. In other words fixing the nominal exchange rate does not tend to move countries away from purchasing power parity. The only effect is that domestic goods prices have to do all of the adjustment since the exchange rate is fixed In the end central banks that choose to fix the value of their exchange rate relative to another currency and central banks that choose to set a short-term interest rate are each choosing a different tool to conduct monetary policy Economic theory does not dictate a clear preference between the two tools ; however by no central bank from any major industrialized nation has opted to use a fixed exchange rate while maintaining their own domestic currency as a monetary policy instrument. These central banks understandably believe that interest rate targeting in practice is a preferred tool in the conduct of monetary policy | Economic Report of the President Box : The Impossible Trinity A fixed exchange-rate regime forces a country to choose between allowing free flows of assets in and out of the country or restricting the flows in order to preserve independent monetary policy. This choice is forced on countries because only two of the following three policies free asset flows a fixed exchange rate and an independent monetary policy can be maintained at any point in time The underlying reason for this restriction is that free asset flows and monetary policy operations may yield a foreign-exchange value of the currency which is inconsistent with the fixed rate that the government is trying to maintain. The United States for example allows free asset flows and maintains an independent monetary policy. As a result the U.S. central bank the Federal Reserve Board can influence domestic interest rates relative to foreign rates. If the Federal Reserve elects to raise domestic rates however then the United States becomes a more attractive investment environment relative to other countries and assets flow into the U.S. economy. Because this shift in asset flows raises demand for the U.S. dollar the exchange rate appreciates. Since the U.S. government lets the market determine the dollar s foreignexchange value the dollar s appreciation can occur without any active intervention by the Federal Reserve In this example the only way to break the direct link between the exchange rate and the interest rate would be for the United States to restrict asset flows. If assets can not flow into the United States demand for the dollar does not rise with the increase in interest rates and the exchange rate does not necessarily appreciate. In other words one of the key assumptions of interest rate parity that assets can flow to the location with the highest return is broken Denmark on the other hand effectively pegs its domestic currency to the euro and allows free flows of assets as evidenced by the nearly billion kroner of foreign direct investment in Denmark in ( over percent of Denmark s GDP ) By pegging its currency and allowing free asset flows Denmark essentially loses the ability to independently determine its domestic inflation rate. If Denmark were to alter interest rates so that they deviated from world rates assets would flow in or out of the Danish economy and lead to a shift in the exchange rate. To correct this shift and maintain its fixed exchange rate with the euro Denmark would then have to buy or sell kroner thus negating the interest rate changes it achieved through its monetary policy. In this sense free asset flows and a fixed exchange rate make an independent monetary policy virtually impossible continued on the next page Chapter | Box continued In the middle of the spectrum are countries such as China which has pegged its exchange rate to the U.S. dollar. China can to a limited extent operate an independent monetary policy however because it restricts the ability of its residents to move capital out of the country. In China s case world and domestic interest rates can differ since restrictions on the flow of funds out of the domestic economy limit the resulting changes in the money supply and the corresponding pressures on the exchange rate Conclusion Currency markets facilitate global trade and investment by making it easy for firms and investors to buy or sell the currencies they need to do business globally. In the absence of global currency markets the benefits of international openness would be nearly impossible to realize international trade would effectively be reduced to barter arrangements. The growing importance of international trade and investment has been accompanied by an increasing number of transactions in the foreign-exchange markets The value of a nation s currency is determined like any other good service or asset. The more people demand the currency and the scarcer the supply of the currency the higher the currency s value. The value of a currency is measured by its purchasing power relative to other currencies. In other words the value of a currency is measured by its exchange rate with other currencies Exchange-rate policy is a form of monetary policy. When a country fixes its exchange rate relative to another country that country must use its monetary policy to maintain the exchange rate. A country with a fixed exchange rate does not have the ability to use monetary policy for any other purpose just as a nation which sets a short-term interest rate must devote its monetary policy to achieving that goal In addition the value of a country s currency is in large part determined by the value of that country s goods services and assets and the ability of people and firms to freely trade these items across national borders. Any policy that restricts the free flow of these items will lower the value of the currency in addition to lowering the value of the restricted asset. The value of a nation s currency is tied to people s ability to move assets and goods. Small changes in a nation s openness to trade and investment will likely have a small impact on the value of the currency ; however every movement towards more protectionist policies is likely to be associated with a lower value of a nation s currency than would have been true otherwise | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R International Trade and Investment T he United States derives substantial benefits from open trade and investment flows. Over many decades increased trade and investment liberalization has been an important catalyst for greater productivity growth and rising average living standards in the United States Trade liberalization and globalization remain controversial subjects because competition invariably raises both anxieties and opportunities. Reducing obstacles to trade can help economies grow more rapidly in the long run and create better higher paying jobs. Increased competition however can lead to hardships for others in the short run. Constructive policies that help displaced workers train for and find new work and increase the portability of pension and health benefits can help to ease adjustment The key points in this chapter are : Engagement in the global economy through increased trade has contributed to rising average living standards in the United States. Firms engaged in international trade are more productive have higher employment growth and are higher wage firms than domestically oriented firms. Looking ahead international trade liberalization in services presents significant opportunities for U.S. workers firms and consumers Foreign direct investment ( FDI ) flows into the United States benefit the U.S. economy by stimulating growth creating jobs and financing the current account deficit. FDI flows into the United States also stimulate investment in research and development in high-technology areas that promote innovation and competitiveness U.S. direct investment abroad is an important channel of global market access for U.S. firms. U.S. multinational companies have contributed to productivity growth job creation and rising average living standards in the United States Trade Liberalization : A Key Contributor to the Strength of the U.S. Economy Increased international trade has raised real incomes restrained prices introduced greater product variety spurred technological advances and innovation and raised living standards in the United States. Studies have estimated that the annual payoff from U.S. trade and investment liberalization to date including from the Kennedy Round the Tokyo Round the Uruguay Round the North American Free Trade Agreement and other free-trade agreements is up to $ trillion. These gains arise through many channels : higher long-term levels of commerce in goods and services that come from trade and investment liberalization ; increased product variety ; more efficient allocation of resources ; and better transportation and communication technology. Some economists have conjectured that trade liberalization alone has accounted for about half of these gains which implies that the annual income gain from trade liberalization to date is over $ per capita or $ for an average American family of four. Existing studies suggest that U.S. incomes could rise further by approximately $ billion per year by moving all the way to global free trade in goods and services International trade in goods and services exposes firms to foreign competition and reduces their ability to charge high markups above production costs International trade also increases the variety of goods available such as silk sweaters from China wine from Australia and winter blueberries from Chile Consumers value variety and one study estimated that the U.S. economic value of increased varieties through imports over the past three decades is equivalent to $ billion per year or percent of gross domestic product ( GDP ) Engagement in the global economy through increased trade has contributed to rising average living standards in the United States. Research shows that firms engaged in the international marketplace tend to exhibit higher rates of productivity growth and pay higher wages and benefits to their workers than domestically oriented firms. Economists agree that the most important determinant of living standards in a country is the average level of productivity or output per worker A free and open international trade regime is vital for a stable and growing economy both here at home and throughout the world. The United States will continue to work aggressively toward multilateral trade liberalization through the World Trade Organization s Doha Development Agenda negotiations. The prospects for these negotiations to produce significant benefits for this country and our trading partners particularly developing countries demand that we promptly reach a balanced and ambitious outcome Firms That Engage in International Trade Are Strong Performers At the microeconomic level firms engaged in international trade outperform domestically oriented firms on many dimensions. Research has shown | Economic Report of the President that firms engaged in international trade have higher productivity than their counterparts engaged solely in domestic activity. One study found that value added per employee one simple measure of productivity was percent higher in manufacturing exporting firms than in firms that did not export ( controlling for industry effects plant size and geographic location ) And these productivity effects are reflected in higher wages : the wages paid by manufacturing plants that export are percent higher on average than wages paid by non-exporting plants of the same size. Wages in service-oriented firms that export are on average percent higher than their purely domestic counterparts of the same size One recent study that examined the dynamics of globally engaged firms between and found that firms engaged in international trade had a higher survival rate ( percent ) than the average for all firms in the country ( percent ) In addition a firm that began to trade during this time period increased employment by nearly percent on average while a firm that quit trading experienced a decline in employment An increasing number of American workers are employed by firms engaged in international trade. Between and firms that trade increased employment by million workers and the share of the American workforce employed by a firm engaged in trade increased from percent to approximately percent. Applied to today s workforce this result implies that over million American workers are currently employed by a firm that engages in international trade The Effects of Nontariff Barriers on International Trade While trade can generate many economic benefits governments at times set up barriers to international trade. One of the more common and harmful barriers is a nontariff barrier a barrier behind the border that is a policy ( other than a tariff or tax ) or official practice that can unfairly inhibit competition Unjustified nontariff barriers can distort the prices and quantities of goods and services traded internationally restrict international investment and reduce economic welfare in exporting and importing countries. As tariffs have fallen both in the United States and in many other countries nontariff barriers have increased in importance and are often cited as more traderestricting than tariffs. Nontariff barriers can arise as a result of government policies aimed explicitly at protecting domestic firms from international competition or from rules or laws within a country that effectively hinder trade ( see Box ) Chapter | Box : Nontariff Barriers Restrict Trade Unjustified nontariff barriers ( NTBs ) make it more difficult for international goods and services to compete freely and fairly with those produced domestically. Common examples of NTBs are burdensome or nontransparent product standards or regulations. For example in Korea pharmaceutical imports must be tested on Korean nationals and each individual batch produced must undergo testing. In China the process of standards certification for telecommunications and IT products can be burdensome and unpredictable as two separate Chinese regulatory agencies each check for conformity to the same set of standards. Other often-cited NTBs include investment restrictions government procurement laws and lax enforcement of intellectual property rights Measuring the effects of NTBs on trade is more difficult than assessing the effects of tariffs but some attempts have been made. A growing body of evidence consistently shows that the economic welfare gains from eliminating NTBs are at least as large as those obtained from further tariff liberalization. One study shows that the U.S payoff from eliminating NTBs with just seven of our trading partners ( Australia Canada Germany Italy Japan the Netherlands and Great Britain ) would generate annual income gains of $ billion for the United States ( percent of GDP ) compared with $ billion from tariff liberalization ( percent of GDP ) These benefits arise largely from the pro-competitive effects of increased international trade and more efficient allocation of resources Tariff negotiations are fairly straightforward and forums such as the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) exist for this purpose. Members are required to report their tariff schedule to the WTO each year so members know the tariff rate for each product in every country However countries do not always agree on what constitutes a NTB and there is no formal consistent notification process thereby making negotiations aimed at addressing such barriers more complicated. Part of the policy problem is making distinctions as to whether NTBs are warranted for nontrade reasons ( e.g. product safety standards ) or whether they are simply covert barriers to imports ( nontransparent licensing requirements for foreign firms ) For instance customary regulatory and legal procedures within one country might be seen as complex and overly burdensome to would-be exporters Apart from the challenges of identifying NTBs policymakers face difficulties in knowing which NTBs they should seek to dismantle first The U.S. Department of Commerce has surveyed its industry and trade experts and country desk officers in an effort to identify the most prevalent NTBs faced by U.S. exporters and to identify which export products | Economic Report of the President are most likely affected. The survey results suggest that on average at least one NTB affects U.S. exporters for each major product category in which they export to our main trading partners. For instance a problematic regulatory environment was cited as a problem in of the countries covered by the survey and was cited as the top problem in of those countries. The industries facing the most NTBs included entertainment pharmaceuticals and information technology International Trade in Services Liberalizing trade in services is important for economic growth here and abroad. As an economy grows and matures services tend to increase as a share of GDP and as a share of trade. The United States has a global competitive advantage in services yet services remain highly protected abroad Services such as financial insurance transportation and storage telecommunications express delivery and business services generate percent of world GDP but account for just under percent of global trade. While global advances in information and communications technology are making services increasingly tradable existing trade barriers to services are significant These barriers are currently subject to negotiation in a host of bilateral regional and multilateral trade talks U.S. Competitive Advantage in Services A large and growing part of the U.S. economy and workforce is employed in services. In out of American workers were employed in agriculture ; today that number is less than in ( Chart ) In contrast nearly in American workers are employed today in the service sector The vast economic benefits from trade liberalization for services stem in part from our competitive advantage in services. That is the United States can produce many services at a lower cost than our trading partners and our trading partners can produce some other set of goods and services at a lower cost than the United States. When we trade our lower cost services for their lower cost goods we and our trading partners gain from trade. Chart shows the changing structure of U.S. trade which in part mirrors the changing structure of the U.S. economy. Since the 1970s the United States has consistently run a surplus in services trade with a $ billion surplus in Chapter | | Economic Report of the President Technological Change Is Fostering International Trade in Services Services have become increasingly tradable particularly knowledge-based or information technology-enabled services that are beyond the traditional notion of internationally traded services such as transportation travel and tourism. For many of these services a physical commercial presence is necessary. For example a financial institution is able to offer a host of financial products to international clients but the multinational firm must still set up intermediary branches to serve their clients overseas. Other services can be delivered with virtually no physical presence. An increasingly wide range of commercial transactions ranging from stock trades to manufacturing orders to airline reservations can occur almost entirely over networked digital media located in many countries around the world Trade in services previously involved high transaction costs between businesses and customers. Technological innovations and changes in global technology such as the Internet information technology ( IT ) hardware such as personal computers and IT networks have greatly reduced communication and transaction costs for trade in services Table reports U.S. trade in private services. The largest subcategories in other private services trade which captures many of the IT-enabled services include financial and insurance services ; computer management and consulting services ; and other business professional and technical services TABLE U.S. International Trade in Private Services ( billions of dollars ) Total private services traded Total private services traded Travel............................................................................................. Passenger fares............................................................................. Other transportation...................................................................... Royalties and license fees............................................................. Other private services Education Financial services Insurance services................................................................... Telecommunications Business professional and technical services....................... Computer and information services...................................... Management and consulting services Research and development and testing services Operational leasing Other business professional and technical services Other services Film and television tape rentals Other...................................................................................... Exports $ Imports $ Balance $ Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Chapter | Trade growth in other private services has far outpaced growth in the rest of services. From to U.S. exports of other private services grew percent compared with percent growth in all other services. The bulk of the overall trade surplus in services comes from the other private services category which accounted for percent of the overall U.S. services trade surplus in up from percent in In contrast the surplus in more traditional services ( e.g. travel and transportation ) has fallen. The surplus in other private services has grown from $ billion in to $ billion in and the surplus in the rest of services has fallen from $ billion to $ billion. Many of these trends are consistent with the global IT advancements that have fostered international trade in services over the past decade High Barriers Restrict International Trade in Services Barriers to trade in services are mostly regulatory and investment restrictions and tend to be higher than trade barriers in merchandise. For instance U.S. banks that wish to offer retail banking services abroad face a host of barriers that limit their ability to compete in foreign markets. Examples of such barriers might be investment restrictions that limit the number of bank licenses the country will issue to a U.S. bank ; requirements for U.S. banks to enter the banking market through a joint venture with a domestic bank ; or limits on the degree of control that a U.S. bank can exercise over its foreign affiliate. Foreign firms wishing to enter the U.S. airline industry face ownership restrictions that limit their ability to compete with domestic firms Despite such barriers services trade is expected to continue to grow Research suggests that as countries incomes grow their demand for services and their trade in services will each grow more than one-for-one with income U.S. producers are well-positioned to continue to engage in increased services trade as many have already incorporated the technology in their operations to facilitate trade Looking Ahead to Larger Gains from Trade Liberalization Despite decades of trade liberalization the world economy is still far from a global marketplace of unfettered trade. Many of the remaining barriers lie in services and the prospective gains for the United States from further trade reform are substantial. While global tariff liberalization in manufacturing and agriculture could generate over $ billion in income for the United States each year the prospective gains from services liberalization are immense : an estimated $ billion in annual U.S. income ( percent of GDP ) Summing up this is an additional $ billion in annual income that will be foregone in the absence of further trade reform | Economic Report of the President The magnitude of the payoff to the United States from services trade liberalization reflects a number of factors : the U.S. competitive advantage in many services the large share of services in the global economy compared to the relatively small share of services in global trade and the high barriers to services trade. These barriers are often regulatory in nature or involve restrictions on the form of investment such as foreign equity restrictions that limit foreign investors holdings and control in a company transfer limitations on capital flows and the repatriation of profits. Removing these barriers would free up capital to move across borders to the location with the highest rate of return Developing countries also stand to benefit greatly from global liberalization of services trade. The service sector share of GDP exceeds the manufacturing share in most developing countries. The increased availability and quality of services enhances the competitiveness of manufactured goods agricultural products and existing services. For instance India stands to gain an estimated $ billion in national income each year ( percent of GDP ) from removing barriers to trade in services and China stands to gain an estimated $ billion ( percent of GDP ) each year Foreign Direct Investment International trade in goods and services is an important channel of international commerce but it is not the largest channel. For many U.S firms foreign direct investment ( FDI ) is a more significant path to accessing foreign markets than are exports FDI is investment of foreign assets into domestic structures equipment and organizations ( e.g. a manufacturing plant an R&D facility an office or a warehouse ) whether in the form of acquisition or greenfield establishment. FDI is distinguished from passive portfolio investment ( FDI does not include foreign investment in the stock market ) Only the former can confer managerial or operational control. The two types of foreign direct investment are inward FDI and outward FDI. Inward foreign direct investment is generally understood to imply ownership by a foreign person or corporation of at least a 10-percent stake in a U.S. business enterprise. Similarly outward foreign direct investment is ownership by a U.S. person or corporation of at least a 10-percent stake in a foreign business operation abroad. A foreign automaker building or buying a production plant in the United States is an example of inward FDI while a U.S. automaker building or buying a production plant in China is an example of outward FDI Before we examine each type of FDI and its importance to the U.S economy it is useful to define some of the terms that are commonly encountered when discussing FDI. A multinational corporation is a business enterprise Chapter | ( i.e. the parent ) headquartered in one country that has at least a 10-percent ownership stake in a foreign business enterprise ( i.e. the affiliate ) in another country. That 10-percent ownership stake is the minimum stake used by many statistical agencies around the world including those in the United States for identifying meaningful managerial influence over the affiliate A majority-owned U.S. affiliate is an affiliate of a foreign-owned company that is located in the United States and has at least percent foreign ownership ( we focus on majority-owned U.S. affiliates here but use the term U.S affiliates ) Similarly a majority-owned foreign affiliate is a foreign affiliate with at least percent U.S. ownership U.S. firms are more reliant on FDI for the international delivery of services than they are for the international delivery of goods. While services are becoming increasingly tradable their actual delivery often requires some physical presence for example distribution and express delivery services Even with widespread use of ATMs and electronic banking financial or retail banking often requires physical presence in the country in which services are being offered. Based on data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis for the ratio of sales by U.S.-owned services affiliates abroad to total U.S. services exports was compared to for goods. That is U.S. firms deliver over five times the value of services through their foreign affiliates as they do through cross-border trade. Similarly U.S. firms deliver times the value of goods through their foreign affiliates as they do through cross-border trade Contributions of Inward FDI to the U.S. Economy The United States receives inward FDI from firms and individuals located in countries from all over the world. Countries with the largest FDI positions in the United States include Great Britain Japan Germany and Canada These funds support firms across the U.S. economic landscape from food mining and manufacturing firms to service sectors such as finance telecommunications and wholesale and retail trade. Every state in the United States is a recipient of foreign direct investment Presence of U.S. Affiliates Decades of trade and investment liberalization both here and abroad have encouraged the growth of multinationals and global supply chains. Today U.S. affiliates of foreign multinationals account for an important part of the U.S. economy. In the latest year for which data are available U.S. affiliates owned $ trillion in assets and had $ trillion in sales. They produced $ billion of goods and services inside the United States and accounted for percent of total U.S. private output up from percent in U.S. affiliates employed million workers or percent of the | Economic Report of the President U.S. workforce in up from percent in While historical data show upward trends in the presence of U.S. affiliates since U.S. affiliate investment output and employment have leveled off or decreased slightly Microeconomic Benefits to the U.S. Economy Inward FDI provides a number of benefits to the U.S. economy at the microeconomic level. Research has shown that multinationals are more productive than firms focused primarily on domestic markets. The relatively high productivity of U.S. affiliates of foreign-owned firms is attributable in part to their relatively high levels of investment in physical capital R&D and exporting and importing. Specifically while U.S. affiliates account for percent of output and percent of employment they account for a disproportionately high share of U.S. exports ( percent ) imports ( percent ) physical capital expenditures ( percent ) and R&D expenditures ( percent ) ( see Chart ) Studies show that all of these activities are correlated with strong productivity performance. ( Chapter discusses productivity growth and long-run effects on the standard of living. ) Chapter | At the firm level U.S. affiliates pay higher compensation ( wages and benefits ) on average than their counterparts in the rest of the U.S. economy In an average U.S. worker employed by a U.S. affiliate of a foreignowned firm received $ in annual compensation compared to $ for workers in the rest of the economy. Research suggests that this difference is largely attributable to above-average labor productivity at U.S. affiliates Part of this productivity advantage reflects these firms ability to integrate production processes across borders and their organizational efficiency Another part reflects differences in plant size capital intensity ( that is higher use of capital relative to other factors such as labor in the production process ) and employee skill level. The data also suggest that these firms have higher levels of efficiency ( how well labor and capital inputs are used ) the gains of which are passed on in part to workers. In other words firms can break up their production process across borders to lower average costs and realize increased productivity and revenues which can be shared with workers through higher compensation and/or captured by firm owners as higher profits ( see Box ) Macroeconomic Benefits to the U.S. Economy Inward FDI provides a number of benefits to the U.S. economy at the macroeconomic level. For instance inward FDI is an additional source of investment that helps to modernize the U.S. capital stock. Another benefit is that it provides a source of financing for the U.S. current account deficit which measures net flows of goods and services between the United States and the rest of the world. As the United States continues to run a current account deficit foreigners continue to accumulate U.S. assets and inward FDI is one of the main ways in which they do so The accumulation of FDI flows over a period of time results in a stock of assets or the gross foreign investment position. In the inward FDI position at market value totaled $ trillion and was the largest component of foreign holdings of U.S. assets. Other components were U.S. Treasury securities ( $ trillion ) ; corporate stocks ( $ trillion ) ; and corporate and other private bonds excluding official holdings ( $ trillion ) ( see Chart ) The share of foreign holdings is not concentrated in any particular class of assets which implies a general broad-based confidence in the U.S. economy Inward FDI is generally considered to be the most stable among the four types of assets shown in Chart that is the least subject to sudden withdrawal. FDI flows are generated by long-term risk return considerations and are far less liquid and less reversible than portfolio investments. Therefore FDI flows provide stability to U.S. capital flows because they are not easily reversed for short-term considerations | Economic Report of the President Box : Multinationals Bring New Products and Processes to the Host Country The benefits to the U.S. economy from inward FDI mirror those of many other countries. A growing body of evidence across countries and industries demonstrates that globally engaged firms tend to be strong performers such firms are more productive pay higher wages and generate beneficial productivity side effects that accrue to domestic competitors. The three case studies that follow provide a snapshot of the benefits of inward FDI Increasing Living Standards in the United States Infineon Technologies of Munich Germany built a state-of-the-art manufacturing plant in Richmond Virginia using leading-edge technology to produce dynamic random access memory products that are used in computers. The Richmond company s annual payroll exceeds $ million with average wages that are nearly double average Virginia salaries. Over North American workers are employed by continued on the next page Chapter | Box continued this German-headquartered multinational with over workers in Richmond alone. The firm has built extensive ties with its customers and suppliers worldwide and many advanced technology suppliers have emerged in Virginia to support Infineon and other semiconductor firms. Semiconductors are now Virginia s second largest export Enhancing Productivity for Mexican Producers and Retailers One case study documents impressive efficiency gains for Mexico s domestic soap producers once Wal-Mart entered its retail sector. WalMart helped improve Mexico s retail sector by improving the way Mexican retailers interacted with their suppliers. These changes brought about efficiency improvements such as modernization of warehousing distribution and inventory management ; triggered greater use of information technology in supply management ; and required delivery trucks to have appointments and drivers to carry standard identification cards. These innovations have been adopted by other retailers and producers outside of Mexico s soap industry. Mexican soap producers improved their productivity and have gained market share in key export markets including in the United States Improving Banking and Telecommunication Services for Czech Manufacturers The change toward a freer and more open investment climate in the Czech Republic was followed by the entrance of foreign-owned banks and telecommunication firms. These foreign-owned service providers helped to improve the availability range and quality of services. These improved services contributed to better performance of Czech manufacturing firms that rely on services as inputs. For instance foreign banks accelerated the processing of loan applications offering decisions to small and medium Czech enterprises within days compared to a previous waiting period of several weeks. Foreign banks were among the first to offer Internet and remote banking services including ATMs which save individual customers and business clients days and sometimes weeks in transaction times. The time needed to send a fax went from hours ( or sometimes days for rural areas ) to just minutes following the liberalization of the telecommunication sector | Economic Report of the President Is Inward FDI on the Decline ? The increase of inward FDI since the late 1980s has coincided with the generally solid performance of the U.S. economy along with a surge in U.S worker productivity that has occurred since Recently however some trends have developed with respect to FDI in the United States that may be cause for concern. First while the U.S. affiliate share of U.S. output has grown over the past two decades it has stagnated and even declined in recent years. Second the U.S. affiliate share of employment has declined from percent in to percent in Third the share of inward FDI in the U.S. capital account that is FDI in the United States as a share of all the assets owned by foreign interests has declined since It is not yet clear whether these are benign and temporary trends or whether this development is symptomatic of deeper issues with respect to the attractiveness of the United States as a country in which to make direct investment. To ensure that inward FDI remains a strong positive force in the U.S. economy foreign investors in the United States must continue to receive fair and equitable treatment as a matter of both law and practice Historically the United States has opposed the use of government actions that distort restrict or place unreasonable burdens on foreign investment. No property can be expropriated pursuant to U.S. law unless it is done for a public use with payment of just compensation. The United States has historically provided a domestic environment conducive to investment by providing foreign investors fair and equitable treatment based on the national treatment principle : foreign investors should be treated no less favorably than domestic investors in like circumstances. Moreover while taking every necessary step to ensure that foreign investments do not jeopardize national security the Administration recognizes that our economic vitality depends on our openness The Contributions of Outward FDI to the U.S Economy A U.S. multinational company is headquartered in the United States and through outward FDI has affiliates ( often production or marketing facilities ) in other countries. Activities of U.S.-headquartered multinationals have contributed strongly to productivity growth in the United States and thus to rising U.S. living standards Because multinationals are engaged in cross-border investment and production networks they are better able to enhance their organizational efficiency Studies have shown that multinationals are more productive than firms that are focused primarily on domestic markets. By combining domestic production with foreign production multinationals can produce at lower costs earn Chapter | higher profits and pay higher wages and benefits. Domestic firms can benefit from outward FDI as multinationals are exposed to the world s best business practices that can be adopted by other U.S. firms Basic Facts About U.S. Multinational Companies U.S. multinationals are relatively small in number but have a disproportionately large economic footprint. Less than percent of U.S. firms are multinationals but these multinationals account for percent of total U.S employment and percent of total U.S. output. In there were U.S. multinationals with foreign affiliates with million employees in the United States and million workers abroad. The operations of U.S. multinationals are concentrated in the United States. In the combined value-added output of U.S. multinationals was $ trillion. U.S parents accounted for over percent of this output and foreign affiliates for less than percent While U.S. multinationals have increased employment and output in an absolute sense their share of the workforce has decreased slightly over the years while their share of output has remained fairly constant. U.S. multinationals employed million American workers or percent of the workforce in ( the first year for which annual employment data are available ) In those figures stood at million workers and percent respectively. The value of output by U.S. parents was $ trillion or percent of the total private U.S. output in ( the first year for which annual output data are available ) In those figures were $ trillion and percent respectively. In terms of recent trends both employment and output by U.S. parents peaked in and then began to decline. Output rebounded in and employment rebounded in largely reflecting economy-wide trends Why Do U.S. Firms Become Multinational ? There are three conditions required for a firm to be willing to invest abroad : ( ) the firm has specific assets that can be transported to foreign affiliates ; ( ) the host country has certain characteristics that make it attractive for the firm ; and ( ) the firm wishes to maintain control over its intellectual assets Multinationals often face large costs and barriers to doing business abroad compared with domestic firms in the host country that are familiar with the local business climate. Physical and human capital are needed to establish an affiliate and additional resources are needed to understand the local business environment ( for example regulations and tax laws supply networks cultural differences and property rights ) Thus a multinational firm must have certain advantages to compensate for these costs. Three types of compensating advantages are commonly cited. One advantage is firm-specific resources or knowledge-based assets and services ( such as technology patents trademarks | Economic Report of the President and managerial or engineering expertise ) that can be used by the foreign affiliate Another advantage is the location and characteristics of the host country such as market size trade costs and differences in the prices for key inputs such as land labor or capital. The existence of a large market or the high costs of trading with a certain country or region can motivate multinationals to produce and sell in foreign countries. Price differences in land capital or labor ; transportation and telecommunications infrastructure ; or good business practices can also motivate a multinational to invest and produce abroad The third type of advantage is known as internalization advantage. A firm may choose outward FDI over giving a foreign company a license to produce its goods so that it can retain control of its intellectual assets. For example a firm may be reluctant to reveal the details of its product s construction or its production process to a prospective licensee. There is also the danger that a licensee may produce a lower quality product and consequently reduce the value of the multinational s trademark. The difficulty of guaranteeing quality control monitoring and managing employees achieving a satisfactory licensing agreement and enforcing patent or trademark rights all tend to favor outward FDI The Organization of Multinational Production There are two main organizational strategies for multinational production One strategy is vertical FDI whereby the multinational geographically fragments the production process and carries out different stages of production at different locations. In contrast horizontal FDI occurs when the multinational conducts the entire production process in the host country to sell locally through its affiliates Vertical FDI establishes cross-border production networks. A multinational firm may perform many activities for example R&D assembly marketing and sales that require different mixes of capital more- or less- skilled labor land and other inputs. Separating these activities across borders ( and across the parent company and affiliate companies ) enables the firm to locate each activity in countries with relatively low costs for each activity s intensively used inputs. Because each stage of the production process is carried out in the optimal location in terms of the input mix vertical FDI production networks can allow firms to take advantage of differences in comparative advantages across countries and produce at an overall lower unit cost. Trade between U.S parents and their affiliates ( intra-firm trade ) has risen over time accounting for percent of total U.S. goods exports in and percent of total goods imports Horizontal FDI can allow U.S. multinationals better access to foreign markets. Ninety-five percent of the world s consumers live outside U.S borders. Companies can reach foreign markets through FDI or exporting. But for U.S. multinationals the predominant mode of serving foreign markets is Chapter | through FDI and affiliate sales ( producing and selling locally ) not exporting In U.S. multinationals sold $ trillion of goods abroad through affiliate sales compared to $ billion through exports ( see Chart ) In other words for every $ of exports in goods U.S. multinational firms sold $ through their foreign affiliates up from $ ten years earlier A common allegation is that U.S. multinationals set up production plants to serve as export platforms back to the United States. However the data do not support this claim. In sales by foreign affiliates of U.S. multinationals totaled $ trillion. Most of these sales were to customers outside of the United States ; percent of total sales were to foreign customers and percent were to U.S. customers Outward FDI Complements Domestic Economic Activity Studies show that economic activity abroad by U.S. multinationals complements domestic economic activity. One dollar of additional foreign capital spending is associated with $ of additional domestic capital spending Firms combine home and foreign production to generate final output at a lower cost than would be possible in just one country resulting in increased output and profits. Further when multinationals hire abroad they also expand employment here at home making multinationals an important force behind job creation in the United States ( see Box ) | Economic Report of the President From a broader perspective U.S. multinationals enhance U.S. competitiveness by engaging in the same activities and possessing the same characteristics that make the U.S. economy competitive in world export markets. Research has shown that the competitiveness of U.S. multinationals tends to be driven by relatively high levels of R&D and highly skilled labor. Studies have also shown that U.S. firms tend to control larger shares of world markets in industries with high levels of R&D and highly skilled labor. Because their competitive interests largely coincide with broader U.S. economic interests U.S. multinationals make the economy as a whole more competitive Box : U.S. Multinational Companies and U.S. Jobs In recent years many observers have expressed dismay that U.S companies have expanded their operations overseas claiming that when U.S. firms hire workers in foreign countries they reduce the number of jobs available to U.S. workers. The idea that U.S. multinationals hiring abroad are exporting jobs relies on at least two assumptions : first that jobs abroad at foreign affiliates are substitutes for domestic jobs at U.S. parent companies ; and second that when U.S parent companies expand overseas they do not change the overall scale or scope of their domestic activities. However in looking at historical data regarding the activity of U.S. multinationals we see exactly the opposite : when U.S. companies expand their employment abroad they also tend to expand domestically When U.S. Multinationals Hire Abroad They Also Expand Domestic Employment Over the last two decades ( ) U.S. multinationals expanded employment at their foreign affiliates by million and at their parents by million ( see chart ) In other words the long-run data show that when U.S. multinationals hire abroad they also expand domestic employment. There have been short-run anomalies to this historical trend that largely reflect economic business cycles both here and abroad. For instance between and for each job U.S. multinationals created abroad they created nearly two at home. Between and U.S. multinationals continued to expand employment abroad albeit at a slower pace while decreasing their U.S. payrolls. Since both U.S. parent company and affiliate employment have risen One study found that as U.S. companies expand employment abroad increase their compensation of foreign workers and invest in their overseas operations they also increase their hiring employee compensation and investment in the United States. Thus rather than being continued on the next page Chapter | Box continued substitutes for one another the domestic and foreign operations of U.S multinationals have tended to be complements. Consider the operations of General Electric. According to its latest annual report since this multinational has expanded foreign employment by while also expanding domestic employment by the same amount One reason for the complementary relationship between domestic and foreign activity is that a firm may change the overall size of its operations and expand both at home and abroad. Alternatively a firm may change the scope of its operations and change the mix of its activities ( for example manufacturing services or R&D ) In fact it is common for parent companies in one industry to own foreign affiliates in another industry. In U.S. parent companies primarily engaged in manufacturing owned over foreign affiliates but over of these affiliates specialized in areas outside of manufacturing In sum the decision of a firm to expand abroad is based on many factors and it may be part of a larger overall expansion strategy or a change in the scope of its operations. It is difficult to predict beforehand what such an expansion means for U.S. workers and the U.S. economy The only way to tell the effect is to examine the data and thus far the data show that over the long run when U.S. multinational firms hire abroad they also hire at home | Economic Report of the President Good Performance Features of U.S. Multinationals U.S. multinationals differ from the average U.S. firm in a number of ways For example while U.S. multinationals account for percent of total U.S output and percent of employment they account for a disproportionately high share of U.S. goods exports ( percent ) goods imports ( percent ) physical capital expenditures ( percent ) and research and development ( percent ) ( see Chart ) In fact U.S. affiliates and multinationals combined conduct over percent of all private sector R&D in the United States. Also the plants operated by these companies tend to be larger in size than the U.S. average. These differences are important because each of them international trade capital expenditure research and development and plant size is associated with high labor productivity. And because of the strong link between labor productivity and employee compensation ( see Chapter ) this higher productivity is a potential benefit to U.S. workers U.S. multinationals pay higher average compensation than firms in the rest of the economy. In U.S. workers employed by U.S. parent companies received an average of $ in annual compensation compared to about $ for workers in the rest of the economy. The relatively high productivity of U.S. multinationals may be one of the causes for the difference in compensation Chapter | U.S. multinationals have had high productivity growth over at least the last three decades and because they make up a sizeable part of the overall U.S economy they have been one of the main drivers of overall U.S. productivity growth during this period. U.S. multinationals accounted for over half of U.S productivity growth between and and for half of the increase in U.S. productivity growth between and During this 5-year period productivity at U.S. multinationals surged growing percent annually Conclusion Engagement in the global economy through increased trade and investment has contributed to rising average living standards in the United States Further trade liberalization particularly in services could bring even larger gains to American consumers firms and workers. Advancing free and fair trade in multilateral regional and bilateral negotiations will help to ensure that America continues to derive benefits from international trade. This includes renewal of the Trade Promotion Authority and a successful outcome of current global trade talks the World Trade Organization s Doha Development Agenda negotiations Both inward and outward FDI have contributed to higher levels of productivity in the United States. Inward FDI contributes to productivity growth provides a source of financing for the current account deficit and generates high-paying jobs for American workers. Outward FDI is an important channel of market access for U.S. multinational companies. U.S. multinationals are an important force behind job creation in the United States and have contributed to productivity growth and rising average living standards in the U.S. economy In order to continue to derive important economic benefits from global economic engagement the United States must continue to break down barriers to trade and investment abroad and keep our markets open to international trade and secure protections for foreign investors | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R Immigration I mmigrants play a vital role in the dynamic U.S. economy. Understanding the forces that drive immigration can help us design more effective immigration policies. This chapter discusses the economics of immigration ; the incentive effects of immigration policies on migrants native workers and employers ; and the benefits of comprehensive immigration policy reform The United States is a nation of immigrants and a nation of laws and we value both historical legacies. Although immigrants continue to make positive contributions to our nation and our economy our current immigration laws have proven difficult to enforce and are not fully serving the needs of the American economy. It is unofficially estimated that between and million foreign-born persons reside in the United States illegally almost onethird of the total foreign-born population and about four percent of the total U.S. population Effective immigration policy can curtail illegal immigration and at the same time promote America s national and economic interests. Comprehensive immigration policy reform which combines more effective enforcement capabilities and a temporary worker program is the most promising route to an immigration system that is legally functional security conscious economically beneficial and humane. In this comprehensive approach the various elements of policy reform reinforce and enhance one another. In contrast any given partial reform standing alone and without the reinforcing measures that characterize the comprehensive approach can not fully address the problems and engage the opportunities that accompany immigration The key points of this chapter are : International differences in economic opportunities and standards of living create strong incentives for labor migration. Once established migration flows from a certain region tend to be self-perpetuating because past migrants facilitate the movement of new migrants employers become familiar with the migrant group and U.S. immigration policy favors family reunification. A large supply of potential migrants will exist for decades to come Foreign-born workers make significant contributions to the American economy but not all Americans gain economically from immigration Understanding the labor-market effects of immigration requires consideration of the migrants skill mix and the capital-accumulation response to labor force growth. Foreign-born workers tend to be concentrated at the low end and the high end of the educational spectrum relative to native-born workers Immigration policy plays a key role in determining the volume and composition of the foreign-born workforce. Comprehensive immigration reform can help ensure an orderly lawful flow of foreign-born workers whose presence benefits the American economy The Economics of Immigration International migration patterns are strongly influenced by the interaction of economic forces and public policy. In this sense migration is similar to other aspects of international economic integration and exchange such as trade in goods and services and investment flows. The fundamental motivation for such movement whether of goods capital or workers is that people perceive more profitable economic opportunities abroad. The ultimate results are that the world s economy functions more efficiently entrepreneurship is rewarded and many Americans reap economic gains Compared to barriers to the movement of goods policy restrictions on the international movement of labor are tight. Immigration policy determines the volume and composition of both permanent immigrants and temporary workers legally admitted to the United States. But many more people would like to come to the United States than are legally permitted to do so and millions manage to reside and work here illegally. There is broad agreement among U.S. citizens that immigration policy needs to be reformed. To this end the reform of U.S. immigration policy should be based on an understanding of the forces that drive migration relevant lessons from American immigration history and the ways in which immigration affects the economy This chapter highlights some facts and principles that can help guide the design of a better immigration policy The Migration Decision and the Volume of International Migration Economic analyses of migration typically start by imagining an individual who has many choices about where to live and work at various times in his life. If this person perceives that job opportunities and living conditions are approximately the same everywhere then he will not have an economic motive to choose one place over another. More realistically because migration costs time and money and often requires leaving behind one s friends and family and adjusting to a new culture and language our imaginary individual will be strongly inclined to live and work near his original home. On the other | Economic Report of the President hand if the same person perceives that incomes and living conditions differ significantly across places for workers with similar skills then he might find it worthwhile to incur the costs of migration to secure a higher standard of living. In this sense migration is like an investment decision a cost is borne today in return for an increased flow of income and well-being in the future Essentially the potential migrant must decide whether the expected benefits from migration outweigh the expected costs From the perspective of workers in many countries today the potential income gains from migration are large. One study measured average wages for Mexican-born men who had recently moved to the United States and compared them to the wages of similar men who were still working in Mexico. The real wage ratios ( that is wages adjusted for international differences in prices ) ranged from about 6-to-1 to 2-to-1 in favor of the U.S.-based workers depending on the age and education group. For example in those who were to years old with to years of education earned $ per hour in the United States compared to the equivalent of $ per hour in Mexico. Another study compared the earnings of fast-food restaurant workers who performed nearly identical jobs but in different countries. Again the real wages in the United States were much higher than in several less advanced economies Facing such large international wage differences a worker might hope to move abroad permanently or with the expectation of returning home after accumulating a nest egg. Indeed migrants often work intensively at relatively high wages ( compared to home ) and save or send back home a portion of their earnings. In this scenario the opportunity to work abroad temporarily can help finance large purchases or investments ( like a house car or new business ) in home countries where credit markets are underdeveloped and where wealth accumulation is difficult due to low wages. Migration might also allow households to expand and diversify their income sources thereby serving as a lifeline to a higher and more stable income level for family members who remain based in a less-developed economy. The large volume of international remittances of migrants earnings testifies to the strength of the links that migrants maintain with their home country. A recent study estimated that U.S.-based workers from Latin America sent home $ billion in remittances in about percent of their total earnings. Nearly three quarters of the migrants in the survey remitted some portion of their earnings The decision framework described thus far emphasizes a potential migrant s expectations regarding the future stream of income at home compared to that available abroad after accounting for broadly defined migration costs ( including transportation costs time spent out of work difficulties adjusting to a new culture and labor market and perhaps fees paid to coyotes or other smugglers who facilitate illegal migration ) But these are not the only Chapter | determinants of the migration decision. A potential migrant might consider the risk of unemployment uncertainties associated with illegal status and other sources of income variability in different locations. The migrant might also consider factors that are not narrowly economic but that certainly would count as benefits from migration such as family reunification or safety from religious or political persecution Even if the incentives to migrate are strong however the economic costs of migration might be impossible for poor workers to meet by saving or borrowing. Moreover immigration policies often make it difficult for workers to relocate to high-wage countries especially if they are not highly skilled or closely related to someone in the high-wage country who can sponsor their application for admission. In this sense immigration policy acts as a filter that selectively allows some workers to migrate but also deters many potential migrants This simplified model of an individual s migration decision is a useful starting point for understanding the economic pressures for labor to move internationally. To make sense of the overall volume and composition of immigration we must expand our scope to consider the sum of many individuals migration decisions and the role of immigration policy. Within any given country some inhabitants might perceive promising economic opportunities abroad whereas others do not ; some might have sufficient means to finance the move whereas others do not ; and some might have family connections or skills that make it easy for them to relocate legally whereas others do not. Against this backdrop events ( such as economic or political crises ) that widen international gaps in expected well-being or that lower the costs of international movement will tend to amplify the volume of international migration because a higher proportion of any given population will find it optimal or feasible to relocate. Working in the other direction events that narrow gaps in expected well-being and policies that make it more difficult for people to relocate will tend to dampen the volume of international mobility The immigration pressures felt by virtually all high-income countries today reflect the ongoing tension between declining costs of migration and persistent international differences in material standards of living on one hand and policy responses that seek to manage the inflow of foreign-born persons on the other. In this context the flow of legal migration is determined by selective immigration policies. In the United States these policies facilitate permanent immigration for family reunification and to a lesser degree for those with high levels of skill. For other workers legal channels for migration are narrow while the economic incentives underpinned by labor demand from U.S. employers and consumers remain strong. Consequently many seek employment through illegal channels | Economic Report of the President Lessons from American Immigration History The surge of immigration in recent decades is not unprecedented and we can better understand the economics of immigration by examining the current situation in light of historical experience. In the decades after the Revolutionary War migration to the United States was hindered by the high costs of international transport the relative immobility and poverty of agrarian populations in potential emigrating regions and political disruptions to international economic integration. By the 1840s however economic technological and political conditions had combined to launch the first era of voluntary mass migration. The first big waves of U.S.-bound migration originated in northwest Europe but by the end of the nineteenth century migrants from eastern and southern Europe dominated the immigration flow. The foreign-born proportion of the U.S. population increased from percent in ( the earliest census to record place of birth ) to percent in and it hovered around percent until when it began to decline steadily. In recent decades it has risen again and in the foreign-born proportion of the population reached approximately percent The mass migration of labor between and along with extensive trade in goods and capital mobility contributed to a high degree of global economic integration that in many ways was a precursor to our more recent and familiar era of globalization. World War I abruptly curtailed the earlier era of globalization and the political and economic turbulence of subsequent decades further disintegrated the international economy. Since World War II policymakers have worked toward re-integrating the global flow of goods services and capital. However in comparison with the pre-1914 era significant policy restrictions on the international movement of labor remain in place Four historical lessons are especially relevant for contemporary thinking about American immigration and the policies that manage the inflow of foreign-born workers. First migration to the United States has always reflected the relatively high level of labor productivity here. In the previous section we cited the wage gap between the United States and Mexico. Similarly estimates of real wage gaps in the late nineteenth century suggest that U.S. wages were often to times higher than those available in Europe. Thus immigration is a sign of our economy s ongoing success and the relatively high rewards that it has long offered its workers. While immigration policy reform is surely necessary we should be glad that after more than years the United States is still a magnet for ambitious foreign workers Second immigration flows are often self-propagating. From the perspective of a potential migrant the cost of migration drops sharply when one has a number of friends and family abroad who can help locate employment and housing opportunities and who can provide a sense of community. One Chapter | consequence of this self-propagating mechanism is that macroeconomic and political shocks can have long-lasting ramifications for American immigration patterns. The Irish famine in the late 1840s is a salient example of how a dire economic situation abroad accelerated a process of mass migration that continued long after famine conditions had passed. Macroeconomic shocks in Mexico in recent decades though far less severe than the Irish famine may have had a similar effect. Durable networks of family friends and employers have always facilitated migration especially given current policy preferences for family reunification The third historical lesson is that regions of emigration that are in the process of economic modernization and development often send out an increasing number of workers. Migration has always been a costly enterprise that the very poor can not easily finance. As the process of modern economic development unfolds a larger number of workers surpass the necessary threshold of wealth and education for long-distance migration ; employment declines in the agricultural sector and young workers seek employment in urban areas at home and abroad ; and stronger migrant networks and financial systems develop to facilitate long-distance movement. Along these lines it has been argued that the spread of economic modernization in Mexico has promoted emigration even as it has raised gross domestic product ( GDP ) per worker. The ongoing process of economic development in many parts of the world may lead to a growing pool of potential international migrants for decades to come Eventually at advanced stages of economic development when domestic wages rise to levels that are comparable to those that are available elsewhere the rate of emigration from a particular place tends to decline. The long-run experience of parts of Europe that were massive exporters of labor in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries exemplifies this pattern of rising and then falling emigration rates. Thus a secondary point is that the pool of potential migrants may change substantially as some countries enter into the process of economic modernization and as others reach comparatively high levels of economic development Fourth the demographic structure of regions of emigration is relevant to the volume of international migration. Migrants to the United States have generally been drawn from the pool of relatively young workers. In for example foreign-born persons who reported being in the United States for only one year ( recent migrants ) had a median age of whereas the median age of native-born persons was The young have the most to gain from migration and they also have fewer ties binding them to a specific location in the home country. Relatively large groups of workers came of age in Mexico in the 1980s and 1990s and emigration surged when the Mexican macroeconomy stumbled. Reinforcing the point made above the sheer number of | Economic Report of the President young people in less advanced economies ensures that many foreign workers will be interested in migration opportunities in the future In sum past experience and current economic and demographic realities suggest that the forces that attract migrants to the United States will continue to be strong in the twenty-first century. Managing the inflow of migrants is an important and complex challenge for policymakers. It demands a comprehensive immigration strategy that views the process for what it is and has always been for the United States a significant contributor to labor force growth and vitality Foreign-Born Workers in the U.S. Labor Force Foreign-born workers ( the sum of both legal and illegal migrants ) make up percent of the total U.S. labor force and since they have accounted for about half of the total growth in the labor force thereby fueling macroeconomic growth. In foreign-born men had higher labor force participation rates than natives ( percent compared to percent ) whereas foreign-born women worked somewhat less than their American counterparts ( percent compared to percent ) Among those in the labor force foreign-born men had lower unemployment rates than natives ( percent compared to percent ) whereas foreign-born women had slightly higher unemployment rates than native women ( percent compared to percent ) At the high end of the skill spectrum foreign-born workers were more likely than natives to work in computer mathematics architecture engineering and science occupations ( percent of foreign born compared to percent of natives ) Lower in the skill spectrum the foreign born were two to four times as likely as the native born to work in building and grounds cleaning and maintenance ; farming fishing and forestry ; and construction and extraction occupations Tables and report more detailed occupational information for the foreign born. Table lists the ten occupations that the foreign born are most likely to fill. For comparison it also reports the proportion of native-born workers in the same set of occupations. Construction laborers maids and housekeepers janitors and cooks are at the top of the foreign-born occupation list. Together these four occupational categories account for percent of all foreign-born workers compared to about percent of native-born workers Table lists the occupations that have the highest proportion of workers who are foreign born. Tailors and dressmakers graders and sorters of agricultural products miscellaneous personal appearance workers ( such as manicurists ) and plasterers and stucco masons are the occupations with the highest proportions of foreign-born workers all with over percent. The foreign born are also strongly represented among medical scientists ( percent ) Chapter | TABLE Ten Most Common Occupations for Foreign-Born Workers Occupation Proportion of Foreign Born ( % ) Proportion of Native Born ( % ) Construction labor Maids and housekeepers Janitors Cooks............................................................................. Cashiers Drivers/sales workers and truck drivers....................... Grounds maintenance Carpenters Retail salesperson......................................................... Supervisors retail sales Note : The sample includes all employed individuals over the age of The Drivers/sales workers and truck drivers category includes both truck drivers and those delivering goods in smaller vehicles Source : American Community Survey TABLE Ten Occupations with the Highest Proportion of Foreign-Born Workers Occupation Tailors dressmakers sewers Graders and sorters ( agriculture ) Miscellaneous personal appearance workers Plasterers and stucco masons Pressers textile garment and related materials Miscellaneous agriculture workers Drywall ceiling-tile installers and tapers Sewing machine operators Medical scientists Maids and housekeepers Foreign-Born Proportion of All Workers ( % ) Note : The sample includes all employed individuals over the age of Source : American Community Survey In recent decades a handful of states have absorbed the majority of foreignborn persons. In California New York Texas and Florida together accounted for percent of all the foreign born in the United States. The same states accounted for only percent of the native-born U.S. population These states still attract a large share of the foreign born as one would expect given the importance of family and information networks in facilitating migration but there is also evidence of significant gains in many other parts of the country. Georgia for instance gained more than foreign-born persons between and raising its total foreign-born population by percent. Several other states had comparable percentage increases though smaller gains in absolute numbers. The largest percentage changes were in New Hampshire ( percent ) and South Carolina ( percent ) These geographic shifts reflect foreign-born workers responsiveness to changes in labor demand across regions within the United States | Economic Report of the President The Foreign-Born Skill Mix and the Labor Market Impact The inflow of foreign-born labor has complex effects on the productivity and earnings of American factors of production capital land and labor. To understand how immigration affects the labor market it helps to consider the determinants of the skill mix among the foreign born and the nature of substitutability among different factors of production American immigration policy acts as a filter that strongly favors potential migrants with family connections to U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents. In persons were granted lawful permanent resident status. Forty-three percent were admitted as immediate relatives of U.S. citizens and an additional percent were admitted under other family-based sponsorship. Only percent were admitted under the employment-based preference category To some extent this policy structure helps explain observed differences in the economic performance of immigrants from different countries. Most permanently admitted Mexican immigrants for example were selected on the basis of family connections rather than skills. Therefore it is not surprising that as a group they do not fare as well economically as groups of migrants who were selected largely on the basis of their skills such as those from India Out of the employment-based permanent admissions category only lawful permanent resident slots are reserved for less-skilled workers For less-skilled seasonal workers H-2A visas ( for agriculture ) and H-2B visas ( for other sectors ) admit workers for short durations and specific jobs. These visas help alleviate peak seasonal demands but there is still demand for lessskilled workers to work for longer durations. In an environment in which unauthorized migrants can find employers without great difficulty the mismatch between labor market forces and immigration policy has resulted in a large number of unauthorized migrant workers Standard surveys such as the Current Population Survey do not specifically identify the legal status of the foreign born. Therefore it is difficult to measure and characterize the unauthorized population with precision. With this caveat in mind Box discusses current estimates of the illegal population s size and economic characteristics H-1B visas permit temporary employment for skilled professionals who are sponsored by a U.S. employer typically in occupations in science computers or engineering. The worker can remain in H-1B status for up to six years Current law permits only new H-1B issuances per year with some exceptions for those with advanced degrees from U.S. universities and those going to work for institutions of higher education or government research organizations. For fiscal year the H-1B application cap was reached in May Chapter | Box : The Number and Characteristics of Unauthorized Migrants Due to the clandestine nature of illegal migration the unauthorized foreign-born population can not be precisely enumerated. Nonetheless reasonable estimates have been made using data from the Census Bureau s Current Population Survey ( CPS ) The CPS data do not explicitly identify unauthorized individuals but they do record a great deal of relevant information. Using an estimate of the number of legal foreignborn residents that is based on official U.S. immigration data the total number of illegal migrants can then be estimated as the difference between the total foreign-born population and the number of foreignborn estimated to be present legally. In a study estimated that there were between and million unauthorized migrants residing in the United States accounting for approximately percent of the total foreign-born population. A related study estimated that between one third and one half of the unauthorized migrants entered the country legally but then overstayed their visas To provide more detailed characterizations the study used statistical techniques to select a certain number of potentially unauthorized foreign-born residents from the March CPS. Keep in mind that the following conclusions are unofficial estimates. They are subject to error but are also the best current characterization of the illegal population It appears that the labor force participation and occupational choices of unauthorized migrants differ substantially from that of the general U.S. population. Unauthorized adult males ( ages to ) were more likely to participate in the labor force than their native counterparts ( percent participation rate compared to percent for natives ) Unauthorized adult females were less likely than natives to participate in the labor force ( percent participation rate compared to percent for natives ) In this case the difference partly reflects the migrant women s higher likelihood of having young children in the household In general unauthorized migrants were concentrated in jobs that require comparatively little formal education. Thus they are under-represented relative to natives in white collar jobs in management business and professional occupations and in sales and administrative support occupations. Relative to native-born workers unauthorized migrants were highly concentrated in other service jobs ( percent compared to ) ; construction and extraction ( percent compared to ) ; production installation and repair ( percent compared to ) ; and farming ( percent compared to ) Although unauthorized migrants represented just percent of the total U.S. labor force in they represented large proportions of the workforce in several specific occupations : percent in | Economic Report of the President farming occupations percent in cleaning occupations percent in construction and percent in food preparation Approximately percent of the unauthorized migrants had been in the country for five years or less. The vast majority of unauthorized migrants had come from Mexico ( percent or million ) and elsewhere in Latin America ( percent or million ) Nearly half ( million ) of the unauthorized migrants were adult males with a little less than half ( million ) of the adult males residing without a spouse or children. Adult females accounted for percent ( million ) of the unauthorized migrants and less than one-fifth of the women were residing without a spouse or children. Approximately million children accounted for the remainder of the unauthorized population. In addition approximately million U.S.-born citizen children were living in households where the head or the head s spouse was an unauthorized migrant The interaction of migrant supply labor demand and policy structure results in a foreign-born skill mix that is described in Chart ( for all foreign born age and above ) Educational attainment is only one component of productive capability and it does not fully capture ambition reliability or knowledge of a specific trade or language. Nonetheless many jobs have strict educational requirements and economists frequently study the labor market in terms of educational categories. The height of each bar in Chart represents the number of foreign born from each region ( age and above ) Clearly Latin America supplies more migrants than any other region and many from Latin America have less than a high school degree Foreign-born workers are found disproportionately at the extremes of the educational spectrum. The educational mix of foreign-born workers relative to native-born workers is shown in Chart It differs from Chart in that it pertains to all employed workers over age it groups all foreign-born workers together and it has more detailed information about the top end of the educational scale. The first bar indicates that percent of all workers in the United States in were foreign born. The foreign born were heavily over-represented in the group of workers with less than a high school degree ; they were slightly under-represented among workers with only a high school degree those with some college and those with only BA degrees ; and they were over-represented among workers with advanced degrees especially among those with Ph.D. degrees who worked in scientific and technological fields. All together and remarkably over percent of Ph.D. workers in computer mathematical architectural engineering and science occupations were born outside the United States Chapter | | Economic Report of the President Highly skilled migrants make many economic contributions to the United States and a strong case can be made that policy should accommodate more of them. Skilled migrants whether permanent or temporary enrich our scientific and academic communities boost the technical capabilities of U.S. firms ( and the native-born workers employed there ) augment the supply of healthcare providers and pay far more in taxes than they absorb in government services. Many of these workers were educated at American universities and nearly all adjust easily to life in the United States in terms of language skills and employment. They make major innovative contributions in science medicine and engineering and help keep the United States at the forefront of technological capability. For example between and approximately one third of U.S. Nobel Prize winners in medicine and physiology were born abroad Because the foreign born as a group do not have the same mix of skills as U.S. natives they alter the relative supply of different types of labor in the economy. The extent to which this alteration of labor supply influences natives wages depends in large part on whether the foreign born are complements or substitutes for natives in the labor market. When two inputs closely resemble one another they are likely to be substitutes and an increase in the supply of one will lower the earnings of the other. In some cases however inputs are likely to be complements and an increase in the supply of one will raise the productivity and therefore the earnings of the other. For example construction laborers may be complements to skilled craftsmen because additional laborers may raise craftsmen s productivity. Conversely new construction laborers may be close substitutes for other construction laborers and for similar less-skilled workers and so additional construction laborers would tend to make the services of less-skilled laborers less valuable on the labor market The impact of immigration on the labor market also depends on how other factors of production such as capital respond to the change in labor supply associated with immigration. In particular in the short run an increase in the supply of labor puts downward pressure on wages allows more hiring and raises the productivity of capital. This increase in capital productivity in turn induces firms to invest in more physical capital which ultimately makes labor more productive. Thus over time the capital accumulation response to immigration tends to offset the downward pressure on wages caused by an increase in the labor supply. The key point is that in trying to understand the effect of immigration on labor markets it does not make sense to suppose that all the other factors that influence labor markets remain the same over a long period of time ; rather these other factors adjust to immigration in important ways Economists have produced many data-intensive analyses of the response of native-born workers wages to immigration and the debate is still ongoing. To Chapter | some extent the estimates depend on the methodological approach that is used to isolate the effects of immigration. One recent study concluded that immigration between and slightly raised the wages of most nativeborn workers but slightly lowered the wages of those without high school degrees ( who represent about percent of the native-born labor force ) If this finding is correct then excluding foreign-born workers might give a small boost to the earnings of American high-school dropouts. But such a policy would be costly and counterproductive from the perspective of American consumers businesses and most native-born workers. Moreover such a policy would not be a well-targeted or effective way to assist low-income Americans. The economic challenges facing low-income Americans are a serious concern but sharp restrictions on immigration are not the remedy A better policy is to ensure that all Americans have opportunities to acquire skills that will improve their labor market outcomes Comprehensive Immigration Policy Reform Border security is a fundamental responsibility of a sovereign nation and an urgent requirement for our national security. Since funding for border security has more than doubled from $ billion in fiscal year to $ billion in fiscal year We will have increased the number of Border Patrol agents by percent from at the beginning of this Administration to nearly at the end of fiscal year and we have deployed about National Guard troops to assist our border security efforts at the southern border. We have also added new detention beds for a total of and have been able to effectively end the practice of catch and release of illegal aliens apprehended at the border. The heightened efforts to control entry into the United States are one part of a larger strategy to improve the immigration system while bolstering national security The President believes that the best way to fix immigration policy is to adopt a comprehensive program that combines stronger border security more effective worksite enforcement of employment eligibility laws and expanded legal channels for the employment of foreign-born workers including those who are not highly skilled. The comprehensive program would reduce the number of illegal workers and preserve the economic benefits associated with a flexible supply of hardworking foreign-born workers. The key features of comprehensive immigration policy reform would work together and reinforce one another to strengthen the incentives for both workers and employers to comply with immigration and employment laws | Economic Report of the President A Legal Bridge between Employer Demand and Migrant Supply By improving the technology that firms use to verify new workers employment eligibility and expanding the channels for legal temporary migration by less-skilled workers comprehensive immigration policy reform can dramatically reduce incentives for illegal work. Effectively narrowing employment opportunities for illegal workers must be the keystone of immigration policy reform. Unfortunately at present it is often difficult for employers to verify the employment eligibility of migrant workers some of whom have fraudulent documents or engage in identity theft. And as long as some firms employ illegal workers other firms might do the same to compete on the basis of cost. The current situation with millions of illegal workers and many non-compliant employers is both unacceptable and unnecessary Comprehensive immigration reform should aim to establish an environment in which all employers can easily determine the legal status of newly hired workers in which foreign-born workers can easily prove their identity and legal status and in which firms can legally hire a foreign worker when no American worker is available to fill a given job. This reform requires an electronic employment eligibility verification system that is accurate fast and inexpensive. The Department of Homeland Security continues to refine and expand an internet-based system called the Basic Pilot Program that allows participating employers to verify the employment eligibility of their new hires by checking against Social Security Administration and immigration records In addition to curtail the use of fraudulent identity documents the Department of Homeland Security now issues tamper-resistant biometrically enhanced ( with photograph and finger print ) identity documents to most lawfully present foreign-born workers Employers also must be held accountable if they hire illegal workers. A rigorous system of verification checks in combination with strong enforcement and enhanced penalties can effectively promote compliance. In this regard the new policy would remedy the comparatively lax enforcement of immigration law that followed the Immigration Reform and Control Act of Electronic verification of new hires eligibility tamper-resistant and biometric identification cards for foreign-born workers and stronger interior enforcement measures should be complemented by the establishment of a temporary worker program initially proposed by the President on January A temporary worker program would provide a legal channel for a foreign-born worker to enter the United States for a specific period of time provided that the worker maintains a consistent work record does not break the law and follows the rules of the program. In addition under certain conditions some currently undocumented workers would be eligible to work here legally if they pay a substantial penalty for having violated the law. As Chapter | long as the costs for program participation are kept low enforcement is robust and the number of workers allowed to participate is sufficient migrants and employers will choose this legal channel for finding matches rather than resorting to illegal means A temporary worker program should also endeavor to preserve the flexible role that foreign-born workers play in the American economy. Foreign-born workers are responsive to new economic opportunities and to variation in opportunities over time and space. This responsiveness tends to improve labor market efficiency and overall economic productivity. Administrative requirements that are burdensome for firms migrants or government agencies will raise the program s economic costs and depending on the program s structure result in either non-compliance with the new policy or a significant drain on government resources Finally comprehensive immigration reform must ensure that highly-skilled immigrants are welcome to make contributions to the U.S. economy. For example many of the world s best students come to American universities for advanced training in science and technology and a large share of these students would like to stay and work in the United States after finishing their education. As discussed earlier in the chapter their work helps keep the United States at the frontier of research and development and their postschooling employment depends upon their ability to acquire a temporary work visa or permanent resident status The Pitfalls of Partial Policy Reforms Less-skilled workers are infrequently admitted to the United States unless they have a close relative who is already an American citizen or lawful permanent resident or they are coming for a short-term seasonal job. At the same time America has a strong demand for the products and services that lessskilled workers provide and a declining number of less-skilled domestic-born workers to provide them. This combination acts as a powerful magnet for lessskilled foreign workers. While there is no excuse for breaking immigration and employment laws the underlying economic forces that draw immigrants to the United States are powerful and deeply rooted. Comprehensive immigration reform can put the United States on a firm legal and economic footing to manage twenty-first century immigration whereas partial reforms are likely to entail significant costs without yielding satisfactory results A policy that relies on more extensive border fencing or more intensive border patrols will make it more difficult for migrants to cross the border illegally. This is an important step in improving control over our borders. By itself however this approach will not undercut the existing demand from U.S. employers and consumers for the labor services of foreign-born workers Therefore it seems likely that in response to this partial reform the flow of | Economic Report of the President migrants would change its path rather than dry up completely. Building fences for example does not address the problem of lawful entrants overstaying their visas and working without permission and according to a recent study between one third and one half of all unauthorized migrants in the U.S entered the country legally. Thus even with substantial increases in border patrol resources and increases in the cost of coyote services ( guides who lead illegal migrants across the southern border ) the best efforts of our Border Patrol have not fully stemmed the tide of illegal immigration. Pursuing intensive fencing and patrolling approaches to extremes would be inordinately costly in terms of material and manpower and still it would not achieve the goal of greatly reducing the employment of illegal workers A partial policy reform that targets current employers of illegal migrants might lower the demand for illegal workers make it more difficult for illegal migrants to find work and therefore lessen the illegal inflow. But if the supply of authorized foreign-born workers is not simultaneously augmented through a temporary worker program this approach would hurt many American companies and consumers and as discussed above would hurt complementary American workers. It would also slow the growth of the labor force and the overall economy Alternatively a partial policy reform that focuses primarily on detecting apprehending and removing illegal workers who are already present in the United States might reduce migrants desire to live and work here but would be very costly to carry out. Moreover fundamental economic forces would still drive many foreign workers to try their luck in America illegally if necessary. The likely outcome of such partial reform is that there would still be many illegal workers and more than ever they would be unwilling to communicate with local law enforcement officials prone to work in the underground economy and subject to exploitation by criminals smugglers and unscrupulous employers Unlike partial reforms the President s comprehensive approach can succeed because it combines a number of elements that reinforce one another. This comprehensive approach gives employers access to a source of legal foreignborn workers when they can not find Americans to fill jobs gives them better tools to verify the employment eligibility of persons they hire and strongly punishes non-compliance with enhanced civil and criminal penalties. This approach also provides potential temporary migrants a more expansive legal route to employment in the United States that does not depend so heavily on having high levels of education and skills or on having relatives in the United States to sponsor them. It also makes illegal border crossing more difficult to accomplish and makes unauthorized employment more difficult to find. By simultaneously narrowing illegal channels for migration and employment and widening legal channels the comprehensive approach to immigration policy reform can significantly improve upon the current system Chapter | Conclusion Immigrants make important contributions to the American economy. They help the economy grow by adding to the labor force ; they fill in jobs at the lower end of the skill distribution where relatively few native-born Americans are available to work ; they also fill in jobs at the highest end of the skill distribution and help keep the United States at the forefront of technological and medical innovation ; they respond quickly and flexibly to shifts in labor demand ; and they work hard to make better lives for themselves and their children. Immigration is both a reflection of and a contributor to our economy s prosperity The foreign-born proportion of the population has steadily increased in recent decades and now stands at about percent of the total U.S. population. Over the same period the U.S. economy has performed well in comparison with other advanced economies. Still the large number of unauthorized workers has made it clear that our current immigration policy is inadequate. At the same time the economic forces that drive international migration are as strong as ever and will remain so for the foreseeable future Comprehensive immigration policy reform can improve border security significantly reduce the number of illegal workers and yield economic benefits for employers workers and consumers in the United States. Achieving these policy goals requires better interior enforcement which in turn requires better tools for employers to verify worker eligibility. It also requires the creation of better legal channels for the migration of hard-working foreignborn workers who are eager to fill jobs that contribute to the American economy. Such workers tend to enhance the productivity of American factors of production but they currently have few avenues aside from family reunification to gain legal entry and employment for a sustained period of time By mutually reinforcing one another the various components of comprehensive immigration policy reform can support a legally and economically viable immigration system | Economic Report of the President Appendix A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D.C. December MR. PRESIDENT : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely Edward P. Lazear Chairman Katherine Baicker Member Matthew J. Slaughter Member Appendix A | Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date November Edwin G. Nourse Chairman August Leon H. Keyserling........................ Vice Chairman August Acting Chairman November Chairman May Member....................................... August John D. Clark January Vice Chairman May Roy Blough Member....................................... June August Robert C. Turner........................... Member....................................... September January Arthur F. Burns............................. Chairman March December Neil H. Jacoby Member....................................... September February Walter W. Stewart Member....................................... December April Raymond J. Saulnier..................... February Member....................................... April Chairman December Joseph S. Davis............................. Member....................................... May October Paul W. McCracken Member....................................... December January January Karl Brandt................................... Member....................................... November January Henry C. Wallich Member....................................... May January Walter W. Heller............................ Chairman January November James Tobin Member....................................... January July Kermit Gordon Member....................................... January December Gardner Ackley Member....................................... August Chairman November February Member....................................... May August Otto Eckstein Member....................................... September February Arthur M. Okun Member....................................... November John P. Lewis Chairman February James S. Duesenberry Member....................................... February January June Merton J. Peck.............................. Member....................................... February January Warren L. Smith............................ Member....................................... July January Paul W. McCracken Chairman February December July Hendrik S. Houthakker.................. Member....................................... February Herbert Stein Member....................................... February Chairman January August Ezra Solomon................................ Member....................................... September March Marina v.N. Whitman.................... Member....................................... March August Gary L. Seevers............................. Member....................................... July April William J. Fellner Member....................................... October February Alan Greenspan Chairman September January Paul W. MacAvoy Member....................................... June November Burton G. Malkiel.......................... Member....................................... July January | Economic Report of the President Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date Charles L. Schultze....................... Chairman January January William D. Nordhaus..................... Member....................................... March February Lyle E. Gramley............................. Member....................................... March May George C. Eads Member....................................... June January Stephen M. Goldfeld Member....................................... August January Murray L. Weidenbaum................. Chairman February August William A. Niskanen Member....................................... June March Jerry L. Jordan Member....................................... July July Martin Feldstein Chairman October July William Poole................................ Member....................................... December January Beryl W. Sprinkel Chairman April January Thomas Gale Moore...................... Member....................................... July May Michael L. Mussa.......................... Member....................................... August September Michael J. Boskin.......................... Chairman February January John B. Taylor............................... Member....................................... June August Richard L. Schmalensee Member....................................... October June David F. Bradford Member....................................... November January Paul Wonnacott Member....................................... November January Laura D Andrea Tyson Chair February April Alan S. Blinder.............................. Member....................................... July June Joseph E. Stiglitz Member....................................... July Chairman June February Martin N. Baily Member....................................... June August Alicia H. Munnell Member....................................... January August Janet L. Yellen Chair February August Jeffrey A. Frankel.......................... Member....................................... April March Rebecca M. Blank......................... Member....................................... October July Martin N. Baily Chairman August January Robert Z. Lawrence....................... Member....................................... August January Kathryn L. Shaw Member....................................... May January R. Glenn Hubbard Chairman May February Mark B. McClellan Member....................................... July November Randall S. Kroszner Member....................................... November July N. Gregory Mankiw Chairman May February Kristin J. Forbes............................ Member....................................... November June Harvey S. Rosen............................ Ben S. Bernanke Member....................................... November Chairman February June Chairman June January Katherine Baicker......................... Member....................................... November Matthew J. Slaughter Member....................................... November Edward P. Lazear.......................... Chairman February Appendix A | Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to provide the President with objective economic analysis and advice on the development and implementation of a wide range of domestic and international economic policy issues The Chairman of the Council Edward P. Lazear was appointed by the President on February as Chairman of the President s Council of Economic Advisers. Dr. Lazear succeeded Ben S. Bernanke who was appointed by the President as Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board on February Dr. Lazear is on a leave of absence from the Stanford Graduate School of Business where he is the Jack Steele Parker Professor of Human Resources Management and Economics. He also serves as the Morris Arnold Cox Senior Fellow at the Hoover Institution Dr. Lazear is responsible for communicating the Council s views on economic matters directly to the President through personal discussions and written reports. He represents the Council at daily White House senior staff meetings a variety of inter-agency meetings Cabinet meetings and other formal and informal meetings with the President. He also travels within the United States and overseas to present the Administration s views on the economy. Dr. Lazear is the Council 's chief public spokesperson. He directs the work of the Council and exercises ultimate responsibility for the work of the professional staff The Members of the Council Katherine Baicker and Matthew J. Slaughter are Members of the Council of Economic Advisers. Dr. Baicker is on leave from the University of California in Los Angeles where she is an Associate Professor in the Department of Public Policy. She also served as a Faculty Research Fellow for the National Bureau of Economic Research. At the Council Dr. Baicker s responsibilities include work on public finance labor and health issues Appendix A | Dr. Slaughter is on leave from the Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth College where he is an Associate Professor of Business Administration. He also serves as a visiting Fellow at the Institute for International Economics and has served as a Research Associate at the National Bureau of Economic Research Dr. Slaughter s responsibilities at the Council include work on international finance and trade and industrial organization issues Macroeconomic Policies As is its tradition the Council devoted much time during to assisting the President in formulating economic policy objectives and designing programs to implement them. In this regard the Chairman kept the President informed on a continuing basis of important macroeconomic developments and other major policy issues through regular macroeconomic briefings. The Council prepares for the President the Vice President and the White House senior staff regular memoranda that report key economic data and analyze current economic events. Council staff also regularly provides assistance with economic data to other offices of the Executive Office of the President The Council the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) the Administration s economic troika are responsible for producing the economic forecasts that underlie the Administration s budget proposals. The Council under the leadership of the Chairman and the Chief Economist initiates the forecasting process twice each year. In preparing these forecasts the Council consults with a variety of outside sources including leading private sector forecasters In the Council took part in discussions on a range of macroeconomic issues. The Council contributed significantly to discussions of the macroeconomic impact of unexpected oil supply shocks the effects of a potential pandemic flu and proposed mitigation plans The Council works closely with the Department of the Treasury the Federal Reserve and other government agencies in providing analyses to the Administration on these topics of concern. It also works closely with the National Economic Council the Office of Management and Budget and other offices within the Executive Office of the President in assessing the economy and economic policy proposals International Economic Policies The Council was involved in a range of international trade and finance issues and was an active participant in discussions at the global regional and bilateral levels. On the international trade front the Council provided | Economic Report of the President empirical analysis of forthcoming free trade agreements and the recently released top-to-bottom review of U.S.-China bilateral economic relations spearheaded by the United States Trade Representative. Staff also conducted a landmark study exploring the prevalence and effects of non-tariff barriers in conjunction with the Department of Commerce Further involvement included extensive analysis and participation in deliberations related to the U.S. economic interaction with China. The Council participated in the inaugural U.S. Treasury-led Strategic Economic Dialogue in Beijing where a host of bilateral economic issues with China were discussed ranging from financial liberalization to energy and the environment to bilateral trade relations The Council participated in the development of U.S. proposals for securing global energy security and combating the spread of pandemic disease at this year s G8 Summit held in St. Petersburg Russia. The Council also prepared in-depth analyses for the President s international itinerary including the annual Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation ( APEC ) summit and travel to Europe India and Mexico. The Council participated in discussions concerning the need for greater international financial and trade liberalization with both advanced and emerging market economies. Council members regularly met with representatives of the Council s counterpart agencies in foreign countries as well as with finance ministers other government officials and members of the private sector The Council is a leading participant in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) the principal forum for economic cooperation among the high-income industrial economies. Chairman Lazear and Dr. Slaughter participated in meetings of the OECD s Economic Policy Committee ( EPC ) as well as meetings of the OECD s Working Party on macroeconomic policy and coordination Microeconomic Policies A wide variety of microeconomic issues received Council attention during The Council actively participated in the Cabinet-level National Economic Council and Domestic Policy Council dealing with issues including health care labor issues energy policy legal reform the environment homeland security education pensions transportation and technology among others The Council was involved in a plethora of discussions related to health care These included examination and policy proposals relating to the tax treatment of health insurance analysis and development of Administration efforts to enhance Health Savings Accounts analysis of potential Medicare and Appendix A | Medicaid reforms and promotion of transparency in health price and quality The Council investigated the causes and consequences of rising health care costs and examined potenial remedies including greater consumer involvement in health care opening access to insurance across state lines Association Health Plans and encouraging high quality health care when the government is the payer The Council was also especially active in energy and environmental policy discussions where it analyzed energy markets fuel economy issues and alternatives to oil. This included issues such as the President s Advanced Energy Initiative bio-energy the Outer-Continental Shelf the Renewable Fuels Standard CAFE the Strategic Petroleum Reserve regulatory reforms global climate change and the international trade of energy The Council examined transportation policies relating to airports hybrid vehicles and congestion pricing. The Council also played a role in the analysis of policy for telecommunications broadband and spectrum allocation Council staff also provided analyses related to agricultural issues The Council participated in discussions related to catastrophic risk insurance relating to natural disasters and attacks. The Council also participated in ongoing policy discussions relating to the government s role in terrorism risk insurance On labor policy the Council was involved in the development of the President s comprehensive immigration policy and other proposed immigration reforms. The Council also assisted in Administration evaluation of higher education policies as well as in the examination of the No Child Left Behind program The Council was active in tax policy discussions relating to comprehensive tax reforms business tax credits and corporate taxation as well as tax issues related to entitlement programs such as Social Security. Many additional tax policy discussions were involved in other microeconomic discussions including labor insurance pensions and health care | Economic Report of the President The Staff of the Council of Economic Advisers The professional staff of the Council consists of the Chief of Staff the Chief Economist the Director of Macroeconomic Forecasting eight senior economists and one economist and seven junior staff of analysts and research assistants. The professional staff and their areas of concentration at the end of were : Chief of Staff Gary D. Blank Chief Economist Keith Hall Director of Macroeconomic Forecasting and Statistics Steven N. Braun William J. Collins Erik A. Heitfield Bradley J. Herring Kristin McCue Robert F. Martin Christine A. McDaniel..... David P. Richardson......... Wolverton Maryann........ Senior Economists Labor Immigration Education Welfare Finance Telecommunications Health Labor Small Business Economic Development Macroeconomics International Finance and Development International Trade Public Finance Agriculture Environment Natural Resources Economist Benjamin T. Ho Energy Transportation Legal Reform Analysts Dagmara K. Tchalakov...... International Finance and Trade Diana C. Wielocha............ Public Finance Finance Legal Reform Jonathan A. Wolfson Health Appendix A | Eric B. Cragun Nikola D. Kojucharov...... Gregory E. Stein............... Lucas D. Threinen Research Assistants Labor Macroeconomics Macroeconomics Energy Transportation Environment Agriculture International Finance and Trade Technology Statistical Office The Statistical Office maintains and updates the Council 's statistical information oversees the publication of the monthly Economic Indicators and the statistical appendix to the Economic Report of the President and verifies statistics in Presidential and Council memoranda testimony and speeches Linda A. Reilly Program Analyst ( Statistical ) Brian A. Amorosi Program Analyst ( Statistical ) Dagmara A. Mocala Research Assistant Linda Reilly retired from Federal service on December She had worked at the Council for years and had been with the Statistical Office since Linda s dedication to the Council has been extraordinary and her knowledge of statistics and their applications are greatly appreciated by CEA staff past and present Administrative Office The Administrative Office provides general support for the Council s activities This includes financial management human resource management and travel facility security information and telecommunications management support Rosemary M. Rogers Administrative Officer Archana A. Snyder Financial Manager Doris T. Searles Information Management Specialist Office of the Chairman Alice H. Williams.............. Executive Assistant to the Chairman Sandra F. Daigle Executive Assistant to the Chairman and Assistant to the Chief of Staff Lisa D. Branch Executive Assistant to Dr. Slaughter Mary E. Jones Executive Assistant to Dr. Baicker Staff Support Sharon K. Thomas Administrative Support Assistant and Assistant to the Chief Economist | Economic Report of the President Jane Tufts and Anna Paganelli provided editorial assistance in the preparation of the Economic Report of the President Student Interns during the year were : Daniel M. Cohen Shana N Dougherty Stacy L. Droms George Kim Bryan C. Hoppe Grace C. Hou Lindsay A. Philbrick Joni Perdue Jennifer Scallion Timothy Simmons Michael S. Verne and Sajid S. Zaidi Fellows during the year were : Michael Chow and Therese C. Scharlemann Departures The Council s senior economists in most cases are on leave of absence from academic institutions government agencies or private research institutions. Their tenure with the Council is usually limited to one or two years. The senior economists who resigned during the year and returned to their previous affiliations were : John Anderson ( University of Nebraska ) William Block ( Department of the Treasury ) Daniel Covitz ( Federal Reserve Board ) Joseph Cooper ( Department of Agriculture ) William H. Dow ( University of California Berkeley ) Wayne Dunham ( Department of Justice ) Dino Falaschetti ( Montana State University ) and Richard Newell ( Resources for the Future ) Rebecca Kalmus an economist resigned to pursue studies at the University of Texas The economists are supported by a team of junior staff made up of staff economists analysts and research assistants who generally work with the Council for one or two years before returning to school. Those who served as staff economists at the Council and resigned during were : Soren Anderson Faisal Z. Ahmed and Andrew Hanson. Those who served as research assistants at the Council and resigned during were : Jeffrey P Clemens and Sarena F. Goodman Public Information The Council s annual Economic Report of the President is an important vehicle for presenting the Administration s domestic and international economic policies It is available for distribution as a bound volume and on the Internet where it is accessible at www.gpoaccess.gov/eop. The Council also publishes the monthly Economic Indicators which is available on-line at www.gpoaccess.gov/indicators The Council s home page is located at www.whitehouse.gov/cea Appendix A | Appendix B cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ A654B.XXX cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ A654B.XXX C O N T E N T S Page NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE : B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES B B B B B Gross domestic product Real gross domestic product Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes Percent changes in real gross domestic product Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product Gross domestic product by major type of product Real gross domestic product by major type of product Gross value added by sector Real gross value added by sector Gross domestic product ( GDP ) by industry value added in current dollars and as a percentage of GDP Real gross domestic product by industry value added and percent changes Gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business Gross value added and price costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business Personal consumption expenditures Real personal consumption expenditures Private fixed investment by type Real private fixed investment by type Government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type Real government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type Private inventories and domestic final sales by industry Real private inventories and domestic final sales by industry Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts Real exports and imports of goods and services Relation of gross domestic product gross national product net national product and national income Relation of national income and personal income National income by type of income Sources of personal income Disposition of personal income Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures and per capita gross domestic product in current and real dollars VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ A654B.XXX Page B B Gross saving and investment Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and persons by race selected years POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY : B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B Population by age group Civilian population and labor force Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age Civilian employment by demographic characteristic Unemployment by demographic characteristic Civilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic Civilian unemployment rate Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic Unemployment by duration and reason Unemployment insurance programs selected data Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries Employment cost index private industry Productivity and related data business sector Changes in productivity and related data business sector PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY : B B B B B B B B B Industrial production indexes major industry divisions Industrial production indexes market groupings Industrial production indexes selected manufacturing industries Capacity utilization rates New construction activity New private housing units started authorized completed and houses sold Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories Manufacturers shipments and inventories Manufacturers new and unfilled orders PRICES : B B B cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES B B Consumer price indexes for major expenditure classes Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes Consumer price indexes for commodities services and special groups Changes in special consumer price indexes Changes in consumer price indexes for commodities and services VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ A654B.XXX Page B B B B Producer price indexes by stage of processing Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE : B B B B B B B B B Money stock and debt measures Components of money stock measures Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and the monetary base Bank credit at all commercial banks Bond yields and interest rates Credit market borrowing Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing Mortgage debt outstanding by holder Consumer credit outstanding GOVERNMENT FINANCE : B B B B B B B B B B B B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) by major type Federal Government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interestbearing public debt securities held by private investors Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE : B cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES B B B Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits by industry Corporate profits of manufacturing industries Sales profits and stockholders equity all manufacturing corporations VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ A654B.XXX Page B B B Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Historical stock prices and yields Common stock prices and yields AGRICULTURE : B B B B B B Farm income Farm business balance sheet Farm output and productivity indexes Farm input use selected inputs Agricultural price indexes and farm real estate value U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS : cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES B U.S. international transactions B U.S. international trade in goods by principal end-use category B U.S. international trade in goods by area B U.S. international trade in goods on balance of payments ( BOP ) and Census basis and trade in services on BOP basis B International investment position of the United States at yearend B Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries B Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries B Foreign exchange rates B International reserves selected years B Growth rates in real gross domestic product VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ A654B.XXX General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals because of rounding Because of the formula used for calculating real gross domestic product ( GDP ) the chained ( ) dollar estimates for the detailed components do not add to the chained-dollar value of GDP or to any intermediate aggregate. The Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) no longer publishes chained-dollar estimates prior to except for selected series Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Data in these tables reflect revisions made by the source agencies through January In particular tables containing national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) estimates reflect revisions released by the Department of Commerce in July VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ A654B.XXX NATIONAL INCOME OR EXPENDITURE TABLE B Gross domestic product [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment and software Residential Change in private inventories : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : I II III See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B1.ER7 TABLE B Gross domestic product Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Total National defense State and local Nondefense AddenFinal Gross dum : sales of domesGross domestic national tic purproduct chases product Percent change from preceding period Gross Gross domes- domestic tic prodpuruct chases : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services plus net income receipts from rest of the world Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES GDP VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B1.ER7 TABLE B Real gross domestic product [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Total Equipment and software Structures Residential Change in private inventories : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B2.ER7 TABLE B Real gross domestic product Continued [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Final sales of domestic product Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local Gross domestic purchases Addendum : Gross national product Percent change from preceding period Gross Gross domes- domestic tic prodpuruct chases : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Gross GDP domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services plus net income receipts from rest of the world cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B2.ER7 TABLE B Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes [ Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted ] Gross domestic product ( GDP ) Index numbers = Year or quarter Real GDP ( chain-type quantity index ) GDP chain-type price index Real GDP ( chain-type quantity index ) GDP chain-type price index : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Quarterly GDP implicit price deflator Percent change from preceding period GDP ( current dollars ) percent changes are at annual rates cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B3.ER7 GDP implicit price deflator TABLE B Percent changes in real gross domestic product [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product Exports and imports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Residential fixed Exports Imports Total Gross private domestic investment Nonresidential fixed Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Structures Equipment and software Federal State and local : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Note. Percent changes based on unrounded data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B4.ER7 TABLE B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product [ Percentage points except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross domestic product ( percent change ) Year or quarter Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total NonDurable durable goods goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment and software Change in priResivate dential inventories : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B5.ER7 TABLE B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product Continued [ Percentage points except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Exports Net exports Total Goods Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Imports Services Total Goods Federal Services Total Total NaNontional defense defense State and local : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B5.ER7 TABLE B Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Nonresidential Durable goods Nondurable goods Total : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Total Services Total Structures Equipment and software Residential Total cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B6.ER7 TABLE B Chain-type quantity indexes for gross domestic product Continued [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Year or quarter Federal Total Total : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Goods Services Total Goods Services National defense Nondefense State and local Total cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B6.ER7 TABLE B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter Gross domestic product Nonresidential Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment and software Residential : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B7.ER7 TABLE B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or quarter Exports and imports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Total Exports Imports Total National Nondefense defense State and local Gross domestic purchases Final sales of domestic product Total Percent change Gross domestic purchases Gross Less domestic food and product Less energy Total food and energy : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services percent changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Quarterly VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B7.ER7 TABLE B Gross domestic product by major type of product [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Change Final in Gross sales of pridomestic domesvate product tic product inventories Total Total Final sales Durable goods Change in private inventories Final sales Change in private inventories Nondurable goods Final sales Change in private inventories Services Structures : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Estimates for durable and nondurable goods for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) ; later estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Includes government consumption expenditures which are for services ( such as education and national defense ) produced by government In current dollars these services are valued at their cost of production Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B8.ER7 TABLE B Real gross domestic product by major type of product [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter Change Final in Gross sales of pridomestic domesvate product tic product inventories Total Durable goods Change in private inventories Final sales Total Final sales Change in private inventories Nondurable goods Final sales Change in private inventories Structures : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Services Estimates for durable and nondurable goods for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) ; later estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Includes government consumption expenditures which are for services ( such as education and national defense ) produced by government In current dollars these services are valued at their cost of production Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B9.ER7 TABLE B Gross value added by sector [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business Gross domestic product Year or quarter Nonfarm Total Households and institutions Farm Total Households Nonprofit institutions serving households General government Total Federal State and local Addendum : Gross housing value added : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Gross domestic business value added equals gross domestic product excluding gross value added of households and institutions and of general government. Nonfarm value added equals gross domestic business value added excluding gross farm value added Equals compensation of employees of nonprofit institutions the rental value of nonresidential fixed assets owned and used by nonprofit institutions serving households and rental income of persons for tenant-occupied housing owned by nonprofit institutions Equals compensation of general government employees plus general government consumption of fixed capital Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B10.ER7 TABLE B Real gross value added by sector [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business Year or quarter Gross domestic product Total Nonfarm Households and institutions Farm Total Households Nonprofit institutions serving households General government Total Federal State and local Addendum : Gross housing value added : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Gross domestic business value added equals gross domestic product excluding gross value added of households and institutions and of general government. Nonfarm value added equals gross domestic business value added excluding gross farm value added Equals compensation of employees of nonprofit institutions the rental value of nonresidential fixed assets owned and used by nonprofit institutions serving households and rental income of persons for tenant-occupied housing owned by nonprofit institutions Equals compensation of general government employees plus general government consumption of fixed capital Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B11.ER7 TABLE B Gross domestic product ( GDP ) by industry value added in current dollars and as a percentage of GDP [ Billions of dollars ; except as noted ] Private industries Year Gross domestic product Total private industries Agriculture forestry fishing and hunting Manufacturing Mining Construction Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Wholesale trade Utilities Retail trade Value added cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Percent Industry value added as a percentage of GDP ( percent ) Consists of agriculture forestry fishing and hunting ; mining ; construction ; and manufacturing Consists of utilities ; wholesale trade ; retail trade ; transportation and warehousing ; information ; finance insurance real estate rental and leasing ; professional and business services ; educational services health care and social assistance ; arts entertainment recreation accommodation and food services ; and other services except government Note. Value added is the contribution of each private industry and of government to gross domestic product. Value added is equal to an industry s gross output minus its intermediate inputs. Current-dollar value added is calculated as the sum of distributions by an industry to its labor and capital which are derived from the components of gross domestic income See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B12.ER7 TABLE B Gross domestic product ( GDP ) by industry value added in current dollars and as a percentage of GDP Continued [ Billions of dollars ; except as noted ] Private industries continued Transportation and warehousing Year Information Arts EducaProentertional fes- services tainment Other sionrecrea- services Governal and health tion ment care busiaccom- except and modation governness social ment servand assisices food tance services Finance insurance real estate rental and leasing Private Private goods- servicesproduc- producing ing indusindustries tries Value added cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Industry value added as a percentage of GDP ( percent ) Note ( cont d ) Value added industry data shown in Tables B and B are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) GDP by industry data based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) are available from the Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Historical data for are available from the U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis. See Survey of Current Business December for details Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B12.ER7 TABLE B Real gross domestic product by industry value added and percent changes Private industries Year Gross domestic product Total private industries Agriculture forestry fishing and hunting Manufacturing Mining Construction Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Wholesale trade Utilities Retail trade Chain-type quantity indexes for value added ( = ) cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Percent change from year earlier Consists of agriculture forestry fishing and hunting ; mining ; construction ; and manufacturing Consists of utilities ; wholesale trade ; retail trade ; transportation and warehousing ; information ; finance insurance real estate rental and leasing ; professional and business services ; educational services health care and social assistance ; arts entertainment recreation accommodation and food services ; and other services except government See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B13.ER7 TABLE B Real gross domestic product by industry value added and percent changes Continued Private industries continued Transportation and warehousing Year Information Finance insurance real estate rental and leasing Professional and business services Arts Educaentertional tainment services recreaOther health services tion care except accom- governand social modation ment and assisfood tance services Private goodsproducing industries Government Private servicesproducing industries Chain-type quantity indexes for value added ( = ) cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Percent change from year earlier Note. Data are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Historical data for are available from the U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis. See Survey of Current Business December for details See Note Table B Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B13.ER7 TABLE B Gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net value added Year or quarter cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business Addenda : Net operating surplus Consumption of fixed capital Total Taxes Comon Net penprodinterest Business sauction and curtion and misrent of imports Total cel- transemploy- less lafer ees subsineous paydies pay- ments ments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Taxes on cor- Profits porate after income tax InCapivental tory conProfits valua- sumpbefore tion tion tax adadjustjustment ment Estimates for nonfinancial corporate business for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) ; later estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B14.ER7 TABLE B Gross value added and price costs and profits of nonfinancial corporate business [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business ( billions of dollars ) Year or quarter Current dollars cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Price per unit of real gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business ( dollars ) Total Chained ( ) dollars Compensation of employees ( unit labor cost ) Unit nonlabor cost Total Consumption of fixed capital Taxes on production and imports Net interest and miscellaneous payments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Taxes on corporate income Profits after tax Estimates for nonfinancial corporate business for and earlier periods are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) ; later estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) The implicit price deflator for gross value added of nonfinancial corporate business divided by Less subsidies plus business current transfer payments Unit profits from current production With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B15.ER7 TABLE B Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Durable goods Year or quarter Personal consumption expendi- Total tures Nondurable goods FurniMotor ture vehiand cles house- Total and hold parts equipment Clothing and shoes Food Services Gaso- Fuel line oil and and Total oil coal Household operation Housing Total Electricity and gas Trans- Mediporcal tacare tion : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Includes other items not shown separately imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Includes VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B16.ER7 TABLE B Real personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Durable goods Personal FurniconMotor ture sumpand tion Total vehi- housecles exand hold pendiparts equiptures ment Nondurable goods Total Food Clothing and shoes Gasoline and oil Services Fuel oil and coal Household operation Total Housing Total Electricity and gas Transportation Medical care : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Includes other items not shown separately imputed rental value of owner-occupied housing Note. See Table B for data for total personal consumption expenditures for Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Includes VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B17.ER7 TABLE B Private fixed investment by type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonresidential Residential Equipment and software Private fixed investment Year or quarter Structures Total Computers and peripheral equipment Total Software Other Industrial equipment Transportation equipment Other equipment Total residential Total Single family : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Total nonresidential Structures Information processing equipment and software Includes other items not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B18.ER7 TABLE B Real private fixed investment by type [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonresidential Residential Equipment and software Private fixed investment Year or quarter Total nonresidential Structures Information processing equipment and software Structures Total Computers and Total peripheral equipment1 Software Other Industrial equipment Transportation equipment Other equipment Total residential Total Single family : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES For details on this component see Survey of Current Business Table Table for growth rates Table for contributions and Table for quantity indexes Includes other items not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B19.ER7 TABLE B Government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal State and local National defense Year or quarter Total Total Total Nondefense Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software Total Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software Total Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : I II III Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B20.ER7 TABLE B Real government consumption expenditures and gross investment by type [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal State and local National defense Year or quarter Total Total Total Nondefense Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software Total Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software Total Gross investment Consumption expenditures Structures Equipment and software : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Note. See Table B-2 for data for total government consumption expenditures and gross investment for cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B21.ER7 TABLE B Private inventories and domestic final sales by industry [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Private inventories Quarter Total Fourth quarter : Farm Mining utilities and construction Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Other industries Nonfarm Final sales of domestic business Ratio of private inventories to final sales of domestic business Total Nonfarm NAICS : : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter change calculated from this table is not the current-dollar change in private inventories component of GDP. The former is the difference between two inventory stocks each valued at its respective end-of-quarter prices. The latter is the change in the physical volume of inventories valued at average prices of the quarter. In addition changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas change in private inventories is stated at annual rates Inventories of construction mining and utilities establishments are included in other industries through Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Final sales of domestic business equals final sales of domestic product less gross output of general government gross value added of nonprofit institutions compensation paid to domestic workers and space rent for owner-occupied housing Includes a small amount of final sales by farm and by government enterprises Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis. Estimates through are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Beginning with estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B22.ER7 TABLE B Real private inventories and domestic final sales by industry [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars except as noted ; seasonally adjusted ] Private inventories Quarter Total Fourth quarter : Farm Mining utilities and construction Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Other industries Nonfarm Final sales of domestic business Ratio of private inventories to final sales of domestic business Total Nonfarm NAICS : : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Inventories at end of quarter. Quarter-to-quarter changes calculated from this table are at quarterly rates whereas the change in private inventories component of GDP is stated at annual rates Inventories of construction mining and utilities establishments are included in other industries through Quarterly totals at monthly rates. Final sales of domestic business equals final sales of domestic product less gross output of general government gross value added of nonprofit institutions compensation paid to domestic workers and space rent for owner-occupied housing Includes a small amount of final sales by farm and by government enterprises Note. The industry classification of inventories is on an establishment basis. Estimates through are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Beginning with estimates are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) See Survey of Current Business Tables 5.7.6A and 5.7.6B for detailed information on calculation of the chained ( ) dollar inventory series Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B23.ER7 TABLE B Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts from rest of the world Current payments to rest of the world Exports of goods and services Year or quarter Total Total Services Goods Imports of goods and services Income receipts Total Total Goods Services Income payments Current taxes and transfer payments to rest of the world ( net ) Total From persons ( net ) From government ( net ) From business ( net ) Balance on current account NIPA : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services. Beginning with repairs and alterations of equipment were reclassified from goods to services Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B24.ER7 TABLE B Real exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Goods Goods Year or quarter Total Durable goods Total Nondurable goods Services Total Total : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Durable goods Nondurable goods Services cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services. Beginning with repairs and alterations of equipment were reclassified from goods to services Note. See Table B for data for total exports of goods and services and total imports of goods and services for Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B25.ER7 TABLE B Relation of gross domestic product gross national product net national product and national income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Plus : Income receipts from rest of the world Gross domestic product Less : Income payments to rest of the world Less : Consumption of fixed capital Equals : Gross national product Total Private Government Equals : Net national product Less : Statistical discrepancy Equals : National income : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B26.ER7 TABLE B Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Year or quarter National income Plus : Corporate profits Taxes ContriNet with buon prointerest inventory duction tions and mis- Business Current current surplus valuation for and cellane- transfer of govand imports govern- ous paypayernment capital ment less ments ments enterconsump- subsi- social on ( net ) prises tion insurdies assets adjustance ments Wage Personal accruals income less receipts disburse- on asments sets Equals : Personal current transfer receipts Personal income : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B27.ER7 TABLE B National income by type of income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Compensation of employees Year or quarter National income Total Total Government Proprietors income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Supplements to wages and salaries Wage and salary accruals Other Total Employer contributions for employee pension and insurance funds Employer contributions for government social insurance Total Farm Nonfarm Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : I II III See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B28.ER7 TABLE B National income by type of income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Year or quarter Total Total Capital Profits conInven- sumptory Profits after tax tion valu- adjustProfits Taxes on ation before corpoNet Undis- adjust- ment rate tax Total divi- tributed ment income dends profits BusiNet ness interest Taxes Less : current on and produc- Sub- transmisceltion sifer laneous and dies paypayments ments imports ( net ) Current surplus of government enterprises : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B28.ER7 TABLE B Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Compensation of employees received Wage and salary disbursements Year or quarter Personal income Total Total Private Governindusment tries Supplements to wages and salaries Total Employer contributions for employee pension and insurance funds Employer contributions for government social insurance Proprietors income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total Farm Nonfarm Rental income of persons with capital consumption adjustment : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Consists of aid to families with dependent children and beginning with assistance programs operating under the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B29.ER7 TABLE B Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal income receipts on assets Personal current transfer receipts Government social benefits to persons Year or quarter Total Personal Personal interest dividend income income Old-age survivors Government disability unemand ployment health insurinsurance ance ben- benefits efits Total Total Veterans benefits Family assistance Other Less : Other Contributions current for transfer receipts government from social business insurance ( net ) : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B29.ER7 TABLE B Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal current taxes Equals : Disposable personal income Percent of disposable personal income PerPersonal Personal sonal curconrent sumption interest transpayexpendi- ments fer tures payments Total Equals : Personal saving Personal outlays Personal Personal consumption saving expenditures Total : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Consists of nonmortgage interest paid by households based on data in millions of dollars Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Percents VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B30.ER7 TABLE B Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures and per capita gross domestic product in current and real dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Disposable personal income Total ( billions of dollars ) Year or quarter Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Total ( billions of dollars ) Per capita ( dollars ) Gross domestic product per capita ( dollars ) Population ( thousands ) Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas ; includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning Annual data are averages of quarterly data. Quarterly data are averages for the period Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B31.ER7 TABLE B Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Net saving Net private saving Year or quarter Total gross saving Total net saving Total UndisWage accruals Personal tributed less discorsaving porate burseprofits ments Total Consumption of fixed capital Net government saving Federal State and local Total Private Government : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B32.ER7 TABLE B Gross saving and investment Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic investment capital account transactions and net lending NIPA Addenda : Gross government saving Gross domestic investment Year or quarter Total Total CapNet ital lending Statistical Gross acGross count or net discrepprivate governborancy domes- ment trans- rowing tic ac ( ) invest- invest- tions NIPA ment ( net ) ment Gross private saving Total Federal State and local Gross saving as a Net perdomes- cent tic of invest- gross ment national income Net saving as a percent of gross national income : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES For details on government investment see Table B of capital transfers and the acquisition and disposal of nonproduced nonfinancial assets to equals the balance on current account NIPA ( see Table B ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Consists Prior VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B32.ER7 TABLE B Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and persons by race selected years Families Persons below poverty level Below poverty level Year ALL RACES WHITE Alone Alone or in combination BLACK Alone Alone or in combination Number ( millions ) Median money income ( in dollars ) Female householder Total Number ( millions ) Percent Number ( millions ) Percent Median money income ( in dollars ) of persons years old and over with income Males Number ( millions ) Percent Females All persons Yearround full-time workers All persons Yearround full-time workers $ $ $ $ $ cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES The term family refers to a group of two or more persons related by birth marriage or adoption and residing together. Every family must include a reference person Current dollar median money income adjusted by CPI U RS Reflects implementation of Census 2000-based population controls comparable with succeeding years Reflects household sample expansion Data are for white alone ; for white alone or in combination ; for black alone ; and for black alone or in combination. ( Black is also Black or African American. ) Beginning with data for the Current Population Survey allowed respondents to choose more than one race ; for earlier years respondents could report only one race group Note. Poverty rates ( percent of persons below poverty level ) for all races for years not shown above are : ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; and Poverty thresholds are updated each year to reflect changes in the consumer price index ( CPI U ) Data for reflect a correction to the sample weights for the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement For details see Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplements Series P Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B33.ER7 POPULATION EMPLOYMENT WAGES AND PRODUCTIVITY TABLE B Population by age group [ Thousands of persons ] Age ( years ) July Total Under cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES and over Revised total population data are available as follows : ; ; ; ; ; and Note. Includes Armed Forces overseas beginning Includes Alaska and Hawaii beginning All estimates are consistent with decennial census enumerations Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B34.ER7 TABLE B Civilian population and labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Civilian noninstitutional population Year or month Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Not in labor force Civil- Civilian ian emlabor ployforce ment/ parpopticipation ulation rate ratio Thousands of persons years of age and over Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Thousands of persons years of age and over Not seasonally adjusted labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force See next page for continuation of table Civilian Civilian VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B35.ER7 TABLE B Civilian population and labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Civilian labor force Civilian noninstitutional population Year or month Employment Total Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Not in labor force Civil- Civilian ian emlabor ployforce ment/ parpopticipation ulation rate ratio Thousands of persons years of age and over : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Not strictly comparable with earlier data due to population adjustments or other changes. See Employment and Earnings for details on breaks in series Beginning in data for agricultural employment are for agricultural and related industries ; data for this series and for nonagricultural employment are not strictly comparable with data for earlier years. Because of independent seasonal adjustment for these two series monthly data will not add to total civilian employment Note. Labor force data in Tables B-35 through B-44 are based on household interviews and relate to the calendar week including the 12th of the month. For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see Employment and Earnings Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B35.ER7 TABLE B Civilian employment and unemployment by sex and age [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Civilian employment Males Year or month Total Total years Unemployment Females years and over Total years Males years and over Total Total Females years years and over Total years years and over : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Note. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B36.ER7 TABLE B Civilian employment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White All civilian workers Year or month Total Males Black and other Females Both sexes Total Males Females Black or African American Both sexes Both FeMales males sexes Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Beginning in persons who selected this race group only. Prior to persons who selected more than one race were included in the group they identified as the main race. Data for black or African American were for black prior to Data discontinued for black and other series. See Employment and Earnings for details Note. Beginning with data for since data for all race groups are not shown here detail will not sum to total See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B37.ER7 TABLE B Unemployment by demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Total Males Black and other Females Both sexes Total Black or African American Males Females Both sexes Total Males Females Both sexes : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec See footnote and Note Table B Note. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B38.ER7 TABLE B Civilian labor force participation rate and employment/population ratio [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Labor force participation rate cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Year or month All civilFeian Males males workers : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Employment/population ratio Both sexes years White Black and other Black or African American All civilFeian Males males workers Both sexes years White Black Black or and African other American Civilian labor force or civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified footnote Table B Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics See VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B39.ER7 TABLE B Civilian labor force participation rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Black and other or black or African American Males Total Total years Females years and over Total years Males years and over Total Total years Females years and over Total years years and over Black and other cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Black or African American : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec 1Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified footnote Table B Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics See VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B40.ER7 TABLE B Civilian employment/population ratio by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Black and other or black or African American Males Females Total years years and over Total Total Males years years and over Total Total years Females years and over Total years years and over Black and other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Black or African American Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified footnote Table B Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics See VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B41.ER7 TABLE B Civilian unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted by NSA ] Males cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Year or month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec All civilian workers Females By race Both sexes years years Total and Total years and years years over over White Black and other Black or African American Asian ( NSA ) HisWomen panic Married who or mainmen Latino spouse tain eth- present faminilies city ( NSA ) Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified footnote Table B whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics See Persons VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B42.ER7 TABLE B Civilian unemployment rate by demographic characteristic [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] White Year or month All civilian workers Black and other or black or African American Males Females Total years years and over Total Total Males years years and over Total Total years Females years and over Total years years and over Black and other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Black or African American Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified footnote Table B Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics See VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B43.ER7 TABLE B Unemployment by duration and reason [ Thousands of persons except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Duration of unemployment Year or month Unemployment Reason for unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Average ( mean ) duration ( weeks ) Job losers Median duration ( weeks ) Total On layoff Other Job leavers Reentrants New entrants : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not add to totals for by reason for unemployment are not equal to total unemployment January job losers and persons who completed temporary jobs Note. Data relate to persons years of age and over See footnote and Note Table B-35 Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Data Beginning VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B44.ER7 TABLE B Unemployment insurance programs selected data All programs Insured unemployment ( weekly average ) State programs Total benefits paid ( millions of dollars ) Year or month Covered employment p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec p cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Thousands Insured unemployment Initial claims Exhaustions Insured unemployment as percent of covered employment Benefits paid Total ( millions of dollars ) Average weekly check ( dollars ) Weekly average ; thousands * * * * * * * * Monthly data are seasonally adjusted Through includes persons under the State UCFE ( Federal employee effective January ) RRB ( Railroad Retirement Board ) programs and UCX ( unemployment compensation for ex-servicemembers effective October ) programs. Beginning covered employment data are State and UCFE programs only. Workers covered by State programs account for about percent of wage and salary earners Covered employment data beginning are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Prior data are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Includes State UCFE RR and UCX. Also includes Federal and State extended benefit programs. Does not include FSB ( Federal supplemental benefits ) SUA ( special unemployment assistance ) Federal Supplemental Compensation Emergency Unemployment Compensation and TEUC ( Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation ) programs Covered workers who have completed at least week of unemployment Annual data are net amounts and monthly data are gross amounts Individuals receiving final payments in benefit year For total unemployment only Including Emergency Unemployment Compensation total benefits paid for and would be approximately ( in millions of dollars ) : for and for Including Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation total benefits paid ( not including RRB program ) would be approximately ( in millions of dollars ) : for ; ; ; ; and Note. Insured unemployment and initial claims programs include Puerto Rican sugar cane workers Source : Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B45.ER7 TABLE B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Goods-producing industries Year or month Total Total Natural resources and mining Service-providing industries Manufacturing Construction Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Trade transportation and utilities Total Total Retail trade cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Includes wholesale trade transportation and warehousing and utilities not shown separately Note. Data in Tables B and B are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period that includes the 12th of the month. Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B through B ) which include proprietors self-employed persons unpaid family workers and private household workers ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B46.ER7 TABLE B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of persons ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Service-providing industries Continued Year or month Information Financial activities Professional and business services Education and health services Leisure and hospitality Other services Government Total Federal State Local cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Note ( cont d ) weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; which are based on a sample of the working-age population ; and which count persons only once as employed unemployed or not in the labor force. In the data shown here persons who work at more than one job are counted each time they appear on a payroll Establishment data for employment hours and earnings are classified based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) For further description and details see Employment and Earnings Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B46.ER7 TABLE B Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Average weekly hours Current dollars dollars Manufacturing ( current dollars ) $ Manufacturing Year or month $ $ Total private Total private Total cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Average hourly earnings p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Overtime Average weekly earnings total private Percent change from year earlier Level Current dollars dollars Current dollars dollars $ $ For production or nonsupervisory workers ; total includes private industry groups shown in Table B dollars divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Note. See Note Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Current VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B47.ER7 TABLE B Employment cost index private industry Total private Year and month Service-providing Goods-producing Total Wages Total Wages comand Bene- comand pen- sala- fits pen- salasation ries sation ries Benefits Manufacturing Total Wages comand Benepen- sala- fits sation ries Total Wages comand Benepen- sala- fits sation ries Indexes on SIC basis December = ; not seasonally adjusted December : : Mar June Sept : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Indexes on NAICS basis December = ; not seasonally adjusted Indexes on NAICS basis December = ; seasonally adjusted Percent change from months earlier not seasonally adjusted December : SIC basis NAICS basis : Mar June Sept : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Percent change from months earlier seasonally adjusted On SIC basis data are for service-producing industries costs for employee benefits on NAICS basis available beginning ; not strictly comparable with earlier data shown on SIC basis Note. In April with release of data for March among other changes the industry classification for these series was switched to the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) from the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Also data were rebased to December = Complete historical SIC data through December as well as technical details are available from the Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Data exclude farm and household workers Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Employer cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Data VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B48.ER7 TABLE B Productivity and related data business sector [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Output per hour of all persons Year or quarter cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Output Hours of all persons Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector including hours of proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers for recent quarters. The trend from is based on the consumer price index research series ( CPI U RS ) Current dollar output divided by the output index Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B49.ER7 TABLE B Changes in productivity and related data business sector [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Output per hour of all persons Year or quarter : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Output Hours of all persons Compensation per hour Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm ness business ness business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector Real compensation per hour Business sector Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector at work of all persons engaged in the sector. See footnote Table B and salaries of employees plus employers contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by a consumer price index. See footnote Table B Current dollar output divided by the output index Note. Percent changes are based on original data and may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Hours Wages VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B50.ER7 PRODUCTION AND BUSINESS ACTIVITY TABLE B Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Total industrial production Total Utilities Nondurable Other ( non-NAICS ) Mining Durable p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Total industry and total manufacturing series include manufacturing as defined in the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) plus those industries logging and newspaper periodical book and directory-publishing that have traditionally been considered to be manufacturing and included in the industrial sector Note. Data based on the North American Industry Classification System ; see footnote Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B51.ER7 TABLE B Industrial production indexes market groupings [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Final products Year or month Total industrial production Nonindustrial supplies Consumer goods Automotive products Total Total Other Nondura- durable Total Busible ness goods goods Defense and space Total Construction Business cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Materials Equipment p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Total Includes other items not shown separately Note. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B52.ER7 Nonenergy Energy TABLE B Industrial production indexes selected manufacturing industries [ = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Durable manufacturing Primary metal Year or month Total p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Iron and steel products Nondurable manufacturing Computer and electronic products Fabricated metal products Machinery Total Selected hightechnology Transportation equipment Apparel Paper Total Motor vehicles and parts Printing and support Chemical Plastics and rubber products Food cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Computers and office equipment communications equipment and semiconductors and related electronic components Note. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B53.ER7 TABLE B Capacity utilization rates [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month Total industry Total Stage-of-process Durable goods Nondurable goods Other ( nonNAICS ) Mining Utilities Crude Primary and semifinished Finished p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Dec p Output as percent of capacity footnote and Note Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System See VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B54.ER7 TABLE B New construction activity [ Value put in place billions of dollars ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Private construction Year or month Total new construction Residential buildings Total Public construction Nonresidential buildings and other construction Total New housing units Total Lodging Total Office Commercial Manufacturing Federal State and local Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct p Nov p Includes farm residential buildings residential improvements not shown separately single- and multi-family units Including farm Health care educational religious public safety amusement and recreation transportation communication power highway and street sewage and waste disposal water supply and conservation and development cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Includes New Note. Data beginning reflect reclassification Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B55.ER7 TABLE B New private housing units started authorized completed and houses sold [ Thousands ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] New housing units started New housing units authorized Type of structure Type of structure Year or month Total unit to units units or more cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES p : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Dec p Total unit to units units or more New housing units completed New houses sold Authorized by issuance of local building permits in permit-issuing places : beginning places ; for ; for ; for ; for ; for ; for ; and prior to Monthly data derived Note. Data beginning for new housing units started and completed and for new houses sold are based on new estimation methods and are not directly comparable with earlier data Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B56.ER7 TABLE B Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month SIC : NAICS : Total manufacturing and trade Sales Inventories Ratio Manufacturing Merchant wholesalers Retail trade Sales Inven3 tories Ratio Sales InvenInven3 tories Ratio Sales tories Ratio Retail and food services sales : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures Seasonally adjusted end of period. Inventories beginning January for manufacturing and December for wholesale and retail trade are not comparable with earlier periods Inventory/sales ratio. Annual data are : beginning averages of monthly ratios ; for ratio of December inventories to monthly average sales for the year. Monthly ratios are inventories at end of month to sales for month Food services included on SIC basis and excluded on NAICS basis. See last column for retail and food services sales Effective in data classified based on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Data on NAICS basis available beginning Earlier data based on Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Data include semiconductors Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B57.ER7 TABLE B Manufacturers shipments and inventories [ Millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Shipments Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Year or month Total SIC : Inventories Total Total Materials and supplies Work in process Finished goods Total Materials and supplies Work in process Finished goods NAICS : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures adjusted end of period. Data beginning are not comparable with earlier data in data classified based on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Data on NAICS basis available beginning Earlier data based on Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Data include semiconductors Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Seasonally Effective VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B58.ER7 TABLE B Manufacturers new and unfilled orders [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] New orders Durable goods industries Year or month Total Capital goods nondefense Total SIC : NAICS : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p Unfilled orders Nondurable goods industries Total Unfilled orders shipments ratio Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Total Nondurable goods industries cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures Unfilled orders are seasonally adjusted end of period. Ratios are unfilled orders at end of period to shipments for period ( excludes industries with no unfilled orders ) Annual ratios relate to seasonally adjusted data for December Effective in data classified based on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Data on NAICS basis available beginning Earlier data based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Data on SIC basis include semiconductors. Data on NAICS basis do not include semiconductors Note. For data beginning on NAICS basis since there are no unfilled orders for manufacturers nondurable goods manufacturers nondurable new orders and nondurable shipments are the same ( see Table B ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B59.ER7 PRICES TABLE B Consumer price indexes for major expenditure classes [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Year or month Food and beverages All items ( CPI-U ) Apparel cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Food Housing Transpor- Medical Entertaintacare ment tion Recreation Education and communication Other goods and services Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately = fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Note. Data beginning incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners costs Series reflect changes in composition and renaming beginning in and formula and methodology changes beginning in Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics December Household VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B60.ER7 Energy TABLE B Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Food and beverages Housing Food Year or month Total cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec At home Shelter Away from home Total Total Fuels and utilities Owners Rent of equivarent primary lent pri- Total of resimary dence residence Fuels Total Fuel oil and other fuels Gas ( piped ) and electricity Includes alcoholic beverages not shown separately other items not shown separately = See next page for continuation of table Includes December VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B61.ER7 Furnishings and operations TABLE B Consumer price indexes for selected expenditure classes Continued [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Transportation Medical care Private transportation Year or month New vehicles Total Used cars and trucks Total New cars cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Total : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Motor vehicle maintenance and repair Motor fuel Public transportation Medical care commodities Total Medical care services Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B61.ER7 TABLE B Consumer price indexes for commodities services and special groups [ For all urban consumers ; = except as noted ] Commodities Year or month cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec All items ( CPI-U ) All commodities Commodities less food Services All services Special indexes Services less medical care services All items less food All items less energy All items All items All items less less food medical and care energy CPI-U- CPI-U- C-CPIX1 RS U ( Dec ( Dec. ( Dec = = = ) ) ) CPI-U-X1 is a rental equivalence approach to homeowners costs for the CPI-U for years prior to the first year for which the official index incorporates such a measure. CPI-U-X1 is rebased to the December value of the CPI-U ( = ) and is identical with CPI-U data from December forward. Data prior to estimated by moving the series at the same rate as the CPI-U for each year CPI research series using current methods ( CPI-U-RS ) introduced in June Data for are preliminary. All data are subject to revision annually Chained consumer price index introduced in August Data for and are subject to revision Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B62.ER7 TABLE B Changes in special consumer price indexes [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] All items ( CPI-U ) Year or month Dec to Dec.1 All items less food Year to year Dec to Dec.1 All items less energy Year to year Dec to Dec.1 All items less food and energy Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year All items less medical care Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Percent change from preceding month cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Unadjusted : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted Unadjusted Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B63.ER7 Seasonally adjusted TABLE B Changes in consumer price indexes for commodities and services [ For all urban consumers : percent change ] All items ( CPI-U ) Commodities Total Year Dec to Dec.1 Year to year Dec to Dec.1 Food Year to year Medical care Services Dec to Dec.1 Total Year to year Dec to Dec. Energy Medical care Year to year Dec to Dec. Year to year Dec to Dec. Year to year Dec to Dec. Year to year cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes and services fuels gas ( piped ) electricity fuel oil etc. and motor fuel. Motor oil coolant etc. also included through Commodities Household Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B64.ER7 TABLE B Producer price indexes by stage of processing [ = ] Finished goods Consumer foods cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Year or month Total finished goods : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Data Finished goods excluding consumer foods Capital equipment Total finished consumer goods Consumer goods Total Crude Processed Total Total Durable Nondurable have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B65.ER7 TABLE B Producer price indexes by stage of processing Continued [ = ] Intermediate materials supplies and components Year or month Total Materials and components Foods and feeds For manufacturing Other For construction Processed fuels and lubricants Crude materials for further processing Containers Supplies Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Other Total Fuel Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Intermediate materials for food manufacturing and feeds Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B65.ER7 TABLE B Producer price indexes by stage of processing special groups [ = ] Finished goods Intermediate materials supplies and components Crude materials for further processing Excluding foods and energy Year or month Total Foods Energy Total Capital equipment Consumer goods excluding foods and energy Total Foods and Energy feeds1 Other Total Foodstuffs and feedstuffs Energy Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Intermediate Data materials for food manufacturing and feeds have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B66.ER7 TABLE B Producer price indexes for major commodity groups [ = ] Farm products and processed foods and feeds Year or month Total Farm products Processed foods and feeds Industrial commodities Textile products and apparel Total Hides skins leather and related products Fuels and related products and power Chemicals and allied products : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Prices Data for some items in this grouping are lagged and refer to month earlier than the index month have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B67.ER7 TABLE B Producer price indexes for major commodity groups Continued [ = ] Industrial commodities Continued Transportation equipment Rubber and plastic products Lumber and wood products Pulp paper and allied products Metals and metal products Machinery and equipment Furniture and household durables Nonmetallic mineral products : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Year or month Motor vehicles and equipment Total Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B67.ER7 Miscellaneous products TABLE B Changes in producer price indexes for finished goods [ Percent change ] Year or month Total finished goods Finished consumer foods Finished goods excluding consumer foods Consumer goods Total Finished energy goods Capital equipment Finished goods excluding foods and energy Dec to Dec. Year to year SeaSeaSeaSeaSeaUnadsonUnadsonUnadsonUnadsonUnadsonjusted ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally ad- justed ally adjusted justed justed justed justed Unadjusted Seasonally adjusted SeaUnadsonjusted ally adjusted Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. to Year to Dec. year Dec. year Dec. year Dec. year Dec. year Dec. to Year to Dec. year cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Percent change from preceding month : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes have been revised through August ; data are subject to revision months after date of original publication Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics Data VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B68.ER7 MONEY STOCK CREDIT AND FINANCE TABLE B Money stock and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures except debt end-of-period basis ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] M1 Year and month M2 Debt Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) M1 plus retail MMMF balances savings deposits ( including MMDAs ) and small time deposits Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors December : Percent change From year or months earlier From previous period M1 M2 Debt : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Consists of outstanding credit market debt of the U.S. Government State and local governments and private nonfinancial sectors changes are from December to December ; monthly changes are from months earlier at a simple annual rate changes are from fourth quarter to fourth quarter. Quarterly changes are from previous quarter at annual rate Note. The Federal Reserve announced that the M3 monetary aggregate and most of its components would no longer be published. Institutional money market mutual funds will continue to be published as a memorandum item in the H.6 release and the component on large-denomination time deposits will be published in other Federal Reserve Board releases. For details see H.6 release of March Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Annual Annual VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B69.ER7 TABLE B Components of money stock measures [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Year and month Nonbank travelers checks Currency December : Other checkable deposits ( OCDs ) Demand deposits At commercial banks Total At thrift institutions : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B70.ER7 TABLE B Components of money stock measures Continued [ Averages of daily figures ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Savings deposits Year and month Total December : Small-denomination time deposits At commercial banks At commercial banks At thrift institutions Total At thrift institutions Retail money funds Institutional money funds : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Savings deposits including money market deposits accounts ( MMDAs ) ; data prior to are savings deposits only deposits are those issued in amounts of less than $ money funds are not part of non-M1 M2 Small-denomination cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Institutional Note. See also Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B70.ER7 TABLE B Aggregate reserves of depository institutions and the monetary base [ Averages of daily figures ; millions of dollars ; seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Adjusted for changes in reserve requirements Year and month Reserves of depository institutions Nonborrowed Total cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES December : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct. Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Required Monetary base Execess ( NSA ) Borrowings of depository institutions from the Federal Reserve ( NSA ) Total Primary Secondary Seasonal Adjustment Data are prorated averages of biweekly ( maintenance period ) averages of daily figures Aggregate reserves incorporate adjustments for discontinuities associated with regulatory changes to reserve requirements. For details on aggregate reserves series see Federal Reserve Bulletin Total includes borrowing under the terms and conditions established for the Century Date Change Special Liquidity Facility in effect from October through April Note. NSA indicates data are not seasonally adjusted Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B71.ER7 TABLE B Bank credit at all commercial banks [ Monthly average ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Securities in bank credit Year and month Total bank credit December : U.S Treasury and agency securities Total securities Other securities Loans and leases in bank credit Total loans and leases Commercial and industrial Real estate Total Revolving home equity Other Consumer Security Other : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Data are prorated averages of Wednesday values for domestically chartered commercial banks branches and agencies of foreign banks New York State investment companies ( through September ) and Edge Act and agreement corporations Excludes Federal funds sold to reverse repurchase agreements ( RPs ) with and loans to commercial banks in the United States Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B72.ER7 TABLE B Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Constant maturities 3month cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES 6month 3year 10year 30year Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor s ) Newhome mortgage yields Prime rate charged by banks Discount window ( Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) Primary credit Adjustment credit Federal funds rate Rate on new issues within period ; bank-discount basis Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Department of the Treasury. The 30-year Treasury constant maturity series was discontinued on February and reintroduced on February Beginning December data for corporate Aaa series are industrial bonds only Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning January not strictly comparable with prior rates See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B73.ER7 TABLE B Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( new issues ) 3month 6month Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Constant maturities 3year 10year 30year Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal bonds ( Standard & Poor s ) Newhome mortgage yields Prime rate charged by banks High-low : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Discount window ( Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) Primary credit Adjustment credit High-low High-low For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for and are ranges of the rate in effect during the period credit replaced adjustment credit as the Federal Reserve s principal discount window lending program effective January July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day s transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Housing Finance Board Moody s Investors Service and Standard & Poor s Primary Since cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Federal funds rate VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B73.ER7 TABLE B Credit market borrowing [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item DOMESTIC BY INSTRUMENT Commercial paper Treasury securities Agency- and GSE-backed securities Municipal securities Corporate bonds Banks loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Home Multifamily residential Commercial Farm Consumer credit BY SECTOR Household sector Nonfinancial business Corporate Nonfarm noncorporate Farm State and local governments Federal Government FOREIGN BORROWING IN THE UNITED STATES Commercial paper Bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances BY INSTRUMENT Open market paper GSE issues ( government-sponsored enterprises ) Agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pool securities Corporate bonds Banks loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages BY SECTOR Commercial banking U.S.-chartered commercial banks Foreign banking offices in U.S. Bank holding companies Savings institutions Credit unions Life insurance companies Government-sponsored enterprises Agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pools Asset-backed securities issuers Finance companies REITs Brokers and dealers Funding corporations TOTAL Open market paper Treasury securities Agency- and GSE-backed securities Municipal securities Corporate and foreign bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Consumer credit NONFINANCIAL SECTORS NONFINANCIAL DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN BORROWING FINANCIAL SECTORS cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES ALL SECTORS BY INSTRUMENT See next page for continuation of table VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B74.ER7 TABLE B Credit market borrowing Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Item I II III IV I II III NONFINANCIAL SECTORS DOMESTIC BY INSTRUMENT Commercial paper Treasury securities Agency- and GSE-backed securities Municipal securities Corporate bonds Banks loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Home Multifamily residential Commercial Farm Consumer credit BY SECTOR Household sector Nonfinancial business Corporate Nonfarm noncorporate Farm State and local governments Federal Government FOREIGN BORROWING IN THE UNITED STATES Commercial paper Bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances NONFINANCIAL DOMESTIC AND FOREIGN BORROWING BY INSTRUMENT Open market paper GSE issues ( government-sponsored enterprises ) Agency- and GSE-backed morgage pool securities Corporate bonds Bank loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages BY SECTOR Commercial banking U.S.-chartered commercial banks Foreign banking offices in U.S. Bank holding companies Savings institutions Credit unions Life insurance companies Government-sponsored enterprises Agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pools Asset-backed securities issuers Finance companies REITs Brokers and dealers Funding corporations TOTAL Open market paper Treasury securities Agency- and GSE-backed securities Municipal securities Corporate and foreign bonds Banks loans n.e.c. Other loans and advances Mortgages Consumer credit FINANCIAL SECTORS ALL SECTORS BY INSTRUMENT cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B74.ER7 TABLE B Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Conventional Government underwritten End of year or quarter Farm properties Total Multifamily properties to 4family houses Commercial properties Total to 4-family houses Total FHA insured VA guaranteed Total to 4family houses : I II III IV : I II III p cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES All properties Includes FHA insured multifamily properties not shown separately Derived figures. Total includes multifamily properties not shown separately and commercial properties not shown here but are the same as nonfarm properties commercial properties Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B75.ER7 TABLE B Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions Total : I II III IV : I II III p cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES End of year or quarter Total Savings institutions Commercial banks Other holders Life insurance companies Federal and related agencies Individuals and others Includes savings banks and savings and loan associations. Data reported by Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation-insured institutions include loans in process for and exclude loans in process beginning Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not by bank trust departments Includes Ginnie Mae Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA ) Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Farmers Home Administration ( FmHA ) Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Resolution Trust Corporation ( through ) and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation and Public Housing Administration. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as Fannie Mae Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA ) Federal Land Banks Freddie Mac Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( FHLMC ) Farmer Mac Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation ( beginning ) Federal Home Loan Banks ( beginning ) and mortgage pass-through securities issued or guaranteed by GNMA FHLMC FNMA FmHA or Farmer Mac Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with individuals and others. Includes private mortgage pools Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B76.ER7 TABLE B Consumer credit outstanding [ Amount outstanding ( end of month ) ; millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Total consumer credit Year and month December : Nonrevolving Revolving : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals. Credit secured by real estate is excluded Includes automobile loans and all other loans not included in revolving credit such as loans for mobile homes education boats trailers or vacations. These loans may be secured or unsecured. Beginning includes student loans extended by the Federal Government and by SLM Holding Corporation Data newly available in January result in breaks in these series between December and subsequent months Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B77.ER7 GOVERNMENT FINANCE TABLE B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Total Fiscal year or period Receipts On-budget Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Off-budget Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Federal debt ( end of period ) Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Gross Federal Held by the public Addendum : Gross domestic product Transition quarter cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES ( estimates ) ( estimates ) Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July 1-June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October 1-September basis. The transition quarter is the 3-month period from July through September See Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year for additional information Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B78.ER7 TABLE B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years [ Percent ; fiscal years ] Outlays Fiscal year or period Receipts Federal debt ( end of period ) Surplus or deficit ( ) National defense Total Gross Federal Held by public Transition quarter cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES ( estimates ) ( estimates ) Note. See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B79.ER7 TABLE B Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Receipts ( on-budget and off-budget ) Fiscal year or period Total Individual income taxes Social Cor- insurpora- ance tion and in- retire- Other come ment taxes receipts Outlays ( on-budget and off-budget ) National defense Total Department of Total Defense military InternaInNet tion- Health Medi- come Social inter- Other al care secu- secu- est rity afrity fairs Surplus or deficit ( ) ( onbudget and offbudget ) Transition quarter cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Estimates Note. See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B80.ER7 TABLE B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Estimates Description RECEIPTS AND OUTLAYS : Total receipts Total outlays Total surplus or deficit ( ) On-budget receipts On-budget outlays On-budget surplus or deficit ( ) Off-budget receipts Off-budget outlays Off-budget surplus or deficit ( ) OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD : Gross Federal debt Held by Federal Government accounts Held by the public Federal Reserve System Other RECEIPTS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance and retirement receipts On-budget Off-budget Excise taxes Estate and gift taxes Customs duties and fees Miscellaneous receipts Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System All other OUTLAYS : ON-BUDGET AND OFF-BUDGET National defense International affairs General science space and technology Energy Natural resources and environment Agriculture Commerce and housing credit On-budget Off-budget Transportation Community and regional development Education training employment and social services Health Medicare Income security Social security On-budget Off-budget Veterans benefits and services Administration of justice General government Net interest On-budget Off-budget Allowances Undistributed offsetting receipts On-budget Off-budget cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Note. See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B81.ER7 TABLE B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Year or quarter Current receipts Current expenditures Federal Government Net government saving ( NIPA ) Current receipts Current expenditures State and local government Net Federal Government saving ( NIPA ) Current receipts Current expenditures Net State and local government saving ( NIPA ) Addendum : Grantsin-aid to State and local governments : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Note. Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal current expenditures and State and local current receipts. Total government current receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B82.ER7 TABLE B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) by major type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts Current expenditures Current tax receipts Year or quarter Total Total ContribuCurrent InTaxes Taxes tions come Current surplus on for transof Peron refer govern- Total sonal produc- corpo- govern- ceipts retion ment ment current and rate on social assets ceipts entertaxes inimprises come insurports ance ConNet sump- Current Interest governtranstion Sub- ment fer pay- sidies saving expaypendi- ments ments tures : I II III IV : I II III IV cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : I II III IV : I II III Includes Includes taxes from the rest of the world not shown separately an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B83.ER7 TABLE B Federal Government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts Current expenditures Current tax receipts Year or quarter Total Total ContribuCurrent InTaxes Taxes tions come Current surplus on for transof Peron refer governsonal produc- corpo- govern- ceipts retion ment ment current rate on and social assets ceipts entertaxes inimprises come insurports ance Total Net ConFederal sump- Current Inter- Sub- Governtranstion est fer expay- si- ment paypendi- ments ments dies saving tures : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Includes taxes from the rest of the world not shown separately an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Federal grants-in-aid to state and local governments. See Table B for data on Federal grants-in-aid Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis Includes Includes VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B84.ER7 TABLE B State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts Current expenditures Current tax receipts Year or quarter Total : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III ContribuInTaxes Taxes tions come Current on for transPer- producon govern- resonal corpo- ment ceipts ferTotal current tion rerate social on ceipts and taxes inassets imcome insurports ance Current surplus of government enterprises Total Consumption expenditures Net GovernState ment and social Interlocal benefit est Sub- governpaypay- siment ments ments dies saving to persons Includes Federal grants-in-aid. See Table B for data on Federal grants-in-aid an item for the difference between wage accruals and disbursements not shown separately Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Includes VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B85.ER7 TABLE B State and local government revenues and expenditures selected fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year Sales Indiand Property gross vidual taxes income receipts taxes taxes Total General expenditures by function Corporation net income taxes Revenue from Federal Government All other Total Education cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Highways Public welfare All other Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans services air transportation water transport and terminals parking facilities transit subsidies police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development solid waste management financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other government administration interest on general debt and general expenditures n.e.c Note. Except for States listed data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregation of data for government fiscal years that ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years ( Texas used August and Alabama and Michigan used September ) Data for and earlier years include data for governments fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Data prior to are not available for intervening years Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B86.ER7 TABLE B U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] End of year or month Total Treasury securities outstanding Fiscal year : : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Marketable Total Treasury bills Nonmarketable Treasury inflation-protected securities Treas- Treasury ury notes bonds Total Notes Total Bonds U.S savings Foreign securi- series ties Government account series Data cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Other beginning January are interest-bearing and noninterest-bearing securities ; prior data are interest-bearing securities only Includes Federal Financing Bank securities not shown separately Through series is U.S. savings bonds. Beginning includes U.S. retirement plan bonds U.S. individual retirement bonds and U.S. savings notes previously included in other nonmarketable securities Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreigncurrency denominated issues Includes depository bonds retirement plan bonds Rural Electrification Administration bonds State and local bonds special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks and for the period July through February depositary compensation securities Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis Source : Department of the Treasury VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B87.ER7 TABLE B Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt securities held by private investors Amount outstanding privately held End of year or month Maturity class Within year to years to years to years years and over Millions of dollars Fiscal year : Average length Years Months : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES In the average length calculation was revised to include Treasury inflation-protected securities Note. Through fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis ; beginning October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis Data shown in this table are as of January Source : Department of the Treasury VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B88.ER7 TABLE B Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities [ Billions of dollars ] Held by private investors Total public debt Federal Reserve Deand posiGovernTotal tory ment privately instiacheld tucounts tions : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec : Mar June Sept Dec End of month Pension funds U.S savings bonds Private State and local governments Insurance companies Mutual funds State Foreign and and interlocal nationgovernal ments Other investors Face value Reserve holdings exclude Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements commercial banks savings institutions and credit unions Current accrual value Includes Treasury securities held by the Federal Employees Retirement System Thrift Savings Plan G Fund. Includes money market mutual funds mutual funds and closed-end investment companies Includes nonmarketable foreign series Treasury securities and Treasury deposit funds. Excludes Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements in custody accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Estimates reflect benchmarks to this series at differing intervals Includes individuals Government-sponsored enterprises brokers and dealers bank personal trusts and estates corporate and noncorporate businesses and other investors Federal Includes Note. Data shown in this table are as of January cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of the Treasury VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B89.ER7 CORPORATE PROFITS AND FINANCE TABLE B Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Year or quarter Taxes on corporate income Net dividends Total Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III IV cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : I II III Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B90.ER7 TABLE B Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Financial Year or quarter Total Total Total cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES SIC : NAICS : : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Federal Reserve banks Nonfinancial Other Manufacturing Total Transportation Utilities Wholesale trade Retail trade Information Rest of the world Other See Table B for industry detail Data on SIC basis include transportation and public utilities. On NAICS basis includes transportation and warehousing. Utilities classified separately in NAICS ( as shown beginning ) Industry data for SIC are based on the SIC for data beginning and on the SIC for earlier data shown. Data on NAICS basis are based on the NAICS Note. Industry data on SIC ( Standard Industrial Classification ) basis and NAICS ( North American Industry Classification System ) basis are not necessarily the same and are not strictly comparable Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B91.ER7 TABLE B Corporate profits of manufacturing industries [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Durable goods Nondurable goods Machinery Computer and electronic products Electrical equipment appliances and components Motor vehicles bodies and trailers and parts Other Total Food and beverage and tobacco products Chemical products NAICS : : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III Total manufacturing Total SIC : cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Year or quarter Fabricated metal products Petroleum and coal products Other For SIC data includes primary metal industries not shown separately Industry groups shown in column headings reflect NAICS classification for data beginning For data on SIC basis the industry groups would be machinery industrial machinery and equipment ; electrical equipment appliances and components electronic and other electric equipment ; motor vehicles bodies and trailers and parts motor vehicles and equipment ; food and beverage and tobacco products food and kindred products ; and chemical products chemicals and allied products See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B92.ER7 TABLE B Sales profits and stockholders equity all manufacturing corporations [ Billions of dollars ] All manufacturing corporations Year or quarter Durable goods industries Profits Sales ( net ) Nondurable goods industries Profits Before income taxes After income taxes Stockholders equity Sales ( net ) Profits Before income taxes Stockholders equity After income taxes Sales ( net ) Before income taxes After income taxes Stockholders equity : IV : IV NAICS : : IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : IV New series : In the old series income taxes refers to Federal income taxes only as State and local income taxes had already been deducted. In the new series no income taxes have been deducted Annual data are average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Beginning profits before and after income taxes reflect inclusion of minority stockholders interest in net income before and after income taxes Data for ( most significantly : I ) reflect the early adoption of Financial Accounting Standards Board Statement ( Employer s Accounting for Post-Retirement Benefits Other Than Pensions ) by a large number of companies during the fourth quarter of Data for ( : I ) also reflect adoption of Statement Corporations must show the cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle in the first quarter of the year in which the change is adopted Data based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Other data shown are based on the Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) Note. Data are not necessarily comparable from one period to another due to changes in accounting principles industry classifications sampling procedures etc. For explanatory notes concerning compilation of the series see Quarterly Financial Report for Manufacturing Mining and Trade Corporations Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B93.ER7 TABLE B Relation of profits after taxes to stockholders equity and to sales all manufacturing corporations Ratio of profits after income taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders equity percent Year or quarter Profits after income taxes per dollar of sales cents All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries Nondurable goods industries All manufacturing corporations Durable goods industries : IV Nondurable goods industries New series : : IV : IV NAICS : : IV : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Annual ratios based on average equity for the year ( using four end-of-quarter figures ) Quarterly ratios based on equity at end of quarter footnote Table B footnote Table B See footnote Table B Note. Based on data in millions of dollars See Note Table B Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census See See VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B94.ER7 TABLE B Historical stock prices and yields Common stock prices New York Stock Exchange indexes Year Composite ( Dec. = ) Composite Industrial Transpor- Utility tation Finance ( ) Common stock yields ( S&P ) ( percent ) Standard Nasdaq & Poor s Dow Jones composite composite Dividendindex industrial index ( Feb. price average ( = ratio = ) ) December = cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Averages Earningsprice ratio of daily closing prices Includes stocks as follows : for NYSE all stocks listed ; for Dow Jones industrial average stocks ; for S&P composite index stocks ; and for Nasdaq composite index over The NYSE relaunched the composite index on January incorporating new definitions methodology and base value. ( The composite index based on December = was discontinued. ) Subset indexes on financial energy and health care were released by the NYSE on January ( see Table B ) NYSE indexes shown in this table for industrials utilities transportation and finance were discontinued Effective April the NYSE doubled the value of the utility index to facilitate trading of options and futures on the index. Annual indexes prior to reflect the doubling Based on stocks in the S&P composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter Annual data are averages of quarterly ratios Sources : New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) Dow Jones & Co. Inc. Standard & Poor s ( S&P ) and Nasdaq Stock Market VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B95.ER7 TABLE B Common stock prices and yields Common stock prices indexes New York Stock Exchange ( December = ) Year or month Composite cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Financial Energy Health Care Common stock yields ( S&P ) ( percent ) Dow Jones industrial average Standard & Poor s composite index ( = ) Nasdaq composite index ( Feb. = ) Dividendprice ratio Earningsprice ratio Averages of daily closing prices Includes stocks as follows : for NYSE all stocks listed ( in over ) ; for Dow Jones Industrial average stocks ; for S&P composite index stocks ; and for Nasdaq composite index in about The NYSE relaunched the composite index on January incorporating new definitions methodology and base value. Subset indexes on financial energy and health care were released by the NYSE on January Based on stocks in the S&P composite index Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices Monthly data are averages of weekly figures annual data are averages of monthly figures Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for quarters ending with particular quarter to price index for last day of that quarter Annual data are averages of quarterly ratios Sources : New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) Dow Jones & Co. Inc. Standard & Poor s ( S&P ) and Nasdaq Stock Market VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B96.ER7 AGRICULTURE TABLE B Farm income [ Billions of dollars ] Income of farm operators from farming Gross farm income Year Cash marketing receipts Total Total cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES p Livestock and products Crops Value of inventory changes Direct Government payments Production expenses Net farm income Cash marketing receipts Government payments value of changes in inventories other farm related cash income and nonmoney income produced by farms including imputed rent of operator residences Crop receipts include proceeds received from commodities placed under Commodity Credit Corporation loans Physical changes in beginning and ending year inventories of crop and livestock commodities valued at weighted average market prices during the year Includes only Government payments made directly to farmers Note. Data for are forecasts Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B97.ER7 TABLE B Farm business balance sheet [ Billions of dollars ] Assets Claims Physical assets End of year Total assets Real estate Livestock and poultry Financial assets Nonreal estate InvestMachinPur- Total ments Other in ery and Crops chased coopermotor inatives vehicles puts Total claims Real estate debt Nonreal estate debt Proprietors equity cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Excludes commercial broilers ; excludes horses and mules beginning ; excludes turkeys beginning Non-Commodity Credit Corporation ( CCC ) crops held on farms plus value above loan rate for crops held under CCC Includes fertilizer chemicals fuels parts feed seed and other supplies Beginning in data available only for total financial assets. Data through for other financial assets are currency and demand deposits Includes CCC storage and drying facilities loans Does not include CCC crop loans Beginning data are for farms included in the new farm definition that is places with sales of $ or more annually Note. Data exclude operator households Beginning data include Alaska and Hawaii Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B98.ER7 TABLE B Farm output and productivity indexes [ = ] Farm output Productivity indicators Primary output Year Total Livestock and products Crops Secondary output Farm output per unit of total factor input Farm output per unit of labor input Note. Farm output includes primary agricultural activities and certain secondary activities that are closely linked to agricultural production for which information on production and input use can not be separately observed See Table B for farm inputs cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B99.ER7 TABLE B Farm input use selected inputs Farm employment ( thousands ) Year Total Crops harSelf-emvested ployed ( miland Hired lions unpaid workers of family acres ) workers Selected indexes of input use ( = ) Capital input Labor input Total farm input Total Durable equipment Total Materials input Hired Selfemlabor ployed Total Feed and seed AgriPurculEner- tural chased gy servchem- ices icals p cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Persons involved in farmwork. Total farm employment is the sum of self-employed and unpaid family workers and hired workers shown here Data from Current Population Survey ( CPS ) Department of Commerce ( Census Bureau ) and Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Acreage harvested plus acreages in fruits tree nuts and vegetables and minor crops. Includes double-cropping Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B100.ER7 TABLE B Agricultural price indexes and farm real estate value [ = except as noted ] Prices received by farmers Year or month All farm products Crops Livestock and products Prices paid by farmers All commodities services interest taxes Total and wage rates Production items Feed Livestock and poultry AgriculFertil- tural izer chemicals Fuels Farm machinery Farm services Rent Wage rates Addendum : Average farm real estate value per acre ( dollars ) : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec Includes items used for family living not shown separately other production items not shown separately for States. Annual data are : March for February for April for February for and January for Includes Average cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Note. Data on a base prior to have not been calculated by Department of Agriculture Source : Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics Service VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B101.ER7 TABLE B U.S. exports and imports of agricultural commodities [ Billions of dollars ] Exports Imports Total Feed grains Food grains Oilseeds and products Year Tobacco Cotton Animals and products Total Fruits nuts and vegetables Animals and products Coffee Cocoa beans and products Agricultural trade balance ( ) Jan-Nov : Total includes items not shown separately wheat and wheat flour fruit nut and vegetable preparations. Beginning in includes bananas but excludes yeasts starches and other minor horticultural products Less than $ million Rice cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Includes Note. Data derived from official estimates released by the Bureau of the Census Department of Commerce. Agricultural commodities are defined as ( ) nonmarine food products and ( ) other products of agriculture which have not passed through complex processes of manufacture. Export value at U.S. port of exportation is based on the selling price and includes inland freight insurance and other charges to the port. Import value defined generally as the market value in the foreign country excludes import duties ocean freight and marine insurance Source : Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B102.ER7 INTERNATIONAL STATISTICS TABLE B U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Goods Year or quarter Exports Imports Balance on goods Services Income receipts and payments Balance Net Net on goods travel Other Balance military and and on transac- transpor- services services Receipts Payments income net tions tation Unilateral current transfers net Balance on current account : I II III IV cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : I II III p Adjusted from Census data for differences in valuation coverage and timing ; excludes military transfers of goods and services under U.S. military grant programs See next page for continuation of table Includes VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B103.ER7 TABLE B U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Credits ( ) debits ( ) ] Financial account Year or quarter U.S.-owned assets abroad net [ increase/financial outflow ( ) ] Capital account transactions net Total U.S official reserve assets Statistical discrepancy Foreign-owned assets in the U.S. net [ increase/financial inflow ( ) ] Other U.S Government assets U.S private assets Total Foreign official assets Other foreign assets Total ( sum of the items with sign reversed ) Of which : Seasonal adjustment discrepancy : I II III IV cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : I II III p Consists of gold special drawing rights foreign currencies and the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B103.ER7 TABLE B U.S. international trade in goods by principal end-use category [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports Imports Nonagricultural products Year or quarter Total Agricultural products Indus- Capital trial goods supplies except Autoand auto- motive mate- motive rials Total Nonpetroleum products Total Other Petroleum and products Total Indus- Capital trial goods supplies except Auto- Other and auto- motive mate- motive rials : I II III IV : I II III IV : I II III p End-use commodity classifications beginning and are not strictly comparable with data for earlier periods. See Survey of Current Business June and July Note. Data are on a balance of payments basis and exclude military In June end-use categories for goods exports were redefined to include reexports ; beginning with data for reexports ( exports of foreign goods ) are assigned to detailed end-use categories in the same manner as exports of domestic goods cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B104.ER7 TABLE B U.S. international trade in goods by area [ Millions of dollars ] Item first quarters at annual rate EXPORTS Industrial countries Euro area Canada Japan United Kingdom Other Other countries OPEC Other Of which : China Mexico International organizations and unallocated IMPORTS Industrial countries Euro area Canada Japan United Kingdom Other Other countries OPEC Other Of which : China Mexico International organizations and unallocated BALANCE ( excess of exports ) Industrial countries Euro area Canada Japan United Kingdom Other Other countries OPEC Other Of which : China Mexico International organizations and unallocated Preliminary ; seasonally adjusted Euro area includes : Austria Belgium Finland France Germany Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal Spain and beginning Greece Australia New Zealand and South Africa and other western Europe Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries consisting of Algeria Indonesia Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela. Previously included Ecuador ( through ) and Gabon ( through ) Includes mainly Latin America and Other Western Hemisphere and other countries in Asia and Africa less members of OPEC Note. Data are on a balance of payments basis and exclude military For further details and additional data by country see Survey of Current Business July cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B105.ER7 TABLE B U.S. international trade in goods on balance of payments ( BOP ) and Census basis and trade in services on BOP basis [ Billions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Goods : Exports ( f.a.s. value ) Goods : Imports ( customs value ) Census basis ( by end-use category ) Year or month Foods Total BOP Total feeds and basis Census bevbasis erages Industrial supplies and materials Capital goods except automotive Automotive vehicles parts and engines Census basis ( by end-use category ) Consumer goods ( nonfood ) except automotive Total BOP basis Foods Total feeds and Census bevbasis erages F.a.s. value Industrial supplies and materials Capital goods except automotive Automotive vehicles parts and engines Consumer goods ( nonfood ) except automotive Exports Imports Customs value : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov Dec : Jan Feb Mar Apr May June July Aug Sept Oct Nov p cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Services ( BOP basis ) Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded from total exports through and included beginning F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports Beginning exports have been adjusted for undocumented exports to Canada and are included in the appropriate end-use categories For prior years only total exports include this adjustment Total includes other exports or imports not shown separately Total arrivals of imported goods other than intransit shipments Total includes revisions not reflected in detail Total exports are on a revised statistical month basis ; end-use categories are on a statistical month basis Note. Goods on a Census basis are adjusted to a BOP basis by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in line with concepts and definitions used to prepare international and national accounts. The adjustments are necessary to supplement coverage of Census data to eliminate duplication of transactions recorded elsewhere in international accounts and to value transactions according to a standard definition Data include international trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands Puerto Rico and U.S. Foreign Trade Zones Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Economic Analysis ) VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B106.ER7 TABLE B International investment position of the United States at year-end [ Billions of dollars ] Type of investment NET INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value U.S.-OWNED ASSETS ABROAD : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value U.S. official reserve assets Gold Special drawing rights Reserve position in the International Monetary Fund Foreign currencies U.S. Government assets other than official reserve assets U.S. credits and other long-term assets Repayable in dollars Other U.S. foreign currency holdings and U.S short-term assets U.S. private assets : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Direct investment abroad : At current cost At market value Foreign securities Bonds Corporate stocks U.S. claims on unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns U.S. claims reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere FOREIGN-OWNED ASSETS IN THE UNITED STATES : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Foreign official assets in the United States U.S. Government securities U.S. Treasury securities Other Other U.S. Government liabilities U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Other foreign official assets Other foreign assets : With direct investment at current cost With direct investment at market value Direct investment in the United States : At current cost At market value U.S. Treasury securities U.S. securities other than U.S. Treasury securities Corporate and other bonds Corporate stocks U.S. currency U.S. liabilities to unaffiliated foreigners reported by U.S. nonbanking concerns U.S. liabilities reported by U.S. banks not included elsewhere Valued cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES at market price Note. For details regarding these data see Survey of Current Business July Source : Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO p Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B107.ER7 TABLE B Industrial production and consumer prices major industrial countries United States Year or quarter Canada Japan France Germany Italy United Kingdom Industrial production ( Index = ) p : I II III IV : I II III IV p p : I II III IV : I II III IV p Consumer prices ( Index = ) cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES See Note Table B for information on U.S. industrial production series to data are for West Germany only data exclude construction. Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted Note. National sources data have been rebased for industrial production and consumer prices Sources : National sources as reported by each country ; Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Prior All VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B108.ER7 TABLE B Civilian unemployment rate and hourly compensation major industrial countries [ Quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] United States Year or quarter Canada Japan France Germany United Kingdom Italy Civilian unemployment rate ( Percent ) : I II III IV : I II III IV Manufacturing hourly compensation in U.S. dollars ( Index = ) cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Prior to data are for West Germany only Civilian unemployment rates approximating U.S. concepts. Quarterly data for Japan France Germany and Italy should be viewed as less precise indicators of unemployment under U.S. concepts than the annual data There are breaks in the series for France ( and ) Germany ( and ) Italy ( and ) and United States ( and ) For details on break in series in and for United States see footnote Table B For details on break in series for other countries see U.S. Department of Labor Comparative Civilian Labor Force Statistics Ten Countries : October Hourly compensation in manufacturing U.S. dollar basis ; data relate to all employed persons ( employees and self-employed workers ) For details on manufacturing hourly compensation see U.S. Department of Labor International Comparisons of Manufacturing Productivity and Unit Labor Cost Trends September Source : Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B109.ER7 TABLE B Foreign exchange rates [ Foreign currency units per U.S. dollar except as noted ; certified noon buying rates in New York ] Period Australia ( dollar ) China P.R ( yuan ) Canada ( dollar ) EMU Members ( euro ) Germany ( mark ) Japan ( yen ) Mexico ( peso ) South Korea ( won ) Sweden ( krona ) Switzerland ( franc ) United Kingdom ( pound ) March : I II III IV : I II III IV Trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar Real Nominal G index ( March = ) cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES : I II III IV : I II III IV Broad index ( January = ) Major currencies index ( March = ) OITP index ( January = ) Broad index ( March = ) Major currencies index ( March = ) OITP index ( March = ) European Economic and Monetary Union members include Austria Belgium Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal Spain and beginning in Slovenia U.S. dollars per foreign currency unit G-10 index discontinued after December Weighted average of the foreign exchange value of the dollar against the currencies of a broad group of U.S. trading partners Subset of the broad index. Includes currencies of the euro area Australia Canada Japan Sweden Switzerland and the United Kingdom Subset of the broad index. Includes other important U.S. trading partners ( OITP ) whose currencies are not heavily traded outside their home markets Adjusted for changes in consumer price indexes for the United States and other countries Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B110.ER7 TABLE B International reserves selected years [ Millions of SDRs ; end of period ] Area and country Oct All countries Industrial countries United States Canada Nov Australia Japan New Zealand Denmark Iceland Norway San Marino Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Euro area : Austria Belgium Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands Portugal Spain Developing countries : Total By area : Africa Asia China P.R. : Mainland India Korea Europe Russia Middle East Western Hemisphere Memo : Oil-exporting countries Non-oil developing countries Includes data for Luxembourg Includes data for European Central Bank ( ECB ) beginning Detail does not add to totals shown Includes data for Taiwan Province of China Note. International reserves is comprised of monetary authorities holdings of gold ( at SDR per ounce ) special drawing rights ( SDRs ) reserve positions in the International Monetary Fund and foreign exchange U.S. dollars per SDR ( end of period ) are : ; ; ; ; ; ; October ; and November cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES Source : International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B111.ER7 TABLE B Growth rates in real gross domestic product [ Percent change ] Area and country annual average World Advanced economies Of which : United States Japan United Kingdom Canada * * * Euro area Germany France Italy Spain Netherlands Belgium Austria Finland Greece Portugal Ireland Luxembourg Memorandum : Major advanced economies Newly industrialized Asian economies Other emerging market and developing countries Regional groups : Africa Central and eastern Europe Commonwealth of Independent States Russia Developing Asia China India Middle East Western Hemisphere Brazil Mexico * All figures are forecasts as published by the International Monetary Fund Canada France Germany Italy Japan United Kingdom and United States Hong Kong SAR ( Special Administrative Region of China ) Korea Singapore and Taiwan Province of China Includes Mongolia which is not a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States but is included for reasons of geography and similarities in economic structure * Figure is zero or negligible Includes Includes Note. For details on data shown in this table see World Economic Outlook published semiannually by the International Monetary Fund Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) and International Monetary Fund cprice-sewell on PROD1PC72 with ER4-EOP TABLES VerDate Aug : Feb Jkt PO Frm Fmt Sfmt E : \ 2007_EOP \ B112.ER7