ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Together With THE ANNUAL REPORT of the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Transmitted to the Congress February economic re p ort of the president transmitted to the congress february together with the annual report of the council of economic advisers C O N T E N T S ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER  MIDDLE-CLASS ECONOMICS : THE ROLE OF PRODUCTIVITY INEQUALITY AND PARTICIPATION CHAPTER THE YEAR IN REVIEW AND THE YEARS AHEAD.. CHAPTER  ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES IN THE U.S LABOR MARKET. CHAPTER  ECONOMICS OF FAMILY-FRIENDLY THE WORKPLACE POLICIES. CHAPTER  BUSINESS TAX REFORM AND ECONOMIC GROWTH. CHAPTER  ENERGY REVOLUTION : ECONOMIC THE BENEFITS AND THE FOUNDATION FOR A LOW-CARBON ENERGY FUTURE.. CHAPTER THE UNITED STATES IN A GLOBAL ECONOMY REFERENCES APPENDIX A.  REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B.  STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION. ____________ * For a detailed table of contents of the Council s Report see page iii economic report of the president economic report of the president To the Congress of the United States : As I send you this Economic Report of the President the United States has just concluded a breakthrough year. In our economy added jobs at the fastest pace since the 1990s. The unemployment rate plunged to its lowest point in over years far faster than economists predicted Ten million Americans gained the security of health coverage. And we continued to cut our dependence on foreign oil and invest in renewable energy making us number one in the world in oil gas and wind power These achievements took place against a backdrop of longer term economic strength. Since the crisis we ve seen our deficits cut by twothirds our stock market double and health care inflation at its lowest rate in years. The housing market is rebounding. Manufacturers are adding jobs. More Americans are finishing college than ever before Now America is poised for another good year as long as Washington works to keep this progress going. But even as the economic recovery is touching more lives we need to do more to restore the link between hard work and opportunity for every American. That s the idea behind middle-class economics the simple fact that our country does best when everyone has a fair shot does their fair share and plays by the same set of rules Over the course of this year I will continue to put forward ideas to make that fundamental value a reality not just so that more Americans can share in their country s success but so that more Americans can contribute to their country s success. At this moment when our economy is growing and creating jobs we ve got to work twice as hard especially Economic Report of the President | in Washington to build on our momentum. And I will not let politics or partisanship roll back the progress we ve achieved on so many fronts I want to work with the Congress to invest in middle-class economics in three key ways First let s help working families achieve greater security in a world of constant change. That means giving Americans the peace of mind that comes with knowing they ll be able to afford childcare college health care a home and retirement At a time when having both parents work is an economic necessity for many families high-quality affordable childcare isn t a nice-to-have it s a must-have. That s why I ve proposed tripling the maximum child tax credit to $ per child per year and creating more slots in childcare programs nationwide Meanwhile we re the only advanced country in the world that doesn t guarantee workers either paid sick leave or paid maternity leave. Let s help more States adopt paid leave laws and put it to a vote in Washington too because no parent should ever have to choose between earning a paycheck and taking care of a sick child Of course nothing helps families make ends meet like raising wages. We still need to pass a law that guarantees women equal pay for equal work. We still need to make sure employees get the overtime they ve earned. We still have a minimum wage of $ per hour. That means minimum-wage workers are actually earning percent less than they were when President Reagan was in office. It s time to give some of America s hardest-working people a raise because wages of $ a year are simply not enough to support a family In a 21st century economy we should lower taxes on working families and make mortgage premiums more affordable so responsible families can own their own homes. And we should strengthen programs like Social Security Medicare and Medicaid that help workers save for retirement and protect them from the harshest adversities. These ideas will make a meaningful difference in the lives of millions of Americans and I look forward to working with the Congress to get them done Second middle-class economics means helping more Americans upgrade their skills so that they can earn higher wages down the road By the end of the decade two in three jobs will require some higher education. Yet far too many young people are priced out of college. That can t stand in the 21st century and that s why my Administration has | Economic Report of the President announced a bold new plan to offer free years of community college to responsible students. Let s work together to make college as free and universal as high school because a modern economy requires a highly educated workforce While we strengthen the higher education system my Administration is working to update our job training system and connect community colleges with local employers to train workers directly for existing highpaying jobs. And I ve encouraged more companies to offer educational benefits and paid apprenticeships so more workers have a chance to earn a higher paying job even if they don t have a higher education Finally as we better train our workers we need to ensure that our economy keeps creating high-skilled high-wage jobs for our workers to fill. That means building the most competitive economy anywhere so that more businesses locate and hire in the United States Let s start by making sure that our businesses have 21st century infrastructure modern ports stronger bridges better roads clean water clean energy faster trains and the fastest internet. A bipartisan infrastructure plan would create thousands of middle-class jobs and support economic growth for decades to come Investments in science technology and research and development can fuel new inventions and breakthroughs that will keep American businesses one step ahead of the competition. And protecting a free and open internet and extending its reach to every classroom and community in America will ensure that the next generation of digital innovators and entrepreneurs have the platform to keep reshaping our world At a time when percent of the world s consumers live outside our borders new trade agreements would help American businesses reach new markets and put stronger environmental and labor standards in place to ensure that all countries are playing by the same fair set of rules. The trade deals that my Administration is negotiating in the Atlantic and the Pacific regions would do just that And to make our economy more competitive let s build a tax code that truly helps middle-class families get ahead. Let s reform our business tax system to close wasteful loopholes lower the rate and simplify the system so small business owners spend less time on accounting and more time running their businesses. And let s reform our broken immigration system so the United States continues to be the number one destination for highly-skilled immigrants Economic Report of the President | Over the past years America has risen from recession freer to write our own future than any other nation on Earth. A new foundation is laid. A new future is ready to be written. It s up to all of us Democrats Republicans and Independents to write it together the white house february | Economic Report of the President the annual report of the council of economic advisers letter of transmittal Council of Economic Advisers Washington D.C. February Mr. President : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely yours Jason Furman Chairman Betsey Stevenson Member Maurice Obstfeld Member C O N T E N T S CHAPTER MIDDLE-CLASS ECONOMICS : THE ROLE OF PRODUCTIVITY INEQUALITY AND PARTICIPATION THE PROGRESS OF THE U.S. ECONOMIC RECOVERY. The Recovery in GDP and Labor Markets. A BRIEF HISTORY OF MIDDLE-CLASS INCOMES IN THE POSTWAR PERIOD The Age of Shared Growth ( ) The Age of Expanded Participation ( ) The Age of Productivity Recovery ( ) The Importance of Productivity Inequality and Participation. THE DRIVERS OF MIDDLE-CLASS INCOMES : AN INTERNATIONAL COMPARISON. Labor Productivity Growth. Income Inequality. Labor Force Participation.. THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT. CONCLUSION. CHAPTER THE YEAR IN REVIEW AND THE YEARS AHEAD.. KEY EVENTS OF Aggregate Output Growth during the Year. Fiscal Policy. Monetary Policy. Financial Markets. International Developments DEVELOPMENTS IN AND THE NEAR-TERM OUTLOOK. Consumer Spending. Housing Markets. Investment. State and Local Governments. Labor Markets.. THE LONG-TERM OUTLOOK.. The 10-Year Forecast. GDP Growth over the Long Term. CONCLUSION. CHAPTER ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES IN THE U.S. LABOR MARKET. THE STATE OF THE U.S. LABOR MARKET IN LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION A Longer-Term Perspective on Labor Force Participation. Decomposing the Decline in Participation Since Outlook for the Participation Rate. LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT. Trends in Long-Term Unemployment Factors behind Elevated Rates of Long-Term Unemployment.. Why Long-term Unemployment Matters. PART-TIME WORK FOR ECONOMIC REASONS Patterns in Part-Time For Economic Reasons The Outlook for the Rate of Part-Time for Economic Reasons.. LABOR MARKET FLUIDITY. Trends in Labor Market Fluidity. Potential Consequences of Reduced Fluidity. WAGE GROWTH AND JOB QUALITY. Job Growth in Patterns in Wage Growth since the 1980s The Rise of the Skill Premium and Employment Growth in High- and Low-Skill Occupations.. Broader Measures of Job Quality. THE AGENDA FOR A STRONGER LABOR MARKET. CHAPTER THE ECONOMICS OF FAMILY-FRIENDLY WORKPLACE POLICIES. RECENT CHANGES IN AMERICAN FAMILY LIFE AND THEIR IMPLICATIONS FOR WORK.. | Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers Attachment to the Labor Force and Educational Attainment Have Increased Significantly Among American Women. Families Are Adjusting to New Caregiving Needs The Effects of Work-Family Conflict. ACCESS TO FAMILY-FRIENDLY WORKPLACE POLICIES Access and Use of Leave in the United States. Workplace Flexibility Access in the United States. Disparities in Access to Paid Leave and Flexible Work Arrangements. STATE AND LOCAL INITIATIVES TO EXPAND ACCESS TO WORKFAMILY FRIENDLY POLICIES. State Paid Family Leave. State Paid Sick Leave. Right-to-Request Provisions. THE ECONOMIC CASE FOR FAMILY-FRIENDLY WORKPLACE POLICIES. Impact of Leave and Flexibility on Worker Health and Absenteeism. The Role of Family-Friendly Policies in Worker Recruitment Retention and Productivity The Business Case for Wider Adoption of Flexible Workplace Practices and Policies. CONCLUSION. CHAPTER BUSINESS TAX REFORM AND ECONOMIC GROWTH. THE SOURCES OF PRODUCTIVITY GROWTH. THE HISTORICAL AND INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT FOR BUSINESS TAX REFORM. THE PRESIDENT S APPROACH TO BUSINESS TAX REFORM. THE POTENTIAL FOR BUSINESS TAX REFORM TO BOOST PRODUCTIVITY. Encouraging Domestic Investment Improving the Quality of Investment. Reducing the Inefficiencies of the International Tax System. Investing in Infrastructure. FOUR ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES TO BUSINESS TAX REFORM.. Eliminate the Corporate Income Tax. Contents | Cut the Top Individual Rate in Parallel with the Corporate Rate. Adopt a Territorial Tax System. Allow Expensing for New Investment.. CONCLUSION. CHAPTER THE ENERGY REVOLUTION : ECONOMIC BENEFITS AND THE FOUNDATION FOR A LOW-CARBON ENERGY FUTURE. THE ENERGY REVOLUTION : HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE AND ECONOMIC BENEFITS The Energy Revolution in Historical Perspective. GDP Jobs and the Trade Deficit.. Energy Prices Households and Businesses Infrastructure Implications of the Energy Revolution. THE ENERGY REVOLUTION AND ENERGY SECURITY : A MACROECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE.. Trends in Oil Import Prices and Shares Macroeconomic Channels of Oil Price Shocks.. A PATH TO A LOW-CARBON FUTURE. A Case for Climate Action. The Climate Action Plan. Reducing Emissions through Improved Efficiency. The Role of Natural Gas in Lowering CO2 Emissions.. Supporting Renewables Nuclear Cleaner Coal and Cleaner Transportation. International Leadership.. CONCLUSION. CHAPTER THE UNITED STATES IN A GLOBAL ECONOMY MULTILATERAL TRADE. The Growth of U.S. and World Trade. FREE TRADE AGREEMENTS. Current Trade Negotiations.. THE IMPLICATIONS OF TRADE Classic Gains from Trade. The Labor Market Implications of Trade. DEVELOPMENT BENEFITS OF TRADE. | Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers Global Growth. Gender Equality. Political Cooperation. Environmental Protection FINANCIAL FLOWS.. Composition of International Capital Flows. Challenges in Regulating Global Financial Markets CONCLUSION. REFERENCES. APPENDIXES A. B. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production FIGURES 1.1a. 1.1b. Global Trade Flows in the Great Depression and Great Recession Household Net Worth in the Great Depression and Great Recession.23 Average Monthly Nonfarm Employment Growth Unemployment Rate and Consensus Forecasts Real Hourly Earnings Production & Nonsupervisory Workers Real Median Family Income Growth in Real Average Income for the Bottom Percent Labor Productivity Growth Share of Income Earned by Top Percent. Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation Rates Prime-Age Female Labor Force Participation Rates Unemployment Rate Mean GDP Growth Federal Budget Deficit Market-Implied Date of Initial Federal Funds Rate Increase Nominal Long- and Short-Term Interest Rates Falling Euro Area Inflation Euro Area Sovereign Interest Rate Spreads over Germany Euro Area Unemployment and Real Interest Rates December China : Real GDP Growth Credit to Nonfinancial Corporations and Households Select Dollar Exchange Rates Contents | Trade in Goods Trade in Services 2.14a. Services and Goods Composition : Imports 2.14b. Services and Goods Composition : Exports Household Deleveraging Consumption and Wealth Relative to Disposable Personal Income ( DPI ) Housing Starts National House Price Indexes Home Prices and Owners Equivalent Rent U.S. Population Distribution by Age and Gender Census. Home Builder Sentiment Index 30-Year Fixed Mortgage Rates Purchase and Refinance Activity Capital Services per Unit of Real Output Private Business Sector Share Buy Backs vs. Investment Nonfinancial Corporate Business Real State and Local Government Purchases During Recoveries State and Local Pension Fund Liabilities Nonfarm Payroll Employment Unemployment Rate by Duration Inflation and Inflation Expectations Ten Years Forward Hourly Compensation Increases vs. Inflation Expectations Actual and Consensus Forecast Unemployment Rate Elevation and Recovery of Broader Measures of Unemployment Unemployment in Non-U.S. OECD Euro Area and United States Average Monthly Job Growth by Year Labor Force Participation by Gender Labor Force Participation Decomposition Detrended Participation Rate and ( Inverted ) Unemployment Gap Share of Recovery in Overall Unemployment Rate Due to Declines in Short- and Long-Term Unemployment. Unemployment Rate by Duration Share of Unemployed Workers by Duration of Unemployment Increase in Long-Term Unemployment as a Percent Increase in Overall Unemployment Rate. Long-term Unemployed as Share of Total Unemployed Monthly Job Finding Rates by Duration of Unemployment in Previous Month December Net Change in Employment Since January Household Survey Estimates | Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers Rates of Part-Time Work Change in Share Part-Time for Economic Reasons Per Percentage-Point Change in the Unemployment Rate Share Part-Time for Economic Reasons Actual and Predicted Share of Employees Working Part-Time for Economic Reasons by Industry Hires Separations and Job-to-Job Flow Rates Job Opening Rates Trends in Hires and Separations Employer Occupation and Industry Transitions Firm and Establishment Entry Rates Change in Job Growth vs. Average Earnings by Industry Wage Inequality College Income Premium by Gender Percent of Workers Receiving Employer-Sponsored or On-the-Job Training Change in Employment by Detailed Occupation Changes in Employment by Occupational Wage Percentile Share of Workers With an Offer of Employer-Sponsored Insurance Coverage by Education Share of Workers Included in Employer-Provided Retirement Plan by Education Share of Full-Time Workers Paid a Salary Labor Force Participation by Sex Percent of Young Men and Women with a Bachelor s Degree or Higher Employed Married Women s Contribution to Family Earnings Percent of Households with Children in Which All Parents Work Fathers Reporting Role in Child Care Activities for Selected Years. Fathers Average Weekly Time Use. Percent of All Unpaid Eldercare Providers Who Are Employed Share of Households with Children under and Adults Over Percentage of Mothers and Fathers Reporting Work-Family Conflict for Selected Years. Percentage of Full-Time Workers Who Report Work-Family Conflict for Selected Years. Reason for Not Taking Needed Leave Percent of Firms Offering Flexibility in the Scheduling of Hours Percent of Workers with Access to Flexible Work Arrangements Contents | Percent of Firms Offering Flexibility in the Location of Work Percent of Firms Offering Flexibility in the Number of Hours of Work Access to Scheduling and Location Flexibility by Industry Access to Paid and Unpaid Leave by Industry Average Absence Rates With and Without Flexible Work Scheduling The Need for Workplace Flexibility Sources of Productivity Growth Over Selected Periods Statutory Corporate Tax Rates in the U.S. and OECD Statutory Corporate Income Rates Effective Tax Rates in the G-7 Effective Marginal Tax Rates in the G-7 Effective Marginal Tax Rates in Several Tax Systems. Effective Marginal Tax Rates by Source of Financing Effective Marginal Tax Rates C Corporation Share of Total Business Receipts 6.1a. U.S. Energy Consumption by Source 6.1b. U.S. Energy Consumption by Source 6.2a. U.S. Petroleum Consumption 6.2b. U.S. Consumption of Motor Gasoline U.S. Petroleum Production U.S. Petroleum Net Imports U.S. Natural Gas Production U.S. Fuel Ethanol and Biodiesel Consumption Petroleum Biofuels and Natural Gas Production Change in Wind Power Generation Capacity Total Monthly Wind and Solar Energy Production Contributions of Oil and Natural Gas Production to GDP Growth Coal Oil and Natural Gas Employment Solar-Related Employment Total and Petroleum Trade Deficits Annual Crude Oil and Natural Gas Spot Prices 6.15a Wholesale and Residential Natural Gas Prices 6.15b Retail Electricity Prices and Fuel Costs WTI Spot Price : Nominal and Real Net Import Shares of Petroleum Products Energy Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions U.S. Energy Intensity 6.20a U.S. Per Capita Consumption of Gasoline and Real Gasoline Prices 6.20b Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standard. U.S. Natural Gas Production and Wholesale Prices | Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers Change in Monthly Electricity Generation and Prices Monthly Share of Non-Hydro Renewables in Net Power Generation U.S. Motor Gasoline and Diesel Fuel Consumption World Carbon Dioxide Emissions Global GDP and Exports of Goods and Services Ratio of U.S. Duties Collected to Total Imports Global Tariff Rates by Income Group U.S. Trade in Services Growth in Real U.S. Goods Trade Around Free Trade Agreements. Characteristics of Export-Intensive and Non-Export-Intensive Industries Growth of Global GDP Trade in Goods and Services and Financial Flows U.S. Equity Home Bias TABLES Components of U.S. Real GDP Growth Percent Change at an Annual Rate Middle-Class Income Growth and its Determinants Counterfactual Scenarios for Productivity Inequality and Participation. Selected Interest Rates Administration Economic Forecast. Supply-Side Components of Actual and Potential Real GDP Growth Tracking the Recovery across Race Gender Age and Level of Educational Attainment. Comparison of Participation Rate Estimates Wage and Earnings Gains Associated with Job Switching. Average Annual Percent Change in Real Productivity Compensation and Wages Access to Leave ( ATUS ) Access to Leave ( NCS ) Leave Use and Hours Access to Leave and Workplace Flexibility by Demographic Educational and Worker Characteristics State Leave Policies as of January Local Right to Request Laws. U.S. Controlled Foreign Corporation Profits Relative to GDP Major Oil Disruptions U.S. Free Trade Agreements. Gross Global Financial Flows Additional Basel III Components. Contents | BOXES Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Macroeconomic Rebalancing Private Domestic Final Purchases as a Predictive Indicator of GDP International Comparison of Growth Performance Imported Petroleum Prices and the Economy U.S. Household Wealth in the Wake of the Crisis and Implications for Wealth Inequality Policy Proposals to Raise Long-Run Potential Output Forecasting the Long-Run Interest Rate Unemployment Across Gender Race and Ethnicity Groups : The Situation for Men of Color Changes in Labor Force Participation for Different Subpopulations Post-Recession Participation in the United States and United Kingdom Immigration Reform and Labor Markets International Comparisons : Access to Paid Leave in Other Countries Why is There Such a Large Difference in Reported Prevalence Between the American Time Use Survey the National Compensation Survey and the National Study of Employers ? Small Business and Manufacturing January Presidential Initiatives to Expand Leave Access for Federal Employees Japan s Strategy to Grow the Economy by Increasing Women s Involvement Reimagining the Structure of Work at JetBlue Corporate Inversions Base Erosion and Profit Sharing Improving the Tax Code for Families Temporary Countercyclical Policies to Promote Investment Natural Gas Exports U.S. Oil Production in a Global Perspective and Implications for U.S. GDP Selected Administration Initiatives under the Climate Action Plan Trade in Ideas Employment Impacts of Trade with China Have U.S. Trade Deficits Reduced Output and Employment ? | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R MIDDLE-CLASS ECONOMICS : THE ROLE OF PRODUCTIVITY INEQUALITY AND PARTICIPATION A s the Economic Report of the President goes to press the U.S economic recovery continues to accelerate. The economy grew at an annual rate of percent over the past two years compared with percent in the first three-and-one-half years of the recovery. The speedup is particu larly clear in the U.S. labor market where the pace of job gains has improved each year since President Obama took office. The American private sector has created million new jobs over straight months the longest streak on record. was the best year for overall job growth since usher ing in million new jobs and the unemployment rate fell percentage points between and the largest decline in three decades. A reduc tion in long-term unemployment one of the economy s major post-crisis challenges accounts for most of the fall in the unemployment rate As the U.S. recovery has progressed the economy has grown in a more sustainable way than before the global financial crisis began. In fact the United States has improved several structural imbalances that jeopardized the economy s stability prior to the crisis. The domestic energy production boom has reduced U.S. dependence on foreign oil helping to narrow the current account deficit and reduce U.S. dependence on foreign borrowing Health-care prices have been growing at the lowest rate in nearly years The Federal Budget deficit has fallen at the fastest pace since the post-World War II demobilization and households are spending less of their income servicing debts than they have in decades But one key benchmark of the economy goes beyond increases in national income accounts and decreases in financial deficits : the wellbeing of the middle class and those working to get into the middle class It is essential that a broad range of households share in the United States resurgent growth. This year s Report views the recovery through the lens of the typical middle-class American family. It begins with a review of recent economic progress and provides historical and international context for the key factors impacting middle-class incomes : productivity growth labor force participation and income inequality. The President s approach to economic policies what he terms middle-class economics is designed to improve these elements and ensure that Americans of all income levels share in the accelerating recovery The Progress of the U.S. Economic Recovery After the global financial crisis the United States and many other countries faced obstacles to recovery that were more challenging than those posed by a normal cyclical recession. Despite being hit particularly hard by the financial crisis the United States has recovered faster than many of its developed-world counterparts. The recession began with a collapse in household wealth and global trade that initially exceeded the declines at the onset of the Great Depression as shown in Figure 1-1a and Figure 1-1b. The headwinds to recovery included weak bank balance sheets that constrained credit supply highly indebted consumers that constrained credit demand and substantial investment overhang in key cyclical sectors such as housing Figure 1-1a Global Trade Flows in the Great Depression and Great Recession Index 1929/2008 = = = Months from January 1929/2008 Note : Red markers represent annual averages Source : CPB World Trade Monitor ; Statistical Office of the United Nations | Chapter Figure 1-1b Household Net Worth in the Great Depression and Great Recession Index 1929/2008 = = = Months from January 1929/2008 Note : Red markers represent annual averages Source : Federal Reserve Board of Governors ; Mishkin ( ) Table Components of U.S. Real GDP Growth Percent Change at an Annual Rate Start of Recovery ( : Q2-2012 : Q4 ) and ( : Q4-2014 : Q4 ) Gross Domestic Product Consumer Spending Business Fixed Investment Residential Investment Exports Imports Federal Government State & Local Government Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts Middle-Class Economics : The Role of Productivity Inequality and Participation | Box : Macroeconomic Rebalancing A broad set of economic structural imbalances that pre-dated the financial crisis have improved in the recovery. The United States has reduced its indebtedness on four levels : in international trade ( as a net recipient of global capital flows ) in gross national saving ( as a result of reduced Budget deficits ) in the household sector and in the private-business sector. On top of recent acceleration in U.S. output and employment growth these structural improvements lay the foundation for more sustainable growth beyond the current business cycle On the international side the current account deficit as a share of GDP a measure of U.S. net transactions with the rest of the world in goods services and income increased steadily for nearly two decades but fell in the Great Recession and has continued to drift down in the recovery. Recently the deficit fell to the smallest share of GDP since the 1990s. Drivers of the recent decline include the domestic energy produc tion boom and an increase in domestic saving that has reduced the U.S need for foreign financing Domestically gross saving has increased as a share of the economy driven by the reduction in Federal dissaving amid the fastest pace of deficit reduction since the demobilization after World War II. The pace of discretionary spending reductions was faster than optimal creating challenges for growth. However when taken together with factors such Percent of GDP Figure 1-i Current Account Balance : Q3 Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis U.S. International Transactions | Chapter Percent of GDP Figure 1-ii Gross National Saving : Q3 Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis Figure 1-iii Household Debt Service Payments Percent of Disposable Income Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Federal Reserve Financial Accounts of the United States : Q3 Middle-Class Economics : The Role of Productivity Inequality and Participation | Percent Figure 1-iv Nonfinancial Corporate Debt-to-Equity Ratio Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Federal Reserve Financial Accounts of the United States : Q3 as revenue increases from high-income households and slower health cost growth the economy is in a more sustainable position today com pared with a few years ago While many households still face challenges the aggregate ratio of debt-to-disposable income in the household sector has decreased to a level last seen in as households have both increased their savings and reduced their borrowing. The combination of lower debt levels and lower interest rates has reduced the aggregate value of households debtservice payments to percent of disposable income the lowest level since at least America s corporations have also partially shed their debt burdens. Corporate debt-to-equity ratios in the non-financial sector have retraced all of the increase that resulted from the crisis The recovery s challenges were compounded by unprecedented State and local government spending cuts that dragged on growth through the first few years of the recovery. A wide range of shocks and slowdowns in other countries have also restrained the U.S. recovery The Recovery in GDP and Labor Markets Although there is more work to do the U.S. economy has managed a lasting and growing recovery amid these challenges. Despite the steeper ini tial declines both trade and wealth recovered faster after the Great Recession | Chapter than during the Great Depression. In and the U.S. economy grew percentage point faster per year than in the first three-and-one-half years of the recovery. A large increase in personal consumption growth and a shift from State and local contraction to expansion contributed to the pickup over this period. More recently growth in was aided by a shift toward a more neutral stance for Federal fiscal policy an important reminder of the need for policymakers to avoid returning to the harmful impact of seques tration and fiscal brinksmanship The recovery s strength has been particularly pronounced in the labor market. The pace of total job growth rose to a month in up from a month in as shown in Figure As recently as most forecasters expected that the unemployment rate would not fall to percent until after but it did so in December as shown in Figure The labor force participation rate has stabi lized since fall Long-term unemployment and the number of workers employed part-time for economic reasons while still elevated have also declined These labor market improvements have begun to translate into wage gains for middle-class workers. Average earnings for production and non supervisory workers shown in Figure function as a reasonable proxy Figure Average Monthly Nonfarm Employment Growth Thousand Jobs per Month Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Employment Statistics ; CEA calculations Middle-Class Economics : The Role of Productivity Inequality and Participation | Figure Unemployment Rate and Consensus Forecasts Percent of Labor Force Forecast Forecast Forecast Forecast Forecast Note : Annual forecasts are current as of March of the stated year. Shading denotes recession Source : Blue Chip Economic Indicators ; Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey Figure Real Hourly Earnings Production & Nonsupervisory Workers Percent Growth Annual Average Note : Dashed line represents average Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Employment Statistics ; CEA calculations | Chapter Figure Real Median Family Income Thousand Dollars Per Year Note : Dashed line traces the level of real median family income for comparison purposes Source : U.S. Census Bureau Current Population Reports for median wages. Real hourly earnings for these workers rose percent in and percent in This real wage growth however still falls well short of what is needed to make up for decades of sub-par growth. Real median family incomes were at mid-1990s levels in as shown in Figure There is no denying the strength of the aggregate recovery but its benefits have not yet been fully shared with middle-class families A Brief History of Middle-Class Incomes in the Postwar Period The ultimate test of an economy s performance is the well-being of its middle class. This in turn has been shaped by three factors : how pro ductivity has grown how income is distributed and how many people are participating in the labor force. Although many of these factors have evolved continuously varying from year to year it is instructive to divide the postWorld War II years into three periods that capture major differences among the trends in these three variables. Specifically these periods are : the Age of Shared Growth from to where movements in productivity participation and distribution aligned ; the Age of Expanded Participation from to when women entered the labor force at a rapid pace but Middle-Class Economics : The Role of Productivity Inequality and Participation | Table Middle-Class Income Growth and its Determinants Age of Expanded Participation Age of Productivity Recovery Average Household Income for the Bottom Percent ( World Top Incomes Database ) % % % Median Household Income ( Census Bureau ) N/A % % Median Household Income with Benefits ( CBO adj. for household size ) N/A % % N/A % % Age of Shared Growth Real Middle-Class Income Growth Median Household Income with Gov't Transfers/Taxes ( CBO adj. for household size ) Productivity Growth ( annual rates ) Labor Productivity Growth % % % Total Factor Productivity Growth % % % Top Percent % % pp/yr Income Shares Bottom Percent % % % % pp/yr pp/yr % % % % % % pp/yr pp/yr pp/yr Labor Force Participation Rate Overall % % pp/yr % % pp/yr % % pp/yr Prime Age Male ( ) % % pp/yr % % pp/yr % % pp/yr Prime Age Female ( ) % % pp/yr % % pp/yr % % pp/yr Note : Income levels from the World Top Incomes Database and the Census Bureau are deflated with the CPIU-RS price index and income levels from the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) are deflated with the personal consumption expenditures price index. Income shares are provided by the World Top Incomes Database cited below median household income is provided by the U.S. Census Bureau and median household income including benefits transfers and taxes is provided by CBO. CBO median income is extended before and after with the growth rate of Census median income Source : World Top Incomes Database ; Census Bureau ; Congressional Budget Office ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations ; Saez ( ) productivity slowed and distribution worsened ; and the Age of Productivity Recovery from through when productivity improved ( at least until the run-up to the financial crisis ) but participation declined and income inequality continued to worsen | Chapter The Age of Shared Growth ( ) All three factors productivity growth distribution and participa tion aligned to benefit the middle class from to The United States enjoyed rapid labor productivity growth averaging percent annually. Income inequality fell with the share of income going to the top percent falling by nearly one-third while the share of income going to the bottom percent rose slightly. Household income growth was also fueled by the increased participation of women in the workforce. Prime-age ( to ) female labor force participation escalated from one-third in to one-half by The combination of these three factors increased the aver age income for the bottom percent of households by percent a year over this period. This measure functions as a decent proxy for the median household s income growth because it ignores the large asymmetric changes in income for the top percent of households. At this rate incomes double every years or about once every generation While these levels of shared income growth and low income inequality worked to benefit the middle class it is important to recognize that these fac tors do not capture the many non-economic dimensions ( such as racial and gender discrimination ) on which the United States has made considerable progress over the past half-century. Accordingly while this period illustrates the combined power of productivity income equality and participation to benefit the middle class it is not necessarily a model for other important aspects of domestic policy The Age of Expanded Participation ( ) Starting in and running through two of the three factors that had been driving middle-class incomes derailed. Labor productivity growth slowed dramatically to only percent annually in part due to the exhaustion of pent-up innovations from World War II reduced public investment dislocations associated with the breakup of the Bretton Woods international monetary system and the oil shocks of the 1970s. Not only did the economy grow more slowly in these years but these smaller gains were distributed increasingly unequally the share of national income that went to the top percent nearly doubled while the share that went to the bottom percent fell accordingly. As a result productivity gains did not boost middle-class incomes and average income in the bottom percent declined by percent a year during these years. One important factor that prevented a larger fall in middle-class incomes was greater labor force par ticipation. The share of dual-income households rose as women surged into the labor force even faster than in the Age of Shared Growth Middle-Class Economics : The Role of Productivity Inequality and Participation | Some alternative and likely more accurate measures of middle-class income show slight increases during these years. Real median household income as measured by the Census Bureau rose by percent a year from to And after including employer-paid health premiums and adjusting for changing family size the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) estimates that median income climbed percent a year and percent a year after taxes and transfers. But regardless of how it is measured middleclass income growth clearly slowed dramatically over this period The Age of Productivity Recovery ( ) The third period is defined as lasting from through though it will take a longer perspective to understand whether and how the Great Recession and the current recovery fit into this period. Amid the worst recession since the Great Depression the average real income for house holds in the bottom percent declined at a percent annual rate during these years. When including employer-paid health premiums and adjusting for family size median income rose percent a year according to CBO data still considerably slower than in the Age of Shared Growth. Largely as a result of substantial tax cuts post-tax and post-transfer incomes rose at a 1.3-percent average annual rate in this third period Labor productivity grew at a percent annual rate over the period as a whole near the rates achieved in the first era fueled by a new economy that made unprecedented advances in the production and use of informa tion technology. However these gains did little to contribute to rising wages for the middle class as the trend of worsening inequality from the previous era continued into this period. The share of income going to the bottom percent fell to percent well below the percent earned by this group in Meanwhile the labor force participation rate fell as women s entry into the workforce plateaued and even started to drift down albeit at onehalf the pace of the decline in prime-age male participation a notable trend over the entire postwar era. After the retirement of the baby boomers added to the decline in participation While productivity growth was high on average from to it varied substantially within this period. It was higher from to declined prior to the start of the crisis and then was adversely affected by the crisis itself. Understanding the degree to which the years through should be considered a single regime for the productivity growth rate or one with an adverse break in the trend during or just before the crisis will take many more years of data and analysis | Chapter The Importance of Productivity Inequality and Participation As productivity the income distribution and participation evolved over the past years middle-class incomes went from doubling once in a generation to showing almost no growth at all by some measures. But if these three factors had recently continued the strong trends observed in ear lier periods the outcome for typical families would be quite different. Four counterfactual thought experiments give a sense of the magnitudes involved in this dramatic change : The impact of higher productivity growth. What if productivity growth from to had continued at its pace from the previous years ? In this scenario incomes would have been percent higher in If these gains were distributed proportionately in then the median household would have had an additional $ in income The impact of greater income equality. What if inequality had not increased from to and instead the share of income going to the bottom percent had remained the same ? Even using the actual slow levels of productivity growth over that period the income for the typical household would have been percent or about $ higher The impact of expanded labor force participation. What if female labor force participation had continued to grow from to at the same rate that it did from to until it reached parity with male participation ? Assuming that the average earnings for working women were unchanged and maintaining the actual histories of productivity and income distribu tion the average household would have earned percent more in or an additional $ The combined impact of all three factors. Finally if all three factors had aligned if productivity had grown at its Age of Shared Growth rate inequality had not increased and participation had continued to rise then these effects would have been compounded and the typical household would have seen a 98-percent increase in its income by That is an additional $ a year In combination these factors would have nearly doubled the typical household s income had they sustained their more favorable readings from earlier historical periods. Productivity inequality and participation consti tute the fundamental challenges facing the future of middle-class incomes and this year s Report addresses policies designed to strengthen all three. But first this chapter situates the United States recent progress in these dimen sions in a global context Middle-Class Economics : The Role of Productivity Inequality and Participation | Table Counterfactual Scenarios for Productivity Inequality and Participation Percentage Income Gain to Impact on Typical Average Income Household Thought Experiment Factor Base Period Impact of Higher Growth Total Factor Productivity Growth Age of Shared Growth ( ) % $ Impact of Greater Equality Share of Income Earned by Middle Quintile % $ Impact of Labor Force Participation Female Labor Force Participation Rate Age of Shared Growth Age of Expanded Participation ( ) % $ Combined Impact All of the Above % $ Note : These thought experiments are intended to demonstrate the importance of these three factors for middleclass incomes. They do not consider second-order effects or interactive effects. The first thought experiment assumes that an increase in productivity is associated with an equal increase in the Census Bureau s mean household income. The second thought experiment uses the Census Bureau s mean income of the middle quintile as a proxy for median income. The third thought experiment assumes that newly-participating women will have the same average earnings as today s working women and halts the growth of female labor force participation when it matches male participation. The first and third thought experiments assume that income gains are distributed proportionally such that mean and median incomes grow at the same rate. Dollar gains are calculated off a base of the Census Bureau s median household income in The fourth thought experiment compounds the effects of the first three Source : World Top Incomes Database ; Census Bureau ; Congressional Budget Office ; Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations The Drivers of Middle-Class Incomes : An International Comparison A wide range of advanced economies has faced similar challenges for middle-class incomes. Most of today s large advanced economies expe rienced rapid growth in the immediate post-World War II years followed by substantially slower growth and plateauing as shown in Figure That development took place relatively early in the United States ( around ) and later in other countries ( for example around in France and Canada ) In Japan middle-class incomes slowed in the 1970s and have sub stantially declined over the past two decades Labor Productivity Growth The first driver of incomes labor productivity growth underlies the progress of both potential GDP and family income. Over the past year the | Chapter Figure Growth in Real Average Income for the Bottom Percent Index = ( log scale ) Japan Germany France Italy United Kingdom Canada United States Note : Data for all countries exclude capital gains. For Germany data excluding capital gains is unavailable after so this chart displays data including capital gains adjusted for the historical relationship between capital-inclusive and capital-exclusive incomes. Italian data begins in and is indexed to the average of the other series at that point. Italian data is calculated by CEA from the income level and share of the top percent as provided by the World Top Incomes Database Source : World Top Incomes Database ; Saez ( ) ; CEA calculations Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) and the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) reduced their productivity growth estimates for many high-income countries. In recent years the United States has been somewhat better situated than many other advanced economies in part because this country has been the center of much high-tech innova tion. In fact the United States has defied the trend in other high-income economies by experiencing a pickup in productivity growth over the last years. In contrast productivity growth has generally declined in most other high-income economies over the same period as shown in Figure Income Inequality The second important factor influencing the dynamics of middle-class incomes is inequality. This too is a global issue. In the United States the top percent has garnered a larger share of income than in any other G-7 country in each year since for which data are available as shown in Figure From to the top percent s income share rose percentage point a year in the United States versus percentage point a year in the United Kingdom. While comparable international data are scarce after the gains of the top percent continued since then in the United States until a noticeable downtick in Middle-Class Economics : The Role of Productivity Inequality and Participation | Figure Labor Productivity Growth 15-Year Centered Moving Average of Annual Percentage Growth in Output per Hour Germany France Italy United Kingdom Canada Japan United States Source : Conference Board Total Economy Database ; CEA calculations Labor Force Participation The third driver of income growth is labor force participation dis cussed in more detail in Chapter Although the United States has enjoyed a strong labor market recovery amid surging employment its labor force participation rate has fallen more than that of other high-income countries The recent decline in the labor force participation rate is largely the result of demographic changes. Since when the first of the baby boomers turned and became eligible for Social Security the baby boom has become a retirement boom. This loss of productive workers was com pounded by the severe recession that hit around the same time. But even before either of these events the economy already faced labor force par ticipation challenges including a long-running decline in male labor force participation and an end to the rapid increase in female participation Since the early 1990s the United States has experienced a marked decline in labor force participation among males aged to ( prime age ) as shown in Figure In this regard the U.S. experience has been something of an outlier compared to many other high-income countries Since the financial crisis U.S. prime-age male participation has declined by about percentage points while the United Kingdom has seen a small uptick and most large European economies were generally stable. Of | Chapter Percent Figure Share of Income Earned by Top Percent United States Canada Italy Germany United Kingdom France Japan Note : Data for all countries exclude capital gains. For Germany data excluding capital gains is unavailable after so this chart displays data including capital gains adjusted for the historical relationship between the capital-inclusive and capital-exclusive ratios Source : World Top Incomes Database ; Saez ( ) Figure Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation Rates Percent Japan France Germany Canada United Kingdom Italy United States Source : Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Middle-Class Economics : The Role of Productivity Inequality and Participation | Figure Prime-Age Female Labor Force Participation Rates Percent Canada France United Kingdom United States Germany Japan Italy Source : Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development OECD countries that reported prime-age male participation data between and the United States fell from 16th to 22nd The story is somewhat similar among prime-age females. Historically the United States showed leadership in bringing women into the workforce In the United States ranked 7th out of current OECD countries reporting prime-age female labor force participation about percentage points higher than the average of that sample. But since the late 1990s women s labor force participation plateaued and even started to drift down in the United States while continuing to rise in other high-income countries as shown in Figure As a result in the United States ranked 19th out of those same countries falling percentage points behind the United Kingdom and percentage points below the sample average. A recent study found that the relative expansion of family leave and part-time work programs in other OECD countries versus the United States explains nearly one-third of the United States relative decline ( Blau and Kahn ) The challenges facing productivity growth inequality and labor force participation are all substantial. As this Report further details the United States has important structural opportunities that can help address each of the challenges though the degree to which we do so will also depend on the policies that we choose to adopt | Chapter The Economic Report of the President The well-being of the middle class and those working to get into the middle class is the ultimate test of an economy s performance. The best way to grow the economy on a sustainable and inclusive basis is to address squarely the three drivers of incomes : productivity growth income inequal ity and labor force participation. With these factors in mind this year s Report reviews the progress the economy has made and identifies the areas where more work is needed Chapter reviews the macroeconomic performance of the U.S economy during including the growth of output and employment the continued decline in the unemployment rate the housing market the growth of wealth over the year and the improvement in the deficit as a fraction of GDP. The chapter also explains the economic assumptions about future growth that underlie the President s Fiscal Year Budget includ ing the economic benefits of the President s agenda Chapter reviews the opportunities and challenges facing the U.S labor market. Perhaps no recent economic development has been more sur prising than the rapid fall in the unemployment rate spurred by the pickup in the rate of job growth in But economic performance must be gauged by more than just the unemployment rate a successful job market also encourages labor force participation supports quality jobs and facilitates effective job matching of workers and positions The American workforce and family lives have changed drastically over the last half-century. Women now represent almost one-half the workforce married couples increasingly share child-care responsibilities and people live and work longer than in the past. Chapter examines these recent changes in American family life and their implications for labor markets. It also as analyzes Americans access to paid leave and workplace flexibility policies and the economic evidence on how these policies can benefit workers firms and our economy. Both Chapter and Chapter address two factors affecting middle-class incomes : labor force participation and the income distribution Chapter shifts the focus to productivity growth with an examination of business tax reform as well as a briefer discussion about the complemen tary issues in individual taxation. The chapter summarizes the international context for business tax reform describes the President s approach to reform and documents four channels through which reform can boost pro ductivity and living standards : encouraging domestic investment improving the quality of investment reducing the inefficiencies of the international tax system and investing in infrastructure Middle-Class Economics : The Role of Productivity Inequality and Participation | Chapter reviews the profound transformation of the U.S. energy sector. The United States is producing more oil and natural gas generating more electricity from renewables such as wind and solar and consuming less petroleum while consuming the same amount of electricity. To build on this progress to foster economic growth and to ensure that growth is sustainable for future generations the President has set out an aggressive allof-the-above clean energy strategy. This chapter lays out the key elements of the strategy : enhancing energy security and laying the foundation for a lowcarbon future in ways that also support economic growth and job creation Finally Chapter situates the United States in the context of the global economy. The United States is more integrated with the rest of the world than ever before. This chapter examines the impact on the economy of increased global interdependence through both international trade in goods and services and financial transactions in international capital markets It presents empirical evidence on the economic effects and benefits to the middle class of enhanced U.S. trade highlighting the United States central position to take advantage of the growth in world trade in services. These issues are important for understanding both productivity growth and the distributional implications of globalization Conclusion The Economic Report of the President considers the recovery and our economic future from the perspective of the typical American fam ily. Although workers have begun to reap the benefits of our accelerating recovery a skewed income distribution and subdued labor force participa tion have restrained the full benefit of U.S. growth from accruing to the middle class. As the economy continues to grow President Obama s focus on middle-class economics is designed to foster productivity growth in a shared and sustainable way so that the typical family participates fully in the Nation s resurgence. These are the values that should drive American economic policy in this next age for the middle class and they are the values that animate this Report | Chapter C H A P T E R THE YEAR IN REVIEW AND THE YEARS AHEAD T he U.S. economy took another major step forward in as it continued to recover from the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. Real gross domestic product ( GDP ) has grown at a solid 2.8-percent annual pace over the past two years a pickup from the 2.0-per cent pace seen during the quarters of through The labor market firmed markedly during as reflected in the fastest pace of job gains since and nearly the fastest decline in the unemployment rate since Cumulatively the private sector added million jobs during consecutive months ( through December ) of positive job growth the nation s longest streak of uninterrupted private-sector job growth on record. The unemployment rate declined percentage points during the months of or almost an average of percentage point a month falling to percent by year end ( see Figure ) Real average hourly earn ings of production and nonsupervisory workers rose percent over the months of the year as nominal wage growth continued to run somewhat ahead of the subdued pace of consumer price inflation. While substantial progress has been made the economic recovery remains incomplete and more work remains to support growth boost job creation and lift wages The strengthening of the labor market occurred while real GDP grew percent during the four quarters of The quarterly pace of economic growth was uneven as unusually cold and snowy weather contributed to a first-quarter drop in real GDP ( at a 2.1-percent annual rate ) The economy rebounded in the second and third quarters at a nearly 5.0-percent annual rate followed by a slowing to percent in the fourth quarter ( advance estimate ) Growth in consumer spending business fixed investment and exports sustained average aggregate demand growth during the four quarters of albeit with substantial quarter-to-quarter fluctuations. Inventory investment proved uneven. The State and local sector bottomed out in Figure Unemployment Rate Percent Dec-2014 Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey and and provided a bit of support for the economy in Although slow growth among our international trading partners limited the growth of foreign demand U.S. exports still grew percent during the four quarters of the year. Manufacturing production also grew percent during the four quarters as annual motor vehicle assemblies reached million units in their highest level since The price of imported petroleum as measured by the spot price of European light crude oil from the North Sea ( known as Brent ) averaged $ per barrel during the first eight months of the year but fell to $ per barrel for the month of December. The price decline reflected both increased global supply including U.S. production and weak world consumption and it lowered the Nation s net petroleum bill by roughly $ billion at an annual rate and dampened headline inflation in the final months of the year Although fiscal restraint continued in fiscal year ( FY ) with the Federal Budget deficit falling percentage points to percent of GDP the restraint was less severe than during the two preceding years and mostly reflected the effects of automatic stabilizers rather than changes in the structural deficit. The cumulative five-year ( to ) decline in the deficit-to-GDP ratio was the steepest five-year drop since the demobilization following WWII. Following the October government shutdown the two-year Ryan-Murray budget agreement ( in December ) helped pro vide fiscal-policy stability during FY and FY The Consolidated | Chapter and Further Continuing Appropriations Act signed into law in December will help to extend this more stable fiscal environment into By the fourth quarter of consumer sentiment as measured by both the Reuters/University of Michigan index and the Conference Board index reached its highest levels since which likely reflects the additional fiscal certainty improving income and employment expectations and declining gasoline prices Key Events of Aggregate Output Growth during the Year Growth during the year was volatile partly due to exceptionally severe weather in the first quarter and a puzzling first-quarter decline in reported health-care spending followed by a surge in growth as the level of real out put rebounded in subsequent quarters. Cold weather played a major role in depressing GDP in the first quarter ; in fact it was the third most unusually cold quarter in the past years. Four snowstorms in the first quarter were severe enough to be rated on the Northeast Snowfall Impact Scale an index produced by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration that aims to capture the economic impact of snowstorms on populations. Prior to no quarter going back to had more than three such storms The bad weather appears to have reduced many of the weather-sensitive components of GDP. Outright real spending declines occurred in inventory investment equipment investment residential investment ( mostly reflecting a drop in real estate commissions ) exports ( especially to Canada ) and State and local government spending ( mostly through construction spending ) Also real consumer spending on goods registered below-trend growth Weakness in these categories was only partially offset by higher consumer spending on services which rose owing to a weather-related increase in electric and natural gas utility outlays Growth rebounded to and 5.0-percent annual rates in the second and third quarters followed by a 2.6-percent rate in the fourth quarter. Over the four quarters of the year real GDP grew percent. Figure shows the growth rate of real output as represented by the average of the incomeside and product-side measures.1 Measured in this way real output grew percent during the first three quarters of up slightly from percent Real output can be measured as the sum of the product-side components ( known as gross domestic product GDP ) or by the sum of the income-side components ( known as gross domestic income GDI ) In principle these two quantities are the same but these two measures will differ due to measurement error. Figure plots both measures and their average The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Mean GDP Growth Percent Change at an Annual Rate : Q3 Note : Mean real GDP growth is the average of the growth rates of real GDP and real gross domestic income ( GDI ) The bullets show mean GDP and the bars show the GDP and GDI growth in each quarter. Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts ; CEA calculations during the four quarters of Relative to this 2.5-percent pace growth was fast in durable goods consumption and business fixed investment while growth was slow ( but still positive ) in consumer spending on nondurables and services exports Federal nondefense purchases and State and local spending. Residential investment grew at about the same pace as overall GDP. Inventory investment ( both farm and nonfarm ) contributed a bit to GDP growth during and it played an important role in the quarterto-quarter fluctuations. An aggregate of consumption and fixed investment known as private domestic final purchases ( PDFP ) is an especially predic tive indicator of future real GDP growth. Real PDFP grew percent dur ing the four quarters of ( see Box ) Fiscal Policy Federal fiscal policy was less restrictive during FY which ended on September than a year earlier. It was also more predictable since Congress had agreed in December on discretionary spending caps for the remainder of FY and all of FY ; and on appropria tions bills for FY and FY enacted in January and December respectively The agreement to end the 16-day October shutdown ( the Continuing Appropriations Act of ) together with subsequent | Chapter Box : Private Domestic Final Purchases as a Predictive Indicator of GDP Real GDP like many indicators can be volatile from quarter-toquarter for purely transitory reasons related to fluctuations or measure ment issues that provide little information about the underlying state of the economy. As discussed in the text provides an example with a sharp contraction in GDP in the first quarter of and a sharp expansion in the second quarter suggesting a fluctuation around an underlying economic trend. One reason why GDP is so volatile is that subcomponents can have large transitory fluctuations for example the volatile inventory investment component of GDP which subtracted from the first quarter of and added to it in the second quarter Table 2-i Component Ability to Forecast One-Quarter-Ahead Real GDP Growth Predictive Power Component ( Real ) ( Adjusted R ) of GDP Government Exports Inventories GDP Final Sales of Dometic Product Imports Fixed Investment Mean Output ( GDP GDI ) PCE GDI Final Sales to Domestic Purchasers Final Sales to Private Domestic Purchasers ( PDFP ) Note : Mean output refers to the average of GDP and GDI. The quarterly growth rate of real GDP is regressed on four lags of growth rates for the listed variables over : Q1 to : Q4 using revised data Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts ; CEA Calculations Do other national income concepts provide a better gauge of the underlying trend in economic activity ? One way to assess this is to deter mine which factors provide the best prediction of one-quarter ahead real GDP growth thereby capturing the more inertial component or compo Sorted nents of GDP. Of the candidates one might consider lags of overall real component value GDP itself Government or the lagged values of individual spending-side components Exports of real GDP ( consumer spending fixed investment and government Inventories spending ) GDP might also consider the income-side measure of real One Final Sales of Dometic Product GDP known as gross domestic income ( GDI ) which would be identical Imports Fixed measurement error. The best predictor could be some to GDP but forInvestment Mean Output ( GDP GDI ) combination of these components PCE GDI Final Sales to Domestic Purchasers Final Sales to Private Domestic Purchasers ( PDFP ) Net Exports n/a The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Table 2-i above shows how well lagged growth rates of these variables predict one-quarter ahead overall GDP growth as measured by percent of the variance of GDP ( known as R2 ) explained by each of these candidates. On this scale a perfect predictor would have an R2 of and a variable with no correlation would have an R2 of Among the possi bilities shown in Table 2-i consumer spending and fixed investment are good predictors of future GDP. The best-fitting predictor however is an aggregate of these two variables called private domestic final purchases ( PDFP ) This is likely attributable to the fact that PDFP excludes the volatile and possibly inaccurate measures of exports imports inventory investment and government spending. It therefore equals the sum of consumption and fixed investment. As can be seen PDFP predicts future GDP growth better than the lags of GDP itself GDI or a simple average of GDP and GDI. PDFP also predicts GDP better than final sales ( GDP less inventory investment ) and all the other components of GDP Figure 2-i below illustrates that real PDFP growth is much more stable than real GDP growth. Although PDFP growth was low in the first quarter of ( because weather affected consumption and fixed investment ) it was not negative because PDFP excludes volatile com ponents like inventory investment. PDFP then rebounded in the second and third quarters but not by as much as GDP. In the second third and fourth quarters growth of PDFP was stable at and percent respectively. In contrast real GDP growth was more volatile surging to Figure 2-i PDFP versus GDP Growth Percent Change Annual Rate : Q4 Real PDFP Growth Standard Deviation ( : Q1-2014 : Q4 ) GDP : PDFP : Real GDP Growth : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts of the United States ; CEA calculations | Chapter percent in the third quarter boosted by defense and net exports and then slowing to percent in the fourth quarter when these components reversed direction. Overall the growth rate of PDFP is more stable than GDP allowing a reasonable quarter-by-quarter measure of the underly ing growth rate of the economy agreements reached in December and the following January sus pended the debt ceiling through March provided partial relief from the automatic sequestration of discretionary spending in fiscal years and and resulted in appropriations bills that funded the Federal Government through the end of FY In September Congress passed a continuing resolution to fund the government through December Finally in mid-December the 113th Congress passed and the President signed an appropriations bill that funded most of the Federal Government through the end of FY This legislation provided positive support to a number of key initiatives including the extension of the FY funding gains for early childhood education investment in manufacturing innova tion hubs around the country and provision of additional funding for key financial watchdogs like the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission.2 In addition Congress retroactively approved a variety of tax extenders that affected liabilities including incentives for research and development and clean energy and tax deduc tions for teacher expenses The five-year decline of percentage points in the deficit-to-GDP ratio since FY has been the largest since the demobilization at the end of World War II. The Federal deficit-to-GDP ratio fell percentage points to percent in FY The year-to-year reduction in this ratio followed steeper declines of and percentage points in fiscal years and respectively ( see Figure ) The deficit-to-GDP ratio in FY was elevated by the steep recession as well as by fiscal measures deployed to combat that recession. Overall fiscal support substantially raised the level of output and employment during and after as discussed in the Economic Report of the President ( Chapter ) But the reduction in the deficit has acted as a drag on growth rates especially in One source of fiscal drag during and was the end of various countercyclical fiscal policies following the recession the largest change being the expiration of the payroll tax cut at the end of The declining deficit in largely http : //www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2014/12/17/ omb-director-shaun-donovan-passage-hr-83-consolidated-and-further-continuing-appropr The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Percent of GDP Figure Federal Budget Deficit FY Fiscal Year Note : Orange markers denote administration forecasts Source : Office of Management and Budget ; Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts reflected an increase in tax collections resulting from growing incomes With the deficit-to-GDP ratio projected to edge up in FY before it edges down in FY fiscal drag is likely to be negligible in the near term Monetary Policy In the Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) maintained a historically accommodative monetary policy stance. With its usual tool the Federal funds rate at its effective lower bound the Committee continued to employ the unconventional policy tools it has introduced in the years since the global financial crisis. These tools included forward guidance for the future path of the Federal funds rate and additional purchases of longerterm U.S. Treasury securities and agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities As the U.S. economy increasingly showed evidence of strength however the Federal Reserve moved gradually to tighten monetary policy At its December meeting the FOMC announced a decision to reduce the monthly increase in its holdings of long-term securities by $ billion a month to $ billion a month. This tapering of asset purchases contin ued with further modest reductions in the monthly pace of purchases at each FOMC meeting through October when new purchases were discontinued entirely. As of February the Federal Reserve continues | Chapter to purchase long-term debt securities but only in amounts sufficient to replace maturing debt in its portfolio such that the overall size of the Federal Reserve s holdings remains approximately constant. Plans for the taper were communicated to markets beforehand and markets experienced little vola tility in response to the actual reductions in purchases when they started in December The yield on the 10-year Treasury note fell basis points over the months of the year The end of new Federal Reserve asset purchases does not mean the end of the effect of the Federal Reserve s asset holdings on the level of lon ger-term interest rates. On the contrary the better measure of the effect of the Fed s portfolio policy on longer-term interest rates is thought to involve the size and expected duration of the Fed s holdings not the pace at which those holdings are increased. Therefore the stock of Federal Reserve asset holdings continues to influence the long-term interest rate even after the end of new purchases.3 At the start of interest-rate futures markets expected the initial increase ( liftoff ) in the Federal funds rate to occur during the second quarter of as shown in Figure By the end of markets expected the liftoff to occur in the third quarter of The shift likely reflected the slow down in global growth and the Committee s indication that it can be patient in beginning to normalize policy even after the end of the asset purchase program. The Committee has emphasized that future policy will remain dependent on incoming economic data Financial Markets Developments in U.S. financial markets over the course of the year largely reflected the evolving global economic outlook and shifting monetary policy expectations. Longer-term interest rates as measured by the yields on 10-year U.S. Treasury notes declined from percent in December to percent in December as shown in Figure The decline in inter est rates came despite rapid improvement in the U.S. labor market and an end to the expansion of the Federal Reserve s balance sheet. The decline was likely driven in large part by the evolving expectation during for a later increase in the Federal funds rate that occurred as depicted in Figure along with continued low readings on inflation Then-Chairman Bernanke has stated that we do believe the primary effect of our purchases is through the stock that we hold because that stock has been withdrawn from markets and the prices of those assets have to adjust to balance supply and demand. Chairman Ben S. Bernanke Press Conference June available at http : //www.federalreserve.gov/ mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20130619.pdf The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Market-Implied Date of Initial Federal Funds Rate Increase Date of Expectation Jan-16 Nov-15 Sep-15 Sep-15 Liftoff Expected in Dec-14 Jul-15 May-15 Mar-15 Jan-15 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Date of Observation Sep Oct Nov Dec Note : The market-implied expectation is the date for which futures contracts imply a percent increase in the Federal funds effective rate Source : Bloomberg Professional Service ; CEA calculations Percent Figure Nominal Long- and Short-Term Interest Rates Dec-2014 10-Year Treasury Yield 3-Month Treasury Yield Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Note : Displayed yields are constant-maturity interest rates calculated from the U.S. Treasury yield curve Source : Federal Reserve Board H.15 Release | Chapter Downward revisions to global growth projections have also been important contributors to the decline in interest rates. The move in U.S interest rates coincided with decreasing long-term interest rates across the developed world including in the United Kingdom Japan and the euro area. The general decline in interest rates among advanced economies likely reflects in part the environment of slowing global growth and weaken ing inflation : the one- and five-year ahead growth rates projected by the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) for these countries were revised down during and again in January Other interest rates also declined in as shown in Table The average rate on a 30-year fixed rate mortgage has fallen basis points over the months of the year to percent. Before the last several weeks of the average mortgage rate had not fallen below percent since mid2013. Similarly corporate borrowing costs declined over the course of the year. Credit spreads differences between corporate interest rates and U.S Treasury yields that reflect the risk of default by corporate borrowers were unchanged on balance during Short-term interest rates ( such as the Federal funds rate and the 91-day Treasury bill rate ) were largely stable over the course of the year as markets consistently expected the first Federal funds rate increase to occur more than three months into the future Reflecting the ongoing economic recovery the stock market saw continued positive performance in The Standard and Poor s index rose percent for the year. That performance follows increases of per cent in and percent in ( the best year since ) In December the Standard and Poor s index was percent above its pre-financial-crisis monthly peak in International Developments Faced with weak global economic performance over the IMF reduced its forecast for year-over-year global real GDP growth from percent in October to percent in January Most economies experienced low rates of inflation in and low interest rates. The pace of recovery was uneven across countries with country-specific factors playing an important role. In its World Economic Outlook assessments the IMF pointed to the legacies of the crisis including high levels of public and pri vate debt and subdued investment as impediments to growth Euro zone. There is considerable divergence in the pace of the recov ery across Europe. The euro zone suffered a debilitating crisis from late to fast on the heels of the to global financial crisis. Germany Sweden and most countries in central and eastern Europe have recovered to their pre-crisis levels of real GDP relative to working-age population while The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Table Selected Interest Rates ( Percent ) Dec-13 Dec-14 Difference 3-Month U.S. Treasury Yield 2-Year U.S. Treasury Yield 5-Year U.S. Treasury Yield 10-Year U.S. Treasury 10-Year BBB Corporate Bonds Federal Funds Effective 30-Year U.S. Treasury 30-Year Fixed Mortgage Rate Note : All interest rates are averages of daily or weekly data throughout the given month Treasury yields are constant-maturity yields estimated by the Federal Reserve Board Corporate bond yields are option-adjusted yields estimated by Standard & Poor 's Global Fixed Income Research. The mortgage rate is that reported in the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Survey Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ; Standard & Poor 's ; Freddie Mac ; CEA calculations in the rest of the continent notably the aggregate of the peripheral euro area economies ( Greece Ireland Italy Portugal and Spain ) real GDP remains percent below the pre-recession peak. ( For a detailed discussion of the dispersion in real GDP trajectories across countries see Box below. ) For the euro area as a whole real GDP growth in the third quarter of ( the latest available as this Report goes to press ) was weak. The growth rate of real GDP per working age population from the third quarter of to the third quarter of was a meager percent for the euro area percent in Germany percent in France while Italy dipped back into recession with a decline of percent. The unemployment rate edged down during across the euro area but inflation fell sharply as well with Greece and Spain experiencing outright deflation ( Figure ) At the height of the euro crisis in July European Central Bank ( ECB ) President Mario Draghi pledged to do whatever it takes to preserve the euro. A month later in August the ECB announced it was pre pared to use large-scale outright monetary transactions ( OMT ) if neces sary to offset the effects on sovereign yields of speculation that some mem ber states might exit the euro. OMT would involve possibly massive ECB purchases of the sovereign debts of countries whose yields spiked upward because of fears they might abandon the euro in favor of a new national Mario Draghi President of the European Central Bank Global Investment Conference July available at http : //www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120726.en.html | Chapter Figure Falling Euro Area Inflation Percent Year-over-Year Europe Outside Euro Area Germany Dec-2014 Euro Area Minus Germany and Peripherals Peripherals Note : Peripherals include Greece Ireland Italy Portugal and Spain Source : Eurostat Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices Gross Domestic Product ; CEA calculations Figure Euro Area Sovereign Interest Rate Spreads over Germany Percentage Points Draghi : " Whatever it takes " ( July ) Greece Jan-15 Spain Italy Source : Bloomberg Professional Service France Portugal The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box : International Comparison of Growth Performance Nearly every advanced economy endured a recession amid the global financial crisis but the experience since then has varied widely across economies. Figure 2-ii shows real GDP divided by workingage population since for most advanced economies. All of the economies represented in the Figure experienced a deep and almost synchronous decline ranging from to percent measured from peak to trough. Since then the United States the United Kingdom Germany and Japan have surpassed the levels of real GDP per working-age popula tion they achieved before the crisis while most of the euro area has not The figures in parentheses show the recent annualized rate of growth in real GDP per working-age population as measured over the eightquarter interval through the third quarter of The United States and the United Kingdom have experienced recent growth of and percent a year respectively and have both exceeded their pre-crisis peaks. Germany has also surpassed its pre-crisis peak but in contrast to the United States and the United Kingdom real GDP per working-age Figure 2-ii Real Gross Domestic Product per Working-Age Population Index : Q1 = percent : Q3 Japan United States percent Germany percent United Kingdom percent percent Euro Area Excluding Germany and Peripherals Peripherals percent Note : Peripherals include Greece Ireland Italy Portugal and Spain. Numbers in parentheses are the annualized eight-quarter percent changes in real GDP per working-age population ended in : Q3. Working age population is for the U.S. and for all others Source : Eurostat ; CEA calculations | Chapter population has been almost flat since with annualized growth of percent over the last eight quarters. Japan s annual growth rate was percent but this was driven largely by the decline in its working-age population. ( Real GDP over the same interval has grown at only a percent annualized rate. ) The high-debt peripheral euro economies ( Greece Ireland Italy Portugal and Spain ) which were battered by the euro financial crisis between late and experienced a doubledip recession and as a group remain percent below their GDPper-worker level though growth has picked up in the last year. The weak recovery is not confined to the high-debt peripheral economies. The rest of the euro area excluding Germany and the high-debt peripheral countries is close to attaining its pre-crisis peak with recent annualized growth of percent in real GDP per worker The diverging paths within advanced economies can partly be attributed to different conditions prior to the crisis : differences in outstanding household debt differences in public debt the health of the financial sector and whether the country is part of a crisis-afflicted mon etary union. But much of the post-crisis difference must also be placed at the feet of government policy which has failed to stimulate aggregate demand. A country s ability to tackle demand shortfalls through higher public spending or tax cuts may be limited if fiscal space is insufficient either because government debt is already high or because markets doubt the government s ability to manage its budget sustainably over the longer term. Thus governments must accumulate fiscal space through prudent Percent Figure 2-iii Five-Year-Ahead Growth Forecasts in Selected Economies Emerging Markets Forecast in April Forecast in October Advanced Economies Note : * Partial Euro Area excludes Germany and Peripheral countries. Peripheral countries are Greece Ireland Italy Portugal and Spain Source : International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook April and October ; CEA Calculations The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | budgets during periods of stronger growth as many emerging economies did during the 2000s At the same time supply shortfalls have also played an important role in the slower pace of global growth. The IMF has marked down its medium-term growth projections for many of the world s major economies as shown in the Figure 2-iii. The figure compares the fiveyear-ahead growth forecasts made in the April World Economic Outlook to the five-year-ahead growth forecasts made in the October World Economic Outlook a rough proxy for revisions to the expectation of the growth of aggregate supply. While Japan and the euro area excluding Germany and peripherals have seen downward revisions to medium-term growth expectations the striking aspect of this figure is the sharp downward revisions to prospects for the BRIC economies which saw growth outlooks marked down by to percentage points. In fact in the October World Economic Outlook the IMF noted the BRIC economies have been responsible for one-half of the IMF s total growth forecast errors from to despite representing just over one-quarter of global GDP. The emerging market slowdown may be just a temporary response to the economic crisis and weak global demand Another possibility is that it could represent the end of an unusual period in global economic history when the integration of China and India into the global economy led to a rapid period of catching up with the technological frontier. As these nations edge closer to the frontier opportunities for growth are diminishing currency. President Draghi s announcement marked the start of a period of declining peripheral sovereign interest-rate spreads over the German bund As a result some commentators view the euro crisis as being in remission if not over ( Ireland and Portugal have formally exited from their troika assistance programs administered by the IMF EU and ECB ) The excep tion is Greece which has so far been unable to meet its commitment to deficit reduction under the troika program despite government efforts to bring its budget under control. Spreads rose sharply in January as the anti-austerity party Syriza came to power vowing to renegotiate the terms of Greece s sovereign debts ( see Figure ) Syriza and its coalition partner the Independent Greeks campaigned on platforms aggressively opposed to the deficit-reduction policies to which Greece must adhere under the terms of the troika assistance program Despite the generally low and falling spreads on sovereign debt defla tion in the peripheral countries has meant that real interest rates ( nominal rates less inflation ) are highest where unemployment is highest. Figure | Chapter shows the relationship between real interest rates and unemployment. The figure suggests that high real interest rates are suppressing recovery in pre cisely those countries with the greatest economic slack One reason that the United States has recovered more quickly than other advanced economies is its combination of accommodative monetary policy quick action to recapitalize the financial sector and aggressive demand management through countercyclical fiscal policy. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of was the largest countercyclical fiscal effort in U.S. history and together with a dozen other fiscal-jobs measures and automatic stabilizers fiscal support to the U.S. economy totaled per cent of GDP in But some euro area countries are constrained by fiscal rules from pursuing stronger countercyclical measures while those that are unconstrained are largely unwilling to do so or to allow much flexibility to the others. Because structural reform tends to work slowly monetary policy must bear the immediate burden of resisting deflation and supporting demand. In contrast to the Federal Reserve s balance sheet which increased through October but is being maintained at roughly a constant level for now the ECB s balance sheet ( as measured by the asset side ) was allowed to contract between mid-2012 and mid-2014 from roughly to trillion as euro area banks repaid ECB long-term loans taken out during the crisis With the ECB s main refinancing interest rate effectively at the zero lower bound and its deposit rate negative since June President Draghi stated near the end of that the ECB will do what we must to raise inflation and inflation expectations as fast as possible In January Draghi announced an open-ended program of large-scale debt purchases including sovereign debt designed to increase the ECB s balance sheet more than trillion by September Other advanced economies. Japan continues to face longstanding economic challenges. The three arrows of Abenomics ( fiscal stimulus monetary easing and structural reforms ) that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe launched in December were greeted with optimism that they would end deflationary expectations and generate sustained growth. After two decades of anemic growth in Japan the apparent initial success of the Abe agenda initially driven mainly by aggressive monetary policy and yen depreciation was a welcome development. Real GDP grew at a rate of about percent ( year over year ) in both and and expected infla tion rose. In April however the government permanently increased the national consumption tax from percent to percent as a step toward Mario Draghi President of the European Central Bank Frankfurt European Banking Conference November available at http : //www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/ html/sp141121.en.html The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Euro Area Unemployment and Real Interest Rates December Real Interest Rate Percent GRE CYP MLT LUX GER NED AUT SLV BEL LAT IRL FIN SLK POR SPA ITA FRA Unemployment Rate Percent Note : The real interest rate is equal to the nominal monthly average interest rate minus the 12-month inflation rate. Greek data are from October and Slovakian data are from November Source : Eurostat Harmonized Unemployment Rate ; European Central Bank Harmonized Long Term Interest Rates ; National Sources reducing the large public debt ( roughly percent of GDP ) This policy a fiscal contraction equal to about percent of GDP was partly offset by temporary expansionary fiscal measures. Nonetheless recent economic data from Japan raise troubling questions about the net effects of the consump tion tax increase on growth. Real GDP surged percent at an annual rate in the first quarter of as consumers raced to complete purchases before the tax hike but then plunged percent at an annual rate in the second quarter after it took effect and another percent in the third quarter leaving real GDP below its level at the end of At the same time infla tion ( excluding the effects of the consumption tax ) remains far below the Bank of Japan s target of percent a year. In response the Bank of Japan expanded its program of quantitative and qualitative easing at the end of October. Slowing growth reflects weakness in consumer spending and busi ness investment which has led forecasters to revise down growth expecta tions for future quarters. Faced with these developments Abe postponed by months a second stage of the consumption tax increase ( from to percent ) planned for October and called a snap election that reaffirmed his parliamentary majority and extended by two years the horizon available for carrying out his policies As of the fourth quarter of real GDP in the United Kingdom was percent above its pre-crisis peak and unemployment stands at percent for the September-to-November period. ( See Box for more details on the UK labor market and a comparison with the United States. ) | Chapter Consumer price inflation was percent over the months of and the rate on the 10-year bond was in December. Given the rapidly improving labor market the Bank of England is anticipated to raise interest rates sometime in or On the downside however the strong eco nomic linkages between the United Kingdom and continental Europe mean that troubles in the euro zone may dampen growth Emerging markets. China s economy grew percent during the four quarters ended in the fourth quarter of down from an annualized rate of percent in the eight quarters ended in the fourth quarter of ( Figure ) Both the IMF and the World Bank have downgraded their pro jections for Chinese growth in to a rate below percent which until recently was thought to be the Chinese authorities target rate China may face stresses in adapting to a slower rate of expansion. In May President Xi Jinping reportedly suggested that the Chinese must boost our confidence adapt to the new normal condition based on the char acteristics of China s economic growth in the current phase and stay coolminded. One concern is the growth in credit to nonfinancial corporations and households much of which has been channeled through the so-called shadow banking sector ( which undertakes risky bank-like functions but outside the government-regulated part of the financial sector ) As shown in Figure credit growth in China since has increased faster than in many developed countries. An initial surge in was seen as an aggres sive response to the global financial crisis in line with expansionary policies around the world. The renewed boom in credit since however has raised worries about the rapid expansion of the unregulated shadow banking sector and a bubble in real estate prices. The government has responded with a number of policy measures to limit lending activities outside of the tradi tional banking sector. Property price gains have moderated however and prices began to fall in even in larger wealthier cities where in the past demand has typically outstripped supply. There is growing concern about overbuilding because contraction in the construction sector would further depress aggregate growth and could cause financial instability A further economic slowdown in China would have ramifications for the global economy and in particular for low- and middle-income coun tries. Trade between China and other emerging BRICS economies ( Brazil Russia India and South Africa ) has expanded since China is now the top export destination for African countries Asian economies and Latin American countries. If demand in China slows exports to China would decline broadly dampening emerging-economy growth. Since mid2011 the other BRICS countries have suffered declining terms of trade ( the relative price of a country s exports compared with its imports ) This decline The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure China : Real GDP Growth Percent Annualized Four-Quarter Growth : Q4 Source : China National Bureau of Statistics National Accounts Figure Credit to Nonfinancial Corporations and Households Percent of GDP : Q2 United States Euro Area China Source : Bank for International Settlements ; People 's Bank of China ; Federal Reserve Board ; National Sources | Chapter is accounted for in large part by falling prices of commodities and raw mate rials to which China s slowdown is a major contributor. The price of oil has recently fallen much more sharply than prices of other commodities because the effects of low world demand for oil have been reinforced by exceptionally ample global supply. Emerging energy exporters including Russia Nigeria and Venezuela and countries in the Middle East have suffered most while this development has been positive for energy importers including China and the big industrial economies ( see Box ) An additional challenge facing emerging economies is the potential for capital flow reversals as the Federal Reserve moves toward positive inter est rates and the demand for higher-yield assets in emerging economies subsides. That said the stronger U.S. economy that motivates monetary policy normalization will benefit emerging market exporters. Vulnerabilities may have declined over the course of as foreign borrowing by several important emerging economies has fallen. Many analysts remain concerned however by the reportedly large stock of offshore dollar liabilities incurred by emerging-economy corporations Exchange rates exports and imports. Since the global financial crisis the U.S. dollar has generally fluctuated in a lower range against foreign cur rencies relative to the early 2000s but it took a particularly sharp upturn from September a percent appreciation against a broad index of trade partners through January ( see Figure ) Among the drivers of the recent appreciation is the strong performance of the U.S economy against a backdrop of relatively weak growth in the rest of the world along with the implications of this growth pattern for countries monetary policies Federal Reserve policy is at a very different juncture than monetary policy in most foreign countries though the United Kingdom is similarly situated While indicators in the United States and the United Kingdom suggest that markets expect monetary tightening steps sometime in the to timeframe the ECB and Bank of Japan remain fully engaged in battling below-target inflation and slow growth with no near-term prospect of policy reversal Both the recent strength of the dollar and slowing demand in much of the world outside the United States will work to weaken U.S. export growth in the near term. The U.S. nominal trade deficit in goods and services edged up from to percent of GDP in as measured in the national income and product accounts. Against this downward pressure on exports it will become especially important to open new markets to which the United States can sell goods and services. This is an important driver of the President s trade agenda which is described more fully in Chapter The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box : Imported Petroleum Prices and the Economy Oil prices fell percent during the months of ( as mea sured by the European Brent price of crude oil ) the combined effect of a surge in U.S. crude oil production a decrease in global oil demand and OPEC s recent decision to maintain production levels despite the drop in prices ( see Chapter of this Report ) Low oil prices benefit major segments of the U.S. economy. Lower fuel costs increase real household income and stimulate consumption both directly mostly through lower prices of gasoline which fell more than $ per gallon in the last six months of and indirectly by reducing the production costs for oil-consuming businesses which ultimately translates to lower prices for consumer goods and services. The drop in oil prices also hurts American oil producers but because the United States is a net importer of crude oil the overall benefit of falling oil prices to the United States exceeds the costs to domestic oil producers The net benefit to the economy is roughly proportional to the share of net oil imports in nominal GDP. In the United States on net imported about billion barrels of petroleum and products down more than percent since Each $ per barrel drop in the price of oil saves U.S. consumers and producers about $ billion a year or about percent of GDP. As a result the roughly $ per barrel decline ( roughly % ) in the price of oil during the last four months of will save the U.S. economy about $ billion a year or percent of GDP Figure 2-iv Petroleum Trade Surplus ( ) /Deficit ( ) in G20 Economies Saudi Arabia Russia Canada Mexico Argentina Australia United Kingdom Brazil France United States Italy Indonesia Germany China Japan South Africa India Turkey Korea Percent of GDP ( estimates for CY issued in April ) Source : International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook April | Chapter Measured in dollars the net import share of petroleum and petroleum products was percent of nominal GDP in but fell to percent during The situation is reversed for countries that are net crude oil exporters. Calculations by the IMF based on data suggest that Canada for example had a petroleum surplus equal to percent of GDP in contrast to the U.S. petroleum deficit of percent of GDP. And so the same 40-percent oil-price decline reduces Canada s real income by percent. Figure 2-iv shows the estimates by the IMF based on data of the petroleum trade balance as a percent of GDP for G-20 countries The back-of-the-envelope estimates described above however are far too simplistic to capture potential impacts for a large number of national economies where policy and structural idiosyncrasies deliver different economic implications. In particular countries like Iran Russia Venezuela Nigeria and Iraq will face challenges as low oil prices place their governments under extreme financial pressure. Analysts have made similarly rough estimates of the net effect of the oil price declines on global GDP. Largely because the world petroleum supply has increased the IMF estimates that global real GDP could be around percent higher in if the price decline persists for the entire year Aside from its positive implications for U.S. and global incomes the decline in oil prices has also created fear of financial instability among energy companies. As oil prices have plunged yields on oil Basis Points Figure 2-v High-Yield Option Adjusted Spreads Dec-2014 Energy Sector All Sectors Note : Spreads weighted by market value Source : Bloomberg Professional Service The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | company debt have skyrocketed in response to investor fears that com panies will have a harder time paying creditors. In particular Figure 2-v shows that in just six months the option-adjusted spread for high-yield energy debt ( a measure of how risky a financial instrument is relative to Treasury debt ) has more than doubled from an average of under basis points in June to over basis points in December ( The option adjustment corrects the spread for the value of rights to repay bonds before maturity. ) By contrast the option-adjusted spread for all sectors combined ( including energy ) has increased by less than one-half that amount over the same time period. As of December energy companies constitute almost percent of the high-yield bond market and there is growing concern that sustained low prices will put investments in future oil projects at risk The net goods deficit was unchanged at percent of GDP in while the services surplus edged down by percentage point of GDP to percent ( see Figures and which show these concepts on the closely related balance of payments basis ) Our services exports have consis tently grown relative to merchandise exports since at least the beginning of the 1990s and the start of the digital revolution. If current trends continue Figure Select Dollar Exchange Rates Index Jan-2004 = Euro/USD Index Jan-2015 Broad Trade/USD Index Yen/USD Index Note : The broad Trade Index is a weighted average of foreign exchange values of the U.S. dollar against major U.S. trading partners Source : Federal Reserve Board Foreign Exchange Rates | Chapter Billions of Dollars Figure Trade in Goods Dec-2014 Imports Exports Balance Source : Census Bureau Foreign Trade Division Billions of Dollars Figure Trade in Services Dec-2014 Exports Imports Balance Source : Census Bureau Foreign Trade Division The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure 2-14a Figure X-X Services and Goods Composition : Imports Services and Goods Import and Export Composition Other Imports ( Percent ) Services ( Percent ) Consumer Goods ( Percent ) Automotive Vehicles Engines and Parts ( Percent ) Capital Goods ( Percent ) Foods Feeds Beverages ( Percent ) Industrial Supplies and Materials ( Percent ) Source : Census Bureau Foreign Trade Division ; Bureau of Economic Analysis Balance of Payments Division Figure 2-14b Figure X-X Services andand Goods Export Composition Services Goods Composition : Exports Consumer Other Exports Goods ( Percent ) Automotive ( Percent ) Vehicles Engines and Parts ( Percent ) Services ( Percent ) Capital Goods ( Percent ) Industrial Supplies and Materials ( Percent ) Foods Feeds Beverages ( Percent ) Source : Census Bureau Foreign Trade Division ; Bureau of Economic Analysis Balance of Payments Diviision | Chapter services exports should remain an increasingly important component of overall U.S. export success In services accounted for over percent of all U.S. exports while services amounted to just percent of all U.S. imports. On the import side percent of U.S. imports are consumer goods ( see Figure ) Overall trade in industrial supplies which includes petroleum accounts for between and percent of imports and exports though the composition of exports and imports differs. Buying from our trading partners the goods and services at which they are relatively more efficient lowers prices and increases choice for U.S. consumers and businesses ( see Chapter ) One ongoing trade trend that accelerated in late is the continu ing decline in U.S. energy imports ( see Chapter for a detailed discussion ) A major part of the decline is due to an expansion in U.S. production of unconventional oil and natural gas while another element is growing U.S energy efficiency and reliance on renewable energy sources. In addition the world price of oil fell precipitously in the fourth quarter of Between and petroleum s share of the U.S. trade deficit in goods fell from percent to percent according to data from the Census Bureau Developments in and the Near-Term Outlook Consumer Spending Real consumer spending grew percent during the four quarters of the same as the year-earlier rate. This growth was accompanied by upward trends in consumer sentiment encouraging reductions in house hold debt and gains in household wealth over the course of and Growth was strong for real household purchases of durable goods ( percent ) especially motor vehicles. Growth was moderate for nondurables ( percent ) and services ( percent ) Within nondurables consumer spending on gasoline and other energy goods rose percent during after falling at a 1.5-percent annual rate during the preceding seven years a generally negative trend driven by increasingly fuel-efficient motor vehicles Sharply lower nominal oil prices during the fourth quarter of which drove the price of gasoline to levels last seen in probably encouraged growth in real consumer energy spending Light motor vehicle sales rose to million units in the fifth consecutive yearly increase and the highest-selling pace since Sales of light motor vehicles averaged million units during the decade through Sales trended up during the four quarters of the year consistent with the emerging strength in labor markets and real incomes. Motor vehicle The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | assemblies also increased from the first to the second half of the year and at year end inventory-to-sales ratios were near their long-term averages Between and the average age of the fleet of private light motor vehicles has risen from to years which may partly reflect an increase in quality but also suggests that households may have postponed new vehicle purchases during the period of elevated unemployment. If so replacement demand is likely to support new vehicle sales during the next couple of years Consumer sentiment resumed its upward trend in after inter ruptions by the debt-limit crisis in the summer of the fiscal cliff in the winter of and the government shutdown in October By year end the Reuters/University of Michigan Index of Consumer Sentiment had reached its highest level since and was in the top percent of its historical range. Survey administrators cited rising wage and employment expectations as the principal contributors to improving sentiment along with declining gasoline prices. The Conference Board index in the second half of was also at its highest level since Meanwhile U.S. households continued to pay down their debts. Figure shows the dramatic rise in the household sector s liabilities-to-income and debt-service ratios in the run-up to the financial crisis along with the reduction in these ratios ( known as deleveraging ) that followed. By the liabilities-to-income ratio was at its lowest level since Household debt service ( the share of income allocated to making required payments on that debt ) has fallen even more dramatically : not only has outstanding debt principal fallen relative to income but interest rates are at historically low levels. By the second quarter of required payments on mortgage and consumer debt had fallen to percent of disposable income nearly the lowest level on record. During the deleveraging process heightened foreclosure activity and lower borrowing for home purchases led to a large reduction in debt. In the eight quarters through the third quarter of this adjustment process appears to have tapered off and debt has been stable relative to disposable income at levels that are near historic lows. At these lows real consumer spending has a firmer foundation for growth than it did earlier in this expansion. However these estimates are based on aggregate data largely from the Financial Accounts of the United States ( FAUS ) that could mask higher debt-service burdens for some families ; that is the health of personal finances varies substantially across households In addition to the uptrend in sentiment and the progress in deleverag ing gains in real consumer spending have also been supported by gains in net worth ( that is household assets less liabilities see Figure ) Although the wealth-to-income ratio was little changed during it had increased | Chapter Figure Household Deleveraging Percent of Disposable Income Years of Disposable Income Debt Service Share of Income ( right axis ) : Q3 Liabilities-to-Income Ratio ( left axis ) Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Federal Reserve Board Financial Accounts of the United States Figure Consumption and Wealth Relative to Disposable Personal Income ( DPI ) Years of Disposable Income : Q4 Consumption/DPI Ratio Consumption-to-DPI Ratio ( left axis ) Net Housing Wealth-to-DPI Ratio ( right axis ) Total-Wealth-to-DPI Ratio ( right axis ) Stock Market Wealth-to-DPI Ratio ( right axis ) Note : Values imputed for : Q4 by CEA. Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts ; Federal Reserve Board Financial Accounts of the United States ; CEA calculations The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box : U.S. Household Wealth in the Wake of the Crisis and Implications for Wealth Inequality Supported by rising home values and stock-market gains real household net worth the difference between the value of a household s assets and debts adjusted for inflation increased further in to about $ per household according to the FAUS just under its prerecession peak. Because wealth is unevenly distributed and concentrated among a relatively small number of households and because the FAUS includes holdings of nonprofit institutions in its definition of wealth the recovery in mean household net worth does not necessarily reflect the experiences of most families The Federal Reserve Board s latest triennial Survey of Consumer Finances ( SCF ) conducted during does measure the evolution of wealth for households at different income levels. Broadly speaking the SCF shows that the recovery in net worth has been uneven for house holds across the income distribution as the top percent of income earners have regained much more of their wealth through on average than the bottom percent of earners. Figure 2-vi shows how the wealth of different income groups changed between the and surveys. This differential recovery owes partially to disparities in the holdings of assets across the income distribution. The value of stock market wealth generally increases more than housing wealth as one Percent Figure 2-vi Percent Change in Wealth by Household Income Less than Percentile of Household Income Source : Federal Reserve Board Survey of Consumer Finances | Chapter moves up the income distribution. For example according to the SCF the top percent of income earners held nearly four times as much housing wealth as did the middle percent in but almost times as much stock-market wealth. The appreciation of equities during discussed earlier in this chapter is likely to have benefited higher-income households disproportionately Such an uneven recovery implies that wealth inequality has con tinued to increase in recent years. Moreover even among the highest percent of earners mean and median wealth diverged between and suggesting that wealth has become even more concentrated within a smaller share of households. Because the SCF excludes the wealthiest households in the United States and because the distribution of wealth becomes increasingly concentrated near the very top the increasing concentration seen in the SCF likely understates the actual increase. However the rise in inequality has been mitigated by the President s policies including the Affordable Care Act and the restora tion of a more progressive individual income tax code. The President s FY Budget proposes further policies to ensure the benefits of growth are more widely shared including investments in early childhood and college education new tax credits for low-income workers and curbs to tax expenditures for high-income earners Figure 2-vii Mean Household Net Worth Thousands of Dollars : Q3 Reported FAUS Net Worth : Q2 SCF-Adjusted FAUS Net Worth FAUS-Adjusted SCF Net Worth Notes : Deflated by the NIPA price index for consumption. The FAUS figures for net worth are adjusted towards SCF concepts Source : Federal Reserve Board Survey of Consumer Finances ( private data ) Financial Accounts of the United States ; CEA calculations The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | But the rise in wealth inequality is not a recent phenomenon ; research shows that it is decades in the making. In a study spanning years of U.S. tax records Saez and Zucman ( ) find that wealth inequality has been increasing in recent decades especially at the very top of the distribution. According to the Saez-Zucman data the wealthi est percent of households saw their share of U.S. wealth grow from percent in to percent in More broadly the study finds that wealth concentration has been increasing since and is now approaching levels not seen since the period immediately before the Great Depression Because the most recent SCF survey was conducted over the course of it would not have picked up some of the wealth gains during the second half of and during as shown in Figure 2-vii. In addi tion some of the divergences between the two measures of household wealth ( the SCF and the one in the FAUS ) can be accounted for by conceptual differences between the two surveys such as : institutional endowments assets of defined-benefit pension plans and pension fund reserves. As can be seen average household wealth was similar across the two surveys in and but the FAUS measure of wealth appears to have fallen further during the recession and risen faster during the recovery sharply during boosted by sizeable gains in stock-market and hous ing wealth. The year-end and year-end levels of wealth relative to income were up by more than one year of disposable income from the trough of the recession reaching years a level surpassed only during the years to Adjusted for inflation and population growth real household net worth finally overtook the level at the end of and made further gains during Changes in net worth have been spread unevenly across households however and these disparities may have impli cations for families and macroeconomic activity ( see Box ) Housing Markets With abnormally cold weather during the first quarter of hous ing market activity got off to a slow start but eventually increased above levels ( see Figure ) As the 30-year fixed mortgage interest rate fell basis points during the months of the year to percent housing starts and permits edged up to million units helping to support a 2.6-percent increase in residential investment during the four quarters of New and existing home sales also got off to a slow start in but recovered somewhat as the year unfolded | Chapter Figure Housing Starts Millions of Units at an Annual Rate Total : Q4 One-Unit Structures Multifamily Structures Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Census Bureau New Residential Construction Other housing market indicators suggested continued recovery in this sector in The stock of delinquencies and foreclosures as a share of all mortgages decreased to levels not seen since particularly in states where court appearances are unnecessary to begin a foreclosure process while the rate of new mortgage delinquencies fell on balance to a level last seen in Accordingly fewer households sold homes under distressed conditions and so the share of sales comprised by non-foreclosure properties rose. With fewer distressed sales speculative investor activity receded as did the share of home purchases financed with cash Supported by improving labor markets rising sales and lower mortgage interest rates house prices increased in Major house price indexes shown in Figure increased to percent during the months through November helping to lift an additional million borrowers out of negative equity ( where they owed more than their homes were worth ) in the first three quarters of the year.6 Notably owing in part to these house price gains many more homeowners were able to sell their properties without realizing a loss and this contributed to a modest increase in the inventory of existing homes available for sale from the low levels seen in Although national house price indexes in November remained 6As of this writing data for some of the major house price indexes were not yet available for December and data on underwater mortgages were not yet available for the fourth quarter of The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure National House Price Indexes Index Jan-2012 = S&P/Case-Shiller ( Nov-2014 ) CoreLogic ( Dec-2014 ) Zillow ( Dec-2014 ) FHFA ( Nov-2014 ) Note : The Standard & Poor 's/Case-Shiller Federal Housing Finance Agency and CoreLogic indexes all adjust for the quality of homes sold but only cover homes that are bought or sold whereas Zillow reflects prices for all homes on the market. Shading denotes recession Source : Zillow ; CoreLogic ; Federal Housing Finance Agency ; Standard & Poor 's/Case-Shiller to percent below their pre-recession highs they are now slightly above levels implied by their traditional relationship with the cost of renting ( Figure ) As a result house price increases may moderate in the com ing years particularly in light of the expected increases in long-term interest rates discussed later in this chapter Residential investment which increased percent during the four quarters of stepped down to an annual growth rate of percent dur ing As defined in the national income and product accounts residen tial investment includes permanent-site new home construction real estate commissions home improvements and spending on manufactured homes Permanent-site new home construction rose during each of the four quar ters of the year cumulating in an 8.5-percent increase over the four quarters of the year. In contrast to the gains in permanent-site construction other construction ( the aggregate of real estate commissions manufactured homes and home improvements ) fell. Sales of new homes hovered only just above the lows seen during the Great Recession. Meanwhile existing home sales dipped early in the year but recovered to a level that is percent higher than its monthly trough in Looking ahead residential investment has the potential for strong gains as a large cohort of millennials ( that is 18-to-34-year olds ) will soon participate in the housing market in greater numbers as renters and eventually as homeowners ( Figure ) Typically homebuilding depends | Chapter Figure Home Prices and Owners ' Equivalent Rent Index Average of to = ( log scale ) : Q3 House Prices Owners ' Equivalent Rent Note : Shading denotes recession. House prices are measured by the FHFA 's price index ( total index before purchase-only index after ) Owners ' equivalent rent is measured by the Personal Consumption Expenditures price index for imputed rent of owner-occupied nonfarm housing ( before ) and the Consumer Price Index for owners ' equivalent rent of residence ( 1983-present ) Source : Federal Housing Finance Agency House Price Index ; Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts ; Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index ; CEA calculations Figure U.S. Population Distribution by Age and Gender Census Age ( Years ) <5 Percent Female Percent Male Percent of Population Source : Census Bureau Population Division The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | positively on household formation reductions in vacancies and demoli tions. With much of the cyclical overhang in vacant housing having abated during the past several years the outlook for homebuilding will depend in large part on the recovery in household formation particularly among mil lennials. Since rates of household formation among millennials have been depressed in part due to high unemployment and the rapid increase in cost of rental housing. However improved labor market conditions in and a slight easing in rental prices provide favorable conditions to push up household formation and in turn boost residential investment activity.7 Expected further strengthening of the labor market could provide additional support to release the pent-up demand for housing due to demo graphic factors. According to a November Gallup survey percent of respondents believe that the current labor market provides a good envi ronment for finding a quality job up percentage points from November and well above the low of percent seen in The Federal Reserve Board s Survey of Young Workers similarly finds that young adults are optimistic about future job stability which also bodes well for household formation and thus housing demand.9 Consistent with optimism about their prospects in the labor market the share of households expecting an improvement in their finances edged up to percent by December from percent last year.10 A National Association of Home Builders survey showed that the positive outlook also extended to homebuilders as their sentiment on whether it is a good time to build increased in to its highest level since ( Figure ) In the mortgage market rates on a 30-year fixed rate mortgage decreased by basis points during the months of in line with the decrease in 10-year Treasury yields and are basis points lower than their recent high in ( See Figure ) In spite of this decline mortgage applications for home purchases were flat on balance in consistent with slowing home sales and tight mortgage credit availability ( see Figure ) Refinancing activity was well below the highs seen in early and did not show much response to the drop in rates in part because previous refinancing waves already lowered rates for many borrowers. The Government-Sponsored Enterprises ( GSEs ) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and the Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) continued to sup port an outsized share ( over percent ) of mortgage originations in See Council of Economic Advisers Economic Facts about Millennials http : //www whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/millennials_report.pdf http : //www.gallup.com/poll/179483/americans-perceptions-job-market-hold-steady.aspx 9http : //www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/2014-survey-young-workers-young-workersoutlook.htm 10http : //www.fanniemae.com/portal/about-us/media/corporate-news/2014/6192.html | Chapter Figure Home Builder Sentiment Index Sentiment Index Dec-2014 Conditions " Good " Conditions " Bad " Note : The NAHB surveys builder perceptions of current single-family home sales sales expectations for the next six months and level of traffic of prospective home buyers. NAHB then uses builders responses to calculate a seasonally adjusted index of sentiment Source : National Association of Home Builders Builders Economic Council Survey Figure 30-Year Fixed Mortgage Rates Percent Dec-2014 Note : Fixed mortgage rates are contract offer rates Source : Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Market Survey The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Purchase and Refinance Activity Purchase Index 3/16/90 = Refinance Index 3/16/90 = MBA Refinance Index Dec-2014 MBA Purchase Index Note : MBA Purchase Index is a seasonally adjusted four week moving average Source : Mortgage Bankers Association Weekly Applications Survey with banks portfolios supporting much of the rest. Since private-label securitization activity has been negligible providing funds only to a tiny seg ment of extremely high credit quality borrowers with high-balance jumbo mortgages One important headwind to continued normalization in the housing sector is low credit availability. Across a broad range of measures mortgage underwriting standards remain tight and the Federal Reserve s Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey showed only modest signs of continued easing dur ing Accordingly mortgage purchase originations are low relative to the volume of home sales activity. The Federal Housing Finance Agency and the FHA took important steps in to clarify and mitigate the legal risks lenders face and the conditions under which housing agencies may force them to repurchase loans ( putback risk ) The Administration has also enacted other policies to improve credit access including a reduction in FHA mortgage insurance premiums from percent to percent which will help homebuyers borrow for less. Nonetheless it may take some time before lenders can fully implement the necessary steps to improve access to credit prudently and before more borrowers particularly borrow ers with less-than-pristine credit histories feel that credit conditions have eased enough to apply for mortgage loans | Chapter Investment Business Fixed Investment. Real business fixed investment grew percent during the four quarters of up from a 4.7-percent increase during The rate of investment growth picked up in each of its three components : structures equipment and intellectual property Investment spending has grown more slowly than usual for a busi ness-cycle expansion. One reason might be the general surplus of capital services relative to output that has persisted since the last recession ( Figure ) After output fell sharply during that recession and during the slow recovery firms found themselves with more capital than they needed. But as the recovery has progressed output has grown faster than capital services so that firms have only recently had a general reason to increase their use of capital services. ( In Figure the blue line has only recently fallen below the orange line. ) This shift argues for faster growth in investment spending during the next year than in the recent past Nonfinancial corporations spent a lower-than-average share of their internal funds ( also known as cash flow ) on investment during to ( see Figure ) Instead these corporations used a good part of those funds to buy back shares from their stockholders. Share buybacks are similar to dividends insofar as they are a way for corporations to return value to share holders. They differ however with regard to permanence : whereas dividend changes tend to persist share buybacks are one-time events. ( When firms raise investment funds by issuing new equity the nonfinancial sector aggre gate of share buybacks in the figures can be negative as was common in the 1950s and 1960s. ) The decline in the invested share of internal funds from to together with the rise in share buybacks suggests that firms had more internal funds than they thought they could profitably invest. As can be seen in Figure the investment outlook appears to have improved in and the investment share of internal funds has rebounded to near its historical average. Share buybacks however remain high Inventory Investment. Inventory investment contributed percent age point to the 2.5-percent growth rate of real GDP during the four quarters of down from the preceding year when it accounted for percentage point of growth. A substantial portion of the inventory contribution to growth was accounted for by agricultural inventory investment when a bumper year for farm production followed the drought. In in contrast agricultural inventory investment was relatively steady. Inventory investment was an important part of the year s quarterly fluctuations accounting for more than one-half of the reported 2.1-percent annual rate of decline in first-quarter real GDP. In the manufacturing and trade sector the buildup of inventories through was no faster than sales ; by November The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Capital Services per Unit of Real Output Private Business Sector Index = : Q3 Capital Services per Unit of Output Nonlinear Trend Note : Annual capital services from BLS multifactor productivity database post-1964 data interpolated quarterly using Macroadvisers quarterly data ; pre-1965 data interpolated by moving average. Nonlinear trend is a bi-weight filter using at 60-quarter window Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Labor Productivity and Costs ; Macroeconomic Advisers ; CEA calculations Figure Share Buy Backs vs. Investment Nonfinancial Corporate Business Percent of U.S. Internal Funds Four-Quarter Moving Average : Q3 Investment/ Internal Funds Share Buy Backs/ Internal Funds Note : Dashed lines represent averages from Shading denotes recession Source : Federal Reserve Board Financial Accounts of the United States | Chapter manufacturing and trade businesses held sufficient inventories to supply months of sales roughly the same level as at year-end State and Local Governments When viewed over the current expansion growth in State and local purchases has been the weakest of any business cycle recovery in the postWorld War II period ( Figure ) The contribution of State and local purchases to real GDP growth was negative during the three years from to but finally turned positive in and Even during these past two years State and local governments contributed only percent age point to the annual rate of real GDP growth. The recent weakly positive trend in this sector is also reflected in job gains as State and local govern ments have added jobs since January Even so employment in this sector remains below its previous high. Almost percent of this net job loss was in the educational services subsector Despite the positive signals during major obstacles to State and local expansion remain. State and local governments continue to spend more than they collect in revenues and their aggregate deficit during the first three quarters of amounted to percent of nominal U.S. GDP ( $ billion ) a deficit-to-GDP ratio that has been roughly stable for several Figure Real State and Local Government Purchases During Recoveries Indexed to at NBER-Defined Trough : Q4 Average Current ( : Q2 Trough ) Trough Quarters from Trough Note : The average excludes the recession due to overlap with the recession Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | years. In the first three quarters of expenditures remained roughly flat at about percent of GDP and revenues remained flat at about percent of GDP. In addition unfunded pension obligations place a heavy burden on State and local government finances. As can be seen in Figure the size of these pension liabilities relative to State and local receipts ballooned immediately after the recession and remains elevated at a level that was about percent of a year s revenue in Adding in State and local bond liabilities does not change the overall shape of the plot shown in Figure though they elevate the liabilities-to-receipts ratio to about percent of a year s revenue Labor Markets Major labor market indicators showed a pronounced recovery in The unemployment rate dropped percentage points in calendar year the fastest pace since Private employment increased by million during the months of substantially faster than the average pace of million jobs during the three preceding years ( Figure ) The job gains were wide-spread across industries. Some notable growth included the construction industry which continued to rebound adding jobs in ( percent of the total increase in payroll employment ) professional and business services ( percent ) and health care services ( percent ) The strengthening of the labor market is discussed in detail in Chapter along with challenges that remain including with respect to involuntary parttime work long-term unemployment labor force participation the fluidity of labor markets and job quality Long-term unemployment peaked in and has been falling steadily since then ; declines in long-term unemployment accounted for percent of the overall unemployment decline in While this progress is encouraging long-term unemployment remains elevated above pre-reces sion levels ( Figure ) Data on job vacancies provided more encouraging news about the labor market in The number of job vacancies jumped percent in the first months of The number of job seekers per job vacancy stood at in November and is now below the average during the previous expansion The labor force participation rate fell percentage points between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of CEA analysis finds that about one-half of this decline was due to the aging of the baby-boom generation into retirement while the other half of this decline was due to a composition of cyclical factors longer-standing secular trends and factors specific to the recession. These demographic-related declines will become steeper in the near term echoing the rise in the number of births from | Chapter Figure State and Local Pension Fund Liabilities Percent of Annual Receipts : Q3 Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Federal Reserve Board Financial Accounts of the United States Figure Nonfarm Payroll Employment 12-Month Change Millions Not Seasonally Adjusted Dec-2014 Private Total Note : Total excludes temporary decennial Census workers. Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Employment Statistics The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Unemployment Rate by Duration Percent of Civilian Labor Force Unemployed for Weeks or Less Dec-2014 Unemployed for Weeks and Over Note : Shading denotes recession. Dashed lines represent averages from Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey through About a sixth of the participation-rate decline however was also due to the high unemployment rates from to which caused potential job-seekers to delay entry into the labor force or become discour aged. By the fourth quarter of the participation rate remained below what would occur if the labor market was fully recovered. Looking ahead as the unemployment rate is projected to continue declining during the labor force participation rate is projected to be roughly flat as the cyclical rebound roughly offsets the continued downward pull of the aging popula tion. See Chapter for further discussion The unemployment rate may not tell the whole story of the potential for increased employment. Measures of discouraged workers and those working part time for economic reasons indicate more slack than what is embodied in the official unemployment rate ( see Chapter ) Labor Productivity in the Nonfarm Business Sector. Although employment growth is strong the growth in output has not risen much ; as such the growth of labor productivity ( that is output per hour ) has been below its long-term average pace. Because productivity moves with the business cycle it should be measured over a long interval. When measured with product-side data from the national income and product accounts ( the measure published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics ) labor productivity real nonfarm output per hour rose at a 1.4-percent annual rate during the almost seven years since the business cycle peak in But when measured | Chapter by the income-side measure nonfarm productivity has risen at a 1.8-percent rate. The best measure of productivity growth is probably the average of these figures similar to the average used for output in Figure yielding an estimate of a 1.6-percent annual rate of growth in productivity thus far in this business cycle. This is a slower pace of growth than the percent during the -year period between the business-cycle peaks in and potentially at least in part due to the transitory after-effects of the severe recession including reduced investment associated with the capital overhand discussed earlier How should recent productivity growth color forecasts of future productivity ? In the absence of a structural change in the process generating productivity outcomes the best way to forecast labor productivity is to draw on long-term data. Averaging productivity growth over the current business cycle with data from all the years since the business-cycle peak in yields an estimate of percent a year the figure that the Administration uses to project the long-term labor productivity growth rate as discussed in the long-term outlook section below Price and wage inflation. Core consumer price inflation ( that is excluding food and energy prices ) has been stable at around a 1.7-percent annual rate for the past two years. The overall ( headline ) consumer price index ( CPI ) was held down by declines in energy prices in and increasing just percent and percent during the months of those two years ( Figure ) Food prices increased faster than overall inflation during partly reflecting the drought in California with meat and milk prices up roughly and percent respectively The price index for personal consumption expenditures in the national income accounts ( the PCE price index ) is largely a re-weighted version of the consumer price index. Because of a different method of aggregating the indi vidual components its annual increases have averaged about percentage point a year less than the consumer price index ( since when the Bureau of Labor Statistics started re-linking it with the pattern of expenditures every two years ) During the months of for example the core PCE price index increased percent less than the percent increase in the core CPI. As tabulated by the Survey of Professional Forecasters measures of long-term expectations for CPI inflation have been well-anchored at around percent ( and percent for the PCE price index ) both during the last recession and more recently. This steadiness suggests market confidence in the Federal Reserve s ability to keep inflation under control Nominal hourly compensation increased percent during as measured by the employment cost index ( ECI ) in the private sector ( Figure ) That pace was up slightly from the and 2.0-percent rates observed The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Inflation and Inflation Expectations Ten Years Forward Four-Quarter Percent Change Consumer Price Inflation : Q4 10-Year Consumer Price Inflation Forecast Core Consumer Price Inflation Note : Shading denotes recession. The 10-Year Consumer Price Inflation Forecast data come from the Survey of Professional Forecasters Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Survey of Professional Forecasters Figure Hourly Compensation Increases vs. Inflation Expectations Four-Quarter Percent Change Employment Cost Index Increase : Q4 10-Year Consumer Price Inflation Forecast Note : Shading denotes recession. The 10-Year Consumer Price Inflation Forecast data come from the Survey of Professional Forecasters Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Survey of Professional Forecasters | Chapter during the preceding two years. The faster pace of growth in was accounted for by take-home wages and salaries as well as hourly benefits It was not however in employer-paid health insurance which slowed to a 2.4-percent increase during down from percent during As can be seen from Figure increases in nominal hourly compensation have been running lower than long-term price inflation expectations for the entire post-2008 period. The low increases in hourly compensation relative to prices are notable because if the labor share of nonfarm business output were to be stable hourly compensation growth would exceed output price inflation ( in the nonfarm business sector ) by the rate of productivity growth That real hourly compensation growth has been below productivity growth suggests that the elevated unemployment rate and the overall slack in the labor market have suppressed hourly compensation growth since The Long-Term Outlook The 10-Year Forecast Although real GDP growth averaged percent during the four-year period through major components of private domestic demand point to faster growth in Meanwhile insofar as inflation remains low and stable the supply side does not appear to impose near-term constraints Although Federal fiscal policy has generally increased the level of output ( as discussed in Chapter ) the year-to-year decline in the deficit-to-GDP ratio implies that Federal fiscal policy subtracted from real GDP growth from FY through FY The Administration projects that the deficit-to-GDP ratio will edge up in FY under the terms of the bipartisan budget agree ment for FY that Congress approved in mid-December With a strengthening State and local sector fiscal actions will likely turn from being a drag to slightly expansionary in For consumers faster job growth and a pickup in nominal and real wage gains in will probably boost spending in These income gains following a multiyear period of successful deleveraging leave consumers in an improved financial posi tion. Beyond the income gains the increases in housing and stock-market wealth during the past three years will probably also support strong growth in consumer spending in Business investment also shows brighter prospects for growth in than in earlier years. Businesses will need new facilities equipment and intellectual property to service growing demand The decline in price of imported petroleum during the last quarter of will if this lower price persists save American businesses and consumers about $ billion in or enough to boost real GDP by percent The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Table Administration Economic Forecast Nominal GDP Real GDP ( chaintype ) GDP price index ( chaintype ) Consumer price index ( CPIU ) Unemployment rate ( percent ) Percent change Q4-to-Q4 Interest rate 91-day Treasury bills ( percent ) Interest rate 10year Treasury notes ( percent ) Level calendar year ( actual ) Note : These forecasts were based on data available as of November and were used for the FY Budget. The interest rate on 91-day T-bills is measured on a secondary-market discount basis Source : The forecast was done jointly with the Council of Economic Advisers the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget But not all signals are green and the United States faces headwinds from abroad. The available indicators suggest that the economies of Japan and our euro area trading partners are sagging. A slowdown abroad not only reduces our exports but also raises risks of financial and other spillovers to the U.S. economy | Chapter With the unemployment rate in December at percent the labor force participation rate still below its expected level given demographic trends the share of those working part-time for economic reasons still ele vated and the capacity utilization rate in manufacturing at about percent the economy still has room to utilize more of its potential The Administration s economic forecast as finalized on November and presented in Table underpins the President s FY Budget By long-standing convention this forecast reflects the economic impact of the President s budgetary and other economic proposals which in the FY Budget primarily act to increase the growth rate of potential GDP as discussed in more detail in Box The Administration expects real GDP growth to increase from a projected 2.1-percent annual rate during the four quarters of to percent during ( Data released after the final forecast show a faster-than-expected growth rate during of percent rather than percent. ) The long-term projections for and beyond as is standard for the Administration s Budget forecast assume enactment of the President s policies including substantial investments in infrastructure reforms to the tax and immigration systems liberalization of trade and deficit reduction all of which will work to support growth ( Box ) Real GDP is projected to grow percent at an annual rate during the eight quarters of and and then to grow percent during All of these growth rates exceed the estimated rate of potential real GDP growth which is percent annually over the long run. As a conse quence the unemployment rate is likely to fall eventually averaging percent in and This level below the Administration s estimate of percent for the rate of unemployment consistent with stable inflation can be expected to incrementally raise inflation. The core PCE price index increased by only percent during the four quarters of By however consumer price inflation is expected to stabilize at percent for the PCE price index and percent for the consumer price index Nominal interest rates are currently low because the economy has not fully healed from the last recession while monetary policy has kept rates low across a wide range of debt securities with long maturities. Consistent with the Federal Reserve s forward policy guidance at the time of the forecast interest rates are projected to rise as the expected period of very low shortterm rates diminishes. Eventually real interest rates ( that is nominal rates less the projected rate of inflation ) are predicted to be near but a bit below their historical average. These interest-rate paths are close to those pro jected by professional economists. During the past several years consensus forecasts for long-term interest rates and long-term economic growth have The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box : Policy Proposals to Raise Long-Run Potential Output A key element of the Administration s economic forecast is the growth rate of real GDP in later years of the budget window once the economy s cyclical recovery is complete. Although there is considerable uncertainty around the longer-term outlook this part of the forecast is critically important because it attempts to summarize the economy s long-run growth potential based solely on structural factors like the size of the labor force and worker productivity. The Administration projects that this long-run potential growth rate is percent a year. For refer ence the FOMC estimates a range of long-run output growth of to percent a year the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) puts this rate at percent a year during to and the October Blue Chip consensus panel forecasts an average growth rate of percent a year during the five years to The Administration s forecast for long-run potential output growth is at the high end of this range because consistent with longstanding Administration practice it incorporates the economic impact of the assumed enactment of the President s policy proposals that would expand the labor force and increase productivity. These proposals include : the productivity increases associated with immigration reform ; investments in surface transportation infrastructure and other areas ; business tax reform ; universal preschool and investments in child care that would boost female labor force participation ; the Trans-Pacific Partnership and other policies to expand cross-border trade and invest ment ; and approximately $ trillion in primary ( non-interest ) deficit reduction The President s agenda is expected to deliver a substantial lift to the economy s future prospects and would raise the level of long-run potential output by several percentage points. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) and International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) estimated that the President s agenda would add percent to GDP after five years larger than their estimate for any other G-7 economy. CBO ( 2014b ) also estimated positive effects from the President s proposals although that assessment likely understates the benefits because it included neither trade agreements nor business tax reform Immigration reform. The policy proposal with the single largest effect on long-run potential output is immigration reform. The President continues to support comprehensive immigration reform along the lines of the bipartisan Border Security Economic Opportunity and Immigration Modernization Act that passed the U.S. Senate in June CBO ( ) has estimated that this legislation if enacted would | Chapter raise the level of real GDP by percent after years. This effect is large because immigration reform would benefit the economy through a multitude of channels including counteracting the effects of an aging native-born population attracting highly skilled immigrants that engage in innovative or entrepreneurial activities and enabling better jobmatching for currently undocumented workers who are offered a path to earned citizenship. Much of the overall effect is due to an expanded workforce a factor already reflected in the budget savings from immigration reform and thus not added to the forecast to avoid double counting. However percentage point of the total 10-year effect is due to increased total factor productivity which may be included in the economic forecast without double counting. A portion of these benefits will be realized as a result of the administrative actions announced by President Obama in November ( CEA ) Investments in surface transportation infrastructure and other areas. The Administration s FY Budget includes $ billion over years in additional surface transportation infrastructure investment relative to a plausible baseline. The budget also provides for about $ billion in additional funding in both the non-defense and defense discretionary categories over the next two years with additional funding in future years. A substantial fraction of this spending will be devoted to investments in physical infrastructure research and development or education and training all of which can help to boost productivity in the years ahead. Notably the IMF ( ) recently found that given the current underutilization of resources in many advanced economies a percent of GDP permanent increase in public infrastructure investment could raise output by as much as percent after years Business tax reform. President Obama s framework for business tax reform issued in sets out a series of changes that would strengthen the economy in three main ways. First the President s plan would encourage investment in the United States. Second by moving to a more neutral tax system the proposal would result in a more efficient allocation of capital. And third to the degree the new system better addresses externalities for example with a more generous research and development credit it would also increase total factor productivity and therefore growth. The precise effects of these changes are difficult to quantify but have the potential to be sizeable ( See Chapter of this Report for more discussion ) Policies to boost female labor force participation. President Obama has pursued policies that enable all workers to participate in the labor force to their fullest desire by making it easier for workers to balance career and family responsibilities. The Administration s FY The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Budget calls for tripling the maximum tax credit for child care to $ for young children while enabling more middle-class families to receive the maximum credit. In addition the President has proposed every year since a Federal-State partnership that would provide all four-year olds from low- and moderate-income families with access to high-quality preschool. Finally the Budget calls for technical assistance to help States implement and develop paid parental leave programs. A growing empiri cal literature on the responsiveness of labor supply to family-friendly policies suggests that implementation of these measures could materially increase female labor force participation and GDP. ( See Chapter in this Report for more discussion. ) Policies to expand cross-border trade and investment. The Administration is pursuing a number of international agreements that would boost cross-border trade and investment including the TransPacific Partnership ( TPP ) the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership ( T-TIP ) an expansion of the Information Technology Agreement a Trade in Services Agreement an Environmental Goods Agreement and a Trade Facilitation Agreement. While the details of TPP are still evolving one study supported by the Peterson Institute for International Economics ( Petri and Plummer ) found that TPP could raise U.S. real income by percent over approximately years The European Commission ( ) has estimated a roughly similar effect of T-TIP on the U.S. economy amounting to an increase of percent of GDP in ( See Chapter in this Report for more discussion. ) Deficit reduction. CBO s February analysis of the macroeco nomic effects of alternative budgetary paths finds that a hypothetical $ trillion in primary deficit reduction over years raises the long-term level of real GDP by percent. This effect arises because lower Federal deficits translate into higher national saving lower interest rates and in turn greater private investment. The Administration s FY Budget proposal includes $ trillion in primary deficit reduction relative to the Administration s plausible baseline enough to stabilize and begin to reduce the National debt-to-GDP ratio fallen. The link between long-term growth prospects and long-term interest rates is examined in Box GDP Growth over the Long Term As discussed earlier the growth rate of the economy over the long run is determined by the growth of its supply-side components including those | Chapter governed by demographics and technological change. The growth rate that characterizes the long-run trend in real U.S. GDP or potential GDP plays an important role in guiding the Administration s long-run forecast. For the first three years of the forecast interval--2015 and 2017--real GDP growth is projected to average percent at an annual rate as the economy moves back to its full potential before shifting thereafter to an average of percent the Administration s estimate of the long-term rate of real GDP growth. These growth rates are slower than historical averages because of the aging of the baby-boom generation into the retirement years. The potential real GDP projections are based on the assumption that the President s full set of policy proposals which would boost long-run output are enacted ( See Box ) Table shows the Administration s forecast for the contribution of each supply-side factor to the growth in potential real GDP : the workingage population the rate of labor force participation the employed share of the labor force the ratio of nonfarm business employment to household employment the length of the workweek labor productivity and the ratio of real GDP to nonfarm output. The two columns of Table show the average annual growth rate for each factor during a long period of history and over the forecast horizon. The first column shows the long-run average growth rates between the business-cycle peak of and the latest quarter available when the forecast was finalized in mid-November Many of these variables show substantial fluctuations within business cycles so that long-period growth rates must be examined to uncover underlying trends The second column shows average projected growth rates between the third quarter of and the fourth quarter of ; that is the entire -year interval covered by the Administration forecast The population is projected to grow percent a year on average over the projection period ( line column ) following the latest projec tion from the Social Security Administration. Over this same period the labor force participation rate is projected to decline percent a year ( line column ) This projected decline in the labor force participation rate primarily reflects a negative demographic trend originating in the aging of the baby-boom generation into retirement. During the next couple of years however rising labor demand due to the continuing business-cycle The one exception is that the forecast does not reflect the increase in the size of labor force attributable to the President s immigration reform. The reason is that the budgetary impact of the added GDP associated with this change is already incorporated in the budget as a policy line so including this effect in the economic forecast would in effect double count it. CBO estimates that the President s immigration reforms would also expand total factor productivity but did not incorporate this effect into their budgetary estimates ; as a result the productivity effects are included in the Administration s forecast The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box : Forecasting the Long-Run Interest Rate A key input to the U.S. economic forecast is a projection for the long-run nominal interest rate. Recent patterns in bond markets raise a number of questions about the future path of interest rates. Nominal and real ( inflation-adjusted ) interest rates have been declining since the mid-1980s. In the aftermath of the financial crisis the Federal Reserve conducted large-scale purchases of longer-term securities pushing long-term real interest rates down even below zero. Despite this low rate of return there has been a strong global demand for U.S. government bonds as a safe haven for savings including demand by foreign central banks for dollar reserves Figure 2-viii shows the nominal interest rate and the ex post real interest rate for 10-year Treasury securities. The ex post real interest rate is defined as the nominal rate less realized inflation ( whereas the ex ante real interest rate is the nominal rate less expected inflation ) The figure illustrates the 30-year decline in ex post real and nominal interest rates and the behavior of real and nominal rates across different monetary policy regimes Percent Figure 2-viii Real and Nominal 10-Year Rate Bretton Woods Era Modern Inflation Stability Era Nominal Real Great Inflation Era Note : Shading denotes different monetary regimes Source : Robert J. Shiller Yale University | Chapter Economic growth and the long-run real interest rate. The basic general equilibrium analysis of real and nominal interest rates originated with Irving Fisher ( ) who characterized the equilibrium relation ship between the real return on investment and the compensation to sav ers for postponing consumption. The Ramsey optimal-growth model is a convenient framework for conveying these fundamental relationships The model and its extensions characterize the behavior of the economy on its steady-state growth path ( Ramsey ; Cass ; Koopmans ) The Ramsey model is based on the dynamic saving and investment decisions of a representative household. In a balanced-growth equilib rium without uncertainty optimal household decision-making implies a formula for the real interest rate : r = MPK = g ( ) Here MPK denotes the marginal product of capital. When households have perfect foresight of the future the marginal product of capital in steady state depends on the rate of discount on future income ( ) the per capita growth rate of the economy ( g ) and the rate at which people are willing to substitute between current and future income ( 1/ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution ) If growth is expected to be high people will wish to borrow against their future higher income to consume more now and this will drive up the interest rate. At some point the higher interest rate will discourage borrowing and restore equilibrium between the return on capital investment ( which reflects the economy s ability to produce income in the future ) and the household s willingness to postpone consumption In the balanced growth equilibrium ( where all variables grow at the same rate ) the marginal product of capital is constant. The rate of population growth does not affect the steady-state interest rate because on the balanced growth path the household saves enough for future generations to keep the ratio of capital per unit of effective labor con stant. In a frictionless world where capital adjusts instantaneously to changes in the population or to productivity ( ) would hold at all times More generally capital adjusts with a lag and ( ) is more appropriate as a characterization of the relationship between productivity and interest rates in the long run Under the illustrative assumptions that = and = the most recent Administration forecast of labor productivity growth of percent per year generates an approximation of the long-run real interest rate of percent. ( With these values for and the Ramsey model s prediction is roughly consistent with actual real interest rates over the period ; however the model s interest-rate implications are The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | reasonably robust to a range of other combinations. ) Note that this forecast abstracts from uncertainty so that there is no risk premium. This forecast also does not factor in inflation. Given the number of assump tions needed and the uncertainty about parameter values and future productivity growth the forecast of the real rate of interest is approxi mate at best. What can be said with some confidence is that a reduction in future labor productivity growth should be reflected in a reduction in the long-run real interest rate Moving away from the strict assumptions of the model other eco nomic forces will potentially affect the interest rate. Such forces include declining rates of population growth the aging of the population and a decline in the government debt-to-GDP ratio. The magnitudes of these effects are hard to quantify but theory suggests that such shifts will exert downward pressure on interest rates Global factors are also likely to play a role. In a world with integrated markets the global real interest rate is determined by the equality of the global supply of saving and world investment demand as illustrated in Figure 2-ix. The gap between saving and investment in emerging markets was especially large in the mid-2000s contributing to the global saving glut that helped to fuel asset bubbles in financial markets. The emerging market gap has declined and the IMF projects it will be near zero by the end of Figure 2-ix also shows that global saving and investment have trended up in the post-crisis period and that trend is projected to continue for some years. If data measurement Percent of GDP Figure 2-ix Global Saving and Investment Saving Investment Saving Investment Advanced Economies Saving Note : Dotted lines indicate forecasts Source : International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook ( October ) | Chapter World Investment Emerging Economies were perfect global saving would equal global investment exactly Accordingly it is not the gap but the levels of both series that are of inter est. The large-scale deleveraging by households and by governments has resulted in an expansion of global saving that has exerted downward pressure on interest rates. Past experience with deleveraging suggests that this process could take a long while indicating that low real interest rates may be part of the global landscape for some time to come Financial markets and the long-run nominal rate. An alternative forecast of the long-run rate is based on information from financial markets that incorporates real-world uncertainties into asset prices. The nominal interest rate on a long-term bond can be decomposed into three components : the real return on rolling over short-term assets during the holding period of the bond the expected rate of inflation and a term premium that compensates for the risk borne by the investor over the life of the bond. Precisely defined the interest rate on long-term nominal bonds also includes a liquidity premium ( because markets for some securities may be thin ) and a credit risk premium reflecting the solvency of the lender. However most financial economists assume these last two components are minuscule for the U.S. Treasury market. On those assumptions forecasts of the short-term real interest rate expected inflation and the term premium suffice to forecast the long-run nominal interest rate Inflation expectations are a major determinant of the yield on Treasuries which guarantee a nominal rate of return. The difference between nominal Treasury yields and the guaranteed real rate of return on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities ( TIPS ) is usually referred to as the breakeven rate of inflation compensation. The current 10-year breakeven inflation compensation rate is percent and the 10-year breakeven inflation compensation rate starting in is percent Though often cited as a gauge of inflation expectations the breakeven inflation compensation rate reflects more than market inflation expecta tions : also embedded in it are a risk premium that reflects the covariance of inflation with wealth a liquidity premium that reflects the relative ease of converting the assets to cash and other factors that reflect the relative demands for nominal and inflation-indexed securities. A point to note in interpreting the data is that TIPS are indexed to the CPI whereas the Federal Reserve s inflation target of percent a year applies to the PCE which ( as noted earlier in this chapter ) tends to rise more slowly than the CPI. Inflation expectations can be inferred from surveys however and these indicate long-run rates of expected inflation close to the Federal Reserve s target The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | The expected short-term rate is based on a forecast of monetary policy. The median projection released by the FOMC suggests a future Federal funds rate of percent. Historically the Federal funds rate is slightly higher than the rate on a three-month Treasury security imply ing an expected three-month Treasury rate of roughly percent. This rate would correspond to a projected short-term real interest rate of percent a year with inflation expectations at percent a year There is an extensive empirical literature that estimates the term premium which reflects the extent to which the long-term nominal bond is a good hedge for other risks faced by the investor ( for example the covariance of the return on the bond with investor wealth and with inflation ) Recent financial data indicate that the term premium has been falling and is in the neighborhood of percent for a ten-year bond. It is possible that future changes in monetary policy or shifts in investor beliefs about the Federal Reserve s reaction function could reverse the downward trend in the term premium but most forecasters predict that the term premium will remain low in the near future. Adding a term premium of percent to the short-term nominal rate of percent suggests a long-term ( 10-year ) nominal rate of percent Although reached through different reasoning the rate on 10-year Treasury notes implied by financial markets is in the same neighbor hood as that based on the steady-state prediction of a Ramsey model This is not surprising if the Ramsey model is a valid description of the economy Federal Reserve policy and market expectations about the future will ultimately conform to the equilibrium conditions in the Ramsey model. There is a gap however between the rate implied by the Ramsey model presented here which abstracts from inflation and uncertainty and therefore does not include a term premium and the rate implied by financial markets which in principle incorporate all risks but could be strongly affected by current economic conditions. Fully reconciling the two requires a lower expected productivity growth rate a higher elasticity of intertemporal substitution or a much smaller term premium than seems realistic to most economists recovery is expected to offset some of this downward trend. Young adults in particular have been preparing themselves for labor-force entry through additional education. The share of young adults aged to enrolled in school between January and December rose well above its trend enough to account for the entire decline in the labor force participation rate for this age group over this period. As these young adults complete their education most are expected to enter or reenter the labor force | Chapter Table Supply-Side Components of Actual and Potential Real GDP Growth Growth ratea History Component Civilian noninstitutional population aged Labor force participation rate Employed share of the labor force Ratio of nonfarm business employment to household employment Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business ) Output per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) c Ratio of real GDP to nonfarm business outputc Sum : Actual real GDPc Memo : Potential real GDPd Output per worker differential : GDP vs Forecast : Q2 to : Q3b : Q3 to : Q4 nonfarme a All contributions are in percentage points at an annual rate forecast finalized November Total may not add up due to rounding b : Q2 was a business-cycle peak. : Q3 is the latest quarter with available data c Real GDP and real nonfarm business output are measured as the average of income- and product-side measures d Computed as ( real GDP line ) less * ( the employed share of the labor force line ) e Real GDP per household worker less nonfarm business output per nonfarm business worker. This can be shown to equal ( line ) ( line ) Note : Population labor force and household employment have been adjusted for discontinuities in the population series. Nonfarm business employment and the workweek come from the Labor Productivity and Costs database maintained by the Bureau of Labor Statistics Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey Labor Productivity and Costs ; Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts ; Department of the Treasury ; Office of Management and Budget ; CEA calculations The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | The employed share of the labor force which is equal to one minus the unemployment rate is expected to increase at an average percent a year over the next years. It is expected to be unchanged after when the unemployment rate converges to the rate consistent with stable inflation The workweek is projected to be roughly flat during the forecast period somewhat less of a decline than its long-term historical trend yearly growth of percent. The workweek is expected to stabilize because some of the demographic forces pushing it down are largely exhausted and because a longer workweek is projected to compensate for the anticipated decline in the labor force participation rate in what will eventually become an economy with a tight labor supply Labor productivity is projected to increase percent a year over the entire forecast interval ( line column ) the same as the average growth rate from to ( line column ) Productivity tends to grow faster in the nonfarm business sector than for the economy as a whole because productivity in the government and household sectors of the economy is presumed ( by a national-income accounting convention ) not to grow ( that is output in those two sectors grows only through the use of more produc tion inputs ) The difference in these growth rates is expected to subtract percent a year during the 10-year projection period similar to the percent a year decline during the long-term historical interval ( line columns and ) This productivity differential can be shown to be equal to the sum of two other growth rates in the table : the ratio of nonfarm business employment to household employment ( line ) and the ratio of real GDP to nonfarm business output ( line ) Summing the growth rates of all of its components real GDP is pro jected to rise at an average percent a year over the projection period ( line column ) somewhat faster than the percent annual growth rate for potential real GDP ( line column ) Actual GDP is expected to grow faster than potential GDP primarily because of the projected rise in the employ ment rate ( line column ) as millions of currently unemployed workers find jobs over the next two years Real potential GDP ( line column ) is projected to grow more slowly than the long-term historical growth rate of percent a year ( line column ) As discussed earlier the projected slowdown in real poten tial GDP growth primarily reflects the lower projected growth rate of the working-age population and the retirement of the baby-boom cohort. If the effects of immigration reform on labor-force size were incorporated into this forecast however then it would show a higher potential real GDP growth rate | Chapter Upside and Downside of Forecast Risks. Like any forecast the Administration s economic forecast comes with risk but several are worth enumerating here. Among the upside risks is a sustained low price for imported petroleum. Much of the decline in petroleum prices occurred after the Administration forecast was finalized in mid-November ; at that time oil-price futures markets anticipated general recovery in prices. Since then the long-term futures prices have fallen. The housing sector also has some upside potential given the current low level of household formation and its potential for increase. On the downside persistent European risks of deflation and slow growth continue to constrain the global economy. There are also concerns about a slowdown in China and the speed with which Japan will rebound from the effects of the consumption tax hike. Over the longer-run there are some downside risks to the estimate of potential growth insofar as more recent lower productivity growth rates continue Conclusion The economy continued to strengthen during especially in the labor market with robust employment gains and deep declines in unem ployment. The labor market saw the fastest pace of job gains since extending the longest streak of uninterrupted private-sector job growth on record and contributing to an American recovery that has outpaced most of its competitors and left a nation well-prepared for continued resilience Conditions are ripe for another year of robust growth in as progress in consumer deleveraging and gains in household wealth have progressed in a way that should support further growth in consumer spending. Residential investment is also likely to expand as the financial constraints that have held back mortgage financing are gradually relaxed and demographic pressures for a larger housing stock become evident. Uncertainty over fiscal policy is lower than in earlier years because of Congress December budget agreement. Recent declines in imported prices for petroleum will boost the real income of domestic consumers and reduce near-term inflation. Core inflation is low and below the Federal Reserve s target and so some upward drift in inflation is projected The U.S. economy strengthened last year against a backdrop of relatively weak growth in the rest of the world. This differential is likely to persist into as growth projections for our major trading partners in Europe Japan and some emerging markets are currently less favorable than for the United States. This will dampen demand growth for U.S. exports The last several years have seen an improvement in the U.S. current account The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | balance ( a falling deficit ) Whether this trend continues will also depend in part on relative demand conditions at home and abroad. Looking ahead some of the most important decisions that we make as a Nation are the structural policies that influence long-term growth. The President s Budget sets forth a number of policies that can be expected to increase the long-term growth rate of potential GDP Such policies also aim to boost aggregate demand in the near term and to improve our long-term competitiveness while promising fiscal restraint over the long run. They are an essential complement to policies that make sure this growth is shared by the middle class and those working to get into the middle class | Chapter C H A P T E R ACHIEVEMENTS AND CHALLENGES IN THE U.S. LABOR MARKET A fundamental metric for judging an economy s performance is its suc cess in providing abundant job opportunities that pay good wages and provide an opportunity to get ahead. Five-and-one-half years ago in the wake of the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression the U.S. economy faced a massive challenge as GDP shrank and the number of jobless workers rose to more than million. Since then a successful multifaceted policy response including actions by the President Congress and the Federal Reserve combined with the determination of the American people has enabled the U.S. economy to dig out of that deep hole putting more people back to work reducing the unemployment rate and creating a virtuous cycle in which higher consumer purchasing power supports greater economic activity and job creation. After four years of recovery in employment in the unemployment rate declined at its most rapid rate in nearly three decades. By the end of the year it had fallen to percent close to its pre-recession average of percent.1 But the United States labor market still has more work to do to achieve the full health that comes with not just low levels of unemployment but also a labor market that encourages labor force participation supports quality jobs and facilitates productive matching of workers and positions all of which are essential to creating well-paying jobs and supporting robust family incomes This chapter begins by discussing the substantial progress that has been made in healing the labor market since and the acceleration in progress seen throughout By October the unemployment rate had fallen more rapidly over the preceding months than in any 12-month Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations. Throughout this chapter unless otherwise specified data and statistics are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey or CEA calculations from these data period since The sharp drop in unemployment came amid a stabiliza tion in the labor force participation rate and for the year as a whole busi nesses added million jobs the most in any year since Moreover nominal wage growth for production and nonsupervisory workers a group that represents about percent of workers who have lower earnings on average continued to rise slightly faster than inflation a reversal from what had been seen earlier in the recovery. Real wage growth was aided by low levels of inflation including declining prices in the fourth quarter of Moreover workers take-home pay was helped by the fact that a typical worker s contribution to employer-sponsored family health insur ance coverage rose at roughly one-half the rate seen on average prior to the recession continuing a recent trend of subdued health cost growth. Finally continued to see the economy shift away from part-time work toward full-time work as all of the employment growth was in full-time jobs. Over the course of the recovery the share of the labor market in full-time jobs has increased and by the end of the number of Americans holding full-time jobs had increased more from January than it had added total jobs over the same period Despite these positive developments more work remains to both complete the cyclical recovery and address underlying structural issues that predate the recession some of which have been present for decades. As described in Chapter three key factors shape the economic situation of the middle class : productivity growth the distribution of income and labor force participation. As Chapter also notes due to a combination of longterm economic challenges and the Great Recession the middle class has seen little improvement in real incomes since despite productivity growth signaling at least one area where much work remains to be done in the labor market and overall economy After reviewing the notable progress in the labor market over this chapter steps back to consider a set of five long-run issues the labor market must address. These are : i ) a long-standing decline in the participation rate that has been compounded by the recession and the retirement boom ; ii ) a rapidly recovering long-term unemployment rate that nonetheless remains elevated ; iii ) a similar pattern of rapid decline but continued elevation in the rate of people working part time but who are seeking full-time employment ; iv ) cyclical improvements in labor market fluidity that are set against a back drop of a long-term decline in a variety of metrics of labor market fluidity or labor market churn ; and v ) real wage growth that is beginning to pick up but is still insufficient. These phenomena have to varying degrees been building up in the years or decades before the Great Recession and in many cases are following patterns similar to those in other recent recessions | Chapter particularly those from on. This suggests that these issues are linked for example when a shock hits the economy less labor market fluidity can result in more long-term unemployment and part-time employment and a lower participation rate than would occur if the labor market were more dynamic. In many cases the increasingly rapid recovery in the labor market will help to address these challenges. In some cases these trends may reflect a natural progression that would be undesirable to reverse such as rising retirements among aging workers. However additional policy steps are needed to counteract the continued effects of the Great Recession as well as longer-term trends that predated it. Consequently this chapter concludes by laying out key elements of the President s middle-class economics agenda which includes policies aimed at growing and supporting middle-class families strengthening the labor market and expanding economic oppor tunity. As the past several years suggest economic policies that focus on strengthening the middle class create a stronger foundation for shared and sustainable growth in the years to come The State of the U.S. Labor Market in Since the end of the Great Recession in the economy has made enormous strides toward recovery in terms of output labor market indicators consumer confidence and numerous other measures. Perhaps no recent economic development has been more surprising than the rapid fall in the unemployment rate and commensurate pickup in the rate of job growth in which far outperformed forecast expectations. From its average of percent the unemployment rate hit percent in October ; but as of December the rate stands at percent having recovered percent of the way back to its pre-recession average.2 Notably marked the strongest year of job growth since and the strongest year of private-sector job growth since December s 5.6-per cent unemployment rate was achieved roughly five years ahead of consensus forecasts made as recently as as shown in Figure In part due to a vigorous policy response to the economic crisis the United States is in a sustained economic recovery. The Administration s early actions including the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of and middle-class tax cuts helped catalyze this recovery : the Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) estimates that between early and the end of Throughout this chapter the phrase pre-recession average refers to the average between December and December the most recent expansionary period before the Great Recession Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Figure Actual and Consensus Forecast Unemployment Rate Percent of Labor Force Forecast Actual Forecast Forecast Forecast Forecast Note : Annual forecasts are current as of March of the stated year. Dashed line represents December value ( percent ) Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; Blue Chip Economic Indicators the Recovery Act added a total of more than million job years to the economy ( CEA 2014b ) In the rate of decline in the unemployment rate picked up to an average of percentage point per month higher than the rate of decline from to with much of the decline reflected in lower long-term unemployment. Although the long-term unemployed account for only about one-third of all unemployed these reductions in long-term unemployment accounted for about two-thirds of the total unemployment decline in Falling long-term unemployment combined with a stable participation rate in suggests that the long-term unemployed are going back to work at higher rates ( Cajner and Ratner ) The improvement in the health of the labor market is also apparent in a range of labor market indicators as shown in Figure The headline unemployment rate accounts for jobless individuals who are actively seeking employment. Broader measures of labor market underutilization include individuals who are not looking for work because they believe no jobs are available ( discouraged workers ) ; others available for work but who have not looked for work in the past month ( other marginally attached ) ; and those who are working part-time but would like full-time work ( part-time for economic reasons ) All of these indicators tell a broadly consistent story : the U.S. economic recovery has made considerable progress but it is not | Chapter Figure Elevation and Recovery of Broader Measures of Unemployment Remaining Elevation as of December Percent Increase to Great Recession Peak Percent Recovered Overall Unemployment Rate ( UR ) U-4 ( Unemployed Discouraged ) U-5 ( U-4 Other Marginally Attached ) U-6 ( U-5 Part Time for Economic Reasons ) Short-Term ( Weeks or Fewer ) UR Long-Term ( Weeks or More ) UR Percent Change in Indicator Relative to Average Note : All rates are expressed as a percent of the labor force and are seasonally adjusted Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations yet complete. Important differences remain in the progress of the recovery across measures however including the continued elevation of long-term unemployment Relative to many other advanced economies the United States experienced a large increase in unemployment during the crisis and yet has also had the strongest recovery since the peak of the crisis as shown in Figure Between the first quarter of and the final quarter of U.S. unemployment rose from percent to percent. Over the same period unemployment in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) countries ( excluding the United States ) increased from an average of percent to percent.3 Unemployment in the euro area over this period rose from percent to percent The most significant differences have emerged since early U.S unemployment steadily declined and was down to percent by the third quarter of over percent below its recession maximum. In contrast average unemployment in both the non-U.S. OECD and euro area has made CEA weighted OECD and euro area countries by GDP ( in millions of USD ) so that countries with larger economies received more weight than smaller countries. The United States is excluded from the OECD weighted average. Accordingly these figures differ from OECD s published unweighted average unemployment rate across OECD countries Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Box : Unemployment Across Gender Race and Ethnicity Groups : The Situation for Men of Color Men of color have much higher rates of unemployment than do White men. For example in December adult African-American men had an unemployment rate of percent percentage points higher than that of adult White men. Among adult Hispanic men the unemployment rate was percent in December percentage point higher than that of adult White men. Racial gaps in unemploy ment have narrowed over time but less progress has been made among African-American men for whom the gap in the unemployment rate relative to Whites has fallen the least Figure 3-i Labor Force Participation Rate Gap Between African-American and White Youth by Gender : Ages to Gap in Percentage Points Young Men Dec-2014 Young Women Note : Data are differences between the 12-month moving averages of the non-seasonally adjusted labor force participation rates of African-American and White youth ages Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations In addition to higher unemployment rates there are also differ ences in labor force participation which mean that men of color often have even lower rates of employment than the unemployment rates alone would suggest. The gap in participation is especially problematic among young men since early-life labor market experiences have significant impacts on later-life labor market success ( Edelman Holzer and Offner ; Raaum and Roed ) The labor force participation rates of young White and African-American women have begun to converge since the 1990s while convergence among young men largely The literature finds persistent and significant impacts of post-graduation labor market conditions and opportunities on later-in-life wages and employment | Chapter stalled until the late 2000s. In December young African-American women s participation was percentage points lower than young White women s while young African-American men s participation was percentage points lower than young White men s To speed U.S. progress in closing the racial disparities in labor market outcomes the Administration has made tackling unemployment among minority men a priority under the My Brother s Keeper Initiative The initiative supports the education and employment of AfricanAmerican Hispanic and Native American men all of whom experience elevated unemployment and lower participation relative to men in other racial groups little progress. Unemployment across the OECD excluding the United States is on average roughly unchanged from its peak. As of the fourth quarter of the average unemployment rate across non-U.S. OECD countries was percent. Unemployment across euro zone countries fared worse with a decline in unemployment in followed by a sharp increase between and mid-2013. These international averages naturally abstract from varied experiences among OECD countries : Germany s unemploy ment rate fell between the first quarter of and the first quarter of while Spain s unemployment rate more than doubled. Nonetheless the Percent Figure Unemployment in Non-U.S. OECD Euro Area and United States Euro Area ( Weighted ) United States : Q4 Non-U.S. OECD ( Weighted ) Note : OECD ( excluding the United States ) and euro area averages are weighted by member countries ' GDP Source : Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development Harmonized Unemployment Rate and GDP series ; CEA calculations Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | recovery in the U.S. unemployment rate compares favorably against the general experience of other advanced economies Behind the improvement in U.S. unemployment is a historic record of steady job growth albeit one that follows historic job losses. As described in Chapter total employment increased by million jobs in the strongest year of the recovery and average monthly job growth was as shown in Figure The private sector has added jobs for consecutive months through December the longest period of con tinual job growth on record In private-sector employment growth was particularly strong in industries that traditionally provide good middle-class jobs such as con struction and professional and business services. Since February more than manufacturing jobs have been added an increase of percent The average workweek for production and non-supervisory workers in manufacturing has also increased to near its highest level since World War II. Over the same period million jobs have been added in professional and business services an percent increase The labor market recovery has been generally shared across the full spectrum of American workers. Table shows that looking across the Figure Average Monthly Job Growth by Year Average Monthly Job Gain/Loss Thousands Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Employment Statistics | Chapter Table Tracking the Recovery Across Race Gender Age and Level of Educational Attainment Remaining Elevation as of December ( Percent ) Percent Recovered PreRecession Average Percent Increase to Great Recession Peak Overall Unemployment Rate ( UR ) Male UR Female UR White UR African-American UR Hispanic UR Asian UR Less than High School UR High School Graduates UR Some College UR Age UR Age UR College Graduates UR Note : Asian unemployment rate is a 12-month moving average of not seasonally adjusted data Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations population by racial gender and educational differences most groups are at least percent recovered and those that have not reached that point are close to it The percentage-point fall in the annual unemployment rate in was the largest such drop since and some groups experienced even larger declines in unemployment. Both the Hispanic and AfricanAmerican annual unemployment rates fell by percentage point in one of the largest declines in series history. As of December the African-American unemployment rate had recovered percent of the way back to its pre-recession average compared to percent for Hispanics percent for Asians and percent for White workers The labor market gained strength in and numerous indicators illustrate that the recovery is robust. Now that much of the direct challenges of the recession are behind us the United States must turn its attention to ensuring that the benefits of the recovery are widespread benefiting more Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | middle-class families. This requires addressing five longer-run challenges in the labor market. The following sections discuss each of these challenges in greater detail Labor Force Participation The decline in the unemployment rate in the economic recovery has been driven by the increased pace of job creation. In addition to the decline in the traditional unemployment rate a broader measure that also includes discouraged workers and people who would like to work if a job were avail able ( U-5 ) has come down from a high of percent in October to percent in December or percent of the way back to its pre-recession average At the same time the economy has continued to go through a sub stantial change in labor force participation. Since peaking in the first quarter of at percent the labor force participation rate declined to in the fourth quarter of A large portion of this decline is explained by the lower participation rates of an aging labor force and in spite of continued demographic pressures in this direction the participation rate has held steady since October This suggests that a stronger labor market is bringing people back into the labor force partially off-setting the increasing size of the retirement-age population. Nevertheless the participation rate is unlikely to return to its peak rate in the near future. This section examines the role of the aging baby boomers in driving declining participation as well as the lesser but important roles of a decades-long downward trend in male labor force participation and a more recent slight trend decline in female labor force participation discussed in Chapter A Longer-Term Perspective on Labor Force Participation The labor force participation rate defined as the share of the population ages and older who are working or who are actively seeking employment is an important measure of labor market potential and health Labor force nonparticipation is not always a source of concern many nonparticipators are seniors enjoying their retirements young people investing in education or parents caring for their children. However low labor force participation particularly among people of prime working age ( ages through ) is evidence that we can do more to create job prospects and support workers. Moreover low labor force participation may mean that even when good economic times return mobilizing the pool of available workers will take more time | Chapter Box : Changes in Labor Force Participation for Different Subpopulations Overall the most important factor affecting the aggregate partici pation rate in the recession and recovery has been the aging of the popu lation. But there are a number of important trends and developments relevant for understanding the changes in participation of different subgroups of the population : Increased participation by older Americans which may be attributable to an increase in skills among this population and also to changes in Social Security retirement benefits ; Reduced participation by younger Americans as they stay in school longer ; Continuation of an at least 65-year long trend of declining male labor force participation which is especially stark for young minority men ; and Tapering of the long-term trend of increasing female labor force participation which dates back to before World War II All told these different trends and factors roughly offset each other but they are important for understanding these groups and for informing policy choices Table 3-i Labor Force Participation Rate by Selected Groups All Men Women Age Age Age White * Black * Hispanic * : Q4 Average Change Per Year ( Percentage Points ) * Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations. Not all groups have information starting in for those groups ( marked with a star ) the change is from the first year for which data is available Taking a longer view as in Figure the labor force participation rate increased from percent to percent between and As described in Chapter this increase during the Age of Participation can be entirely accounted for by increased participation among women : over this Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Figure Labor Force Participation by Gender Percent of Civilian Noninstitutional Population Age Dec-2014 Men Overall Women Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey period the female participation rate increased from percent to per cent while the male participation rate fell from percent to percent Since however the participation rate has fallen from per cent to percent in the fourth quarter of with percentage points of this decrease occurring since the fourth quarter of While some of this time period coincides with the Great Recession it also coincides with the period when the eldest baby boomers entered their peak retirement years ; the first baby boomers turned in becoming eligible for Social Security. This demographic shift had been predicted to lower the participa tion rate well in advance of the Great Recession ( Aaronson et al. ) Although population aging explains much of the decline in labor force participation seen in recent years longer-run trends cyclical responses and other factors also affect participation. CEA evaluated these various factors in its comprehensive report The Labor Force Participation Rate Since : Causes and Policy Implications summarized in this chapter. This analysis finds that a combination of demographic changes and typical business-cycle effects can explain most but not all of the decrease since Decomposing the Decline in Participation Since The decline in labor force participation between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of can be decomposed into three parts : an | Chapter Figure Labor Force Participation Decomposition Percent of Civilian Noninstitutional Population Age Aging Trends Actual Cyclical Effects Residual : Q4 Note : Year axis denotes first quarter of year noted. See text for methodological details Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations aging population the economic downturn and a residual that is attribut able to other factors. Figure shows the decomposition of this decline over time based on CEA modeling. By the close of the participation rate was down percentage points since the end of Of this CEA analysis attributes points to long-run aging trends and point to poor business-cycle conditions. The remaining point is not due to either standard business cycle or aging trends.4 This residual component emerged in and grew over the subsequent few years CEA s finding that aging trends explain more than one-half of the decline in labor force participation over the course of the recession and recovery is consistent with a wide range of studies that have used a variety of methodological approaches to better understand the impact of various factors on the participation rate. These studies summarized in Table show that research finds that long-term trends such as aging account for between and percent of the participation decline over the recession These findings are not directly comparable as the time periods they study differ. Consequently CEA s model is estimated over the same time period as each of these studies with the results presented in the final two columns of Table CEA s model finds an aging effect that is between and percent of the decline depending on the time period being analyzed. CEA s The three components do not sum to the whole due to rounding Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Table Comparison of Participation Rate Estimates Time Period Shares of the Total Decline Trend Cycle CEA ( 2014c ) : Q4 : Q4 % % Beginning in CBO ( ) S. Aaronson et al. ( ) D. Aaronson et al. ( ) Erceg and Levin ( ) Fallick and Pingle ( ) Kudlyak ( ) Shierholz ( ) Van Zandweghe ( ) Aaronson et al. ( ) : Q4 : Q4 : Q4 : Q2 : Q4 : Q3 : Q4 : Q2 % % % % % % % % % Other time periods CEA ( ) Fujita ( ) Aaronson Davis and Hu ( ) : Q1 : Q4 : Q1 : Q4 % % % CEA Estimated Shares Over Same Time Period Source : Cited studies ; CEA calculations Trend Cycle % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % estimate of the aging effects accounting for slightly more than one-half of the decline between and the end of is therefore roughly in the mid-range of the literature The variation across estimates of the cyclical component in the final column shows that different magnitudes of this component in the literature are largely driven by the time period of analysis not variation in analytical methods. Comparing estimates from the literature to those from the CEA model in the same time period the CEA estimate of the cyclical effect is roughly in the middle of the estimates. The roles of each factor in explaining the overall change in participation are addressed below Aging Population Lower participation among baby boomers as they aged had been depressing the participation rate well before since participation begins to fall when workers reach their mid-50s. Both men and women decrease their participation by around percentage points between ages and and participate at even lower rates thereafter. CEA concludes that the aging population is the single most important factor depressing the participation rate accounting for of the percentage point decline or more than | Chapter Percentage Points Figure Detrended Participation Rate and ( Inverted ) Unemployment Gap Percentage Points : Q4 Participation Rate ( left axis ) Unemployment Gap ( right axis ) Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations one-half of the decline since the end of This finding is robust to dif ferent methods of modeling the effect of aging on participation as described in more detail in The Labor Force Participation Rate Since : Causes and Policy Implications ( CEA 2014c ) The effect of aging has also been growing in magnitude in recent years. The youngest baby boomers will not turn until so aging will continue to depress labor force participation in coming years Business-Cycle Effects Economic contractions historically result in both greater unemploy ment and lower labor force participation ( Elsby Hobijn and Sahin ) Therefore while movements in the participation rate over decades are driven largely by the long-term trends in the short- and medium term cyclical factors play a role Figure shows the cyclicality of the participation rate by comparing the detrended participation rate and the ( inverted ) detrended unemploy ment gap defined as the difference between the unemployment rate and CBO s estimate of the natural rate of unemployment.5 For example the detrended participation rate declined in the 1990s expansion and rose during the Great Recession. Visual inspection further suggests that move Detrending was performed using the methods described in CEA ( 2014c ) A trend component of each series was estimated using a semiparametric procedure. The trend components are then subtracted from the original data series to produce the series shown in Figure Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Box : Post-Recession Participation in the United States and United Kingdom In late the U.S. and U.K. economies exhibited some striking similarities. The two countries year-end unemployment rates were nearly identical at percent in the United States in December versus percent in the United Kingdom as of the three months ending in November. Moreover the International Monetary Fund predicted in October that the United Kingdom and the United States would see the fastest year-ahead GDP growth among G-7 economies although output in the United States currently exceeds its pre-crisis peak by a substan tially wider margin than in the United Kingdom However some elements of the labor market have followed very different paths in the two economies. The United Kingdom has seen overall labor force participation hold roughly steady since despite the fact that the demographically adjusted participation series for the United Kingdom show a downtrend similar to that for the United States ( Carney ) Yet more than a quarter of the increase in employment in the United Kingdom has been in part-time work whereas all of the jobs added back in the United States have been full-time. And while average wages in the United States have been roughly keeping pace with inflation U.K. workers have seen large declines in real earnings ( Figure 3-iii ) The average weekly inflation-adjusted paycheck for British private-sector workers is now more than percent below its average. In short the | Chapter United Kingdom experienced stable labor force participation at the same time that many jobs offered fewer work hours and lower pay To explain this set of circumstances Bank of England Governor Mark Carney ( ) has argued that the United Kingdom experienced a labor supply surge in the wake of the crisis with about million people joining the U.K. labor force. Carney suggested this was likely fueled by a number of factors including the need for households to rebuild savings or pay down debt in the wake of the financial crisis as well as policy changes that have raised the retirement age for public-sector workers and introduced more stringent job-search requirements for some welfare recipients. The U.K. government has also undertaken efforts to improve job search assistance for unemployed workers potentially facilitating faster matches of workers and positions Ultimately the differences between the United States and United Kingdom on key labor market variables are a puzzle that is not yet fully understood. To an extent some of the factors that have affected the United States and United Kingdom are similar for instance a high number of indebted households. It is clear that both the United States and the United Kingdom face the challenge of facilitating transitions for workers currently employed in lower-wage and -hour jobs to jobs offering higher wages and more full-time work. Nevertheless these dif ferent experiences are also a reminder of the many possible paths from recession to recovery Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | ments in the participation rate lag movements in the unemployment rate by perhaps a year or so. CEA estimates that business-cycle effects explain percentage point ( about one-sixth ) of the total decline in labor force partici pation between the end of and the end of As the labor market continues to recover business cycle effects should wane. For example cyclical factors depressed the participation rate by percentage point in when the unemployment rate was about percent but by the fourth quarter of the unemployment rate had fallen to percent and cyclical factors had shrunk to percentage point Other Factors While most of the decline in the participation rate since the end of is due to the combination of the aging population and standard cycli cal effects percentage point or a little over one-quarter of the decline is not fully understood. CEA s analysis finds that this portion of the decline is not explained by either the aging of the population or the normal cycli cal impact of the current recession. Between and the decline in participation is fully ( and at some points more than fully ) explained by the aging of the population and standard business-cycle effects. Beginning in however the labor force participation rate decline began to exceed what was predicted from aging and cyclical factors. Since late the labor force participation rate has stabilized and the portion of the decline that was unexplained shrank albeit slowly between the second and fourth quarters of ( Figure ) One driver of this unexplained component may be long-term trends within age groups. There was a general downward trend in participation rates prior to even after conditioning on age. In the case of prime-age men the decline dates back to at least ; as noted in Chapter primeage male participation declined percentage point a year between and and then percentage point a year since More recently prime-age female participation has declined at percentage point a year on average since Because of these general trends toward lower partici pation pre-recession models predicted a decline in participation over this period greater than what would be predicted based on aging alone even with the assumption of no major recession ( Aaronson et al. ) A second set of explanations is that the unexplained portion reflects the very severe nature of the Great Recession which led to a greater-thannormal cyclical relationship between unemployment and participation CEA uses the unemployment gap as a measure of the state of the business cycle. CEA regresses the quarter-on-quarter difference in the detrended labor force participation rate on the contemporaneous year-over-year difference in the detrended unemployment gap along with a one-year lag and a two-year lag | Chapter CEA s model assumes that the relationship between the unemployment rate and the labor force participation rate remained the same as in earlier shallower recessions. However the particularly long average duration of unemployment in the last recession might discourage participation even more. Adding unemployment duration to the model explains a part of the previously unexplained portion. Thus the model suggests that a recession that leads to greater long-term unemployment leads to greater declines in labor force participation conditional on the unemployment rate CEA s analysis finds no unusual rise in disability insurance in response to the recession in fact disability insurance rose less than would be predicted based on the severity of the recession so this does not account for the unexplained decline in participation. The rise in schooling also does not account for the unexplained portion. Overall it is likely that a combina tion of factors including both non-aging trends and factors unique to the Great Recession played a role in the participation-rate decline Outlook for the Participation Rate While the evolution of the participation rate is subject to uncertainty it is unlikely that the trend of decreasing labor force participation will reverse in the medium-term without policy changes. As of the fourth quarter of the cyclical effect depressed the labor force participation rate by percentage point. In the short-run as the economy fully recovers from the Great Recession the cyclical component should dissipate adding this percentage point to the participation rate. At the same time however as more baby boomers retire the aging population will depress the participa tion rate by roughly an additional percentage point each year. The size of this aging effect is projected to grow gradually from percentage point in to percentage point in at which point the magnitude of the effect is expected to start receding. That older workers are able to retire is in many ways a positive development. But it also creates challenges especially for overall fiscal policy and in particular for programs like Social Security and Medicare The unexplained component of the participation decline is subject to greater uncertainty. To the extent that the decline represents trends that pre-date the Great Recession it could persist. However if the unexplained portion primarily reflects temporary factors related to the Great Recession as the economy recovers the participation rate may increase more than what cyclical factors alone predict. However under a range of feasible scenarios it is likely the labor force participation rate will continue to decline in the medium-term Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Long-Term Unemployment In not only did the annual unemployment rate fall by more than any year since but also most of the decline came from a decrease in long-term unemployment. The long-term unemployed defined as those unemployed for weeks or longer accounted for percent of the unem ployed population as of December Nearly two-thirds of the decrease in unemployment resulted from a decrease in long-term unem ployment and by December they were percent of the unemployed ( Figure ) Broader measures of unemployment also fell slightly faster than the overall unemployment rate in while labor force participation was largely stable suggesting that this reduction in long-term unemployment reflects workers finding employment rather than leaving the workforce or becoming discouraged. While this constitutes important progress the long-term unemployment rate remains elevated relative to its pre-recession average Percent Figure Share of Recovery in Overall Unemployment Rate Due to Declines in Short- and Long-Term Unemployment Short-Term Unemployment ( Weeks or Fewer ) Long-Term Unemployment ( Weeks or More ) From Oct-2009 to Dec-2013 From Dec-2013 to Dec-2014 Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations | Chapter Figure Unemployment Rate by Duration Percent of Labor Force Unemployed Weeks or Fewer Dec-2014 Unemployed Weeks or More Note : Shading denotes recession. Dashed lines represent pre-Great Recession ( December 2001December ) averages Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations Trends in Long-Term Unemployment In the previous expansion the short-term unemployment rate ( work ers unemployed for less than weeks ) averaged percent of the labor force while the long-term unemployment rate averaged percent. Both types of unemployment increased in the recession with a markedly larger surge in long-term unemployment as shown in Figure Both have since substantially recovered and Figure shows that as of December the short-term unemployment rate was below its pre-recession average although the long-term unemployment rate remained elevated. However as discussed earlier the long-term unemployment rate recovered more relative to the short-term unemployment rate in The Great Recession saw a larger than typical increase in both the number and the share of the long-term unemployed. The number of longterm unemployed rose from million at the end of to million in April or percent of all unemployed workers. By December however this number had fallen to million workers or percent of unemployed workers. By comparison between and workers unemployed for at least weeks accounted for about percent of unem ployed workers on average with a previous peak share of percent in June The share of the unemployed who are long-term unemployed of longer durations also rose sharply in the recession as shown in Figure Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Figure Share of Unemployed Workers by Duration of Unemployment Percent of Unemployed Weeks or More Dec-2014 Weeks or More Weeks or More Note : Calculations are a 12-month moving average of the share of unemployed by duration as a share of the overall unemployed population Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations That figure also shows that even among the long-term unemployed there have been greater improvements for those more recently unemployed This rise in the prevalence and severity of long-term unemployment in the Great Recession may in part be a continuation of longer-term trends in the cyclical pattern of long-term unemployment. Compared to recessions in earlier decades the past several recessions have seen sharper increases in the share of the unemployed who are long-term unemployed as the unem ployment rate climbs as shown in Figure Moreover aside from changes during business cycles there appears to have been a secular increase in the long-term share of the unemployed for decades before the crisis occurred.7 Figure shows a gradual increase in the share long-term unemployed since when the data are first available.8 The estimates suggest that between and the share of the unemployed out of work for weeks or more increased by about percentage point a year on average If the share of unemployment that is long term returns to trend at the end of it would be about percent well above its October trough of percent. However recent cycles suggest that the longterm upward trend may be increasing even during expansionary periods Also reported in Aaronson Mazumder and Schechter ( ) The linear time trend is not adjusted for business cycles | Chapter Figure Increase in Long-Term Unemployment as a Percent of Increase in Overall Unemployment Rate Percent Recession Start Year Note : Increases are measured from the first month of the recession to the peak in the overall unemployment rate. The 1980s recessions are consolidated into a single cycle Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations Figure Long-term Unemployed as Share of Total Unemployed Percent Dec-2014 Actual Linear Time Trend Note : Time trend projection is based on data from through Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Moreover during the Great Recession long-term unemployment increased even more than would have been expected from the historical relationship ( Aaronson Mazumder and Schechter ) suggesting that while long-run trends have contributed to higher rates of long-term unemployment other factors may contribute to a more persistent increase Factors behind Elevated Rates of Long-Term Unemployment The likelihood of finding new employment falls as an unemployment spell extends as shown in Figure During the Great Recession the long-term unemployed were to percent less likely than the short-term unemployed to obtain employment within two years ( Krueger Cramer and Cho ) In addition audit studies show that callback rates from prospec tive employers decline with the length of unemployment ( Kroft Lange and Notowidigdo ; Ghayad ) The literature offers potential explanations for why the long-term unemployed are less likely to find employment than the short-term unem ployed. One explanation worker heterogeneity argues that the long-term unemployed are different from the short-term unemployed in ways that make them less attractive to employers which extends how long they must search to land a new job ( Pries ) However this is less likely to be true following a deep recession. Moreover research by Krueger Cramer and Cho ( ) and Mitchell ( ) find that the long-term unemployed resem ble the short-term unemployed on many dimensions. Kroft et al. ( ) and Aaronson Mazumder and Schechter ( ) reach similar conclusions and show that rates of long-term unemployment increased for nearly all demographic occupation industry and regional groups during the Great Recession This research suggests that another explanation for why the long-term unemployed are less likely to be hired is more relevant to our recovery : that becoming long-term unemployed itself makes it harder to escape from unemployment. Employers may interpret a spell of long-term unemploy ment as a negative signal of a worker s ability because of stigma ( Blanchard and Diamond ; Kroft Lange and Notowidigdo ) Additionally employers hiring processes may lead to discrimination against the longterm unemployed by for example screening out all workers with a long spell of unemployment regardless of their other qualifications ( Ghayad ) Research has shown that the long-term unemployed conditional on all other characteristics remaining the same are less likely to get called for interviews ( Kroft Lange and Notowidigdo ) Another explanation is that as people remain out of work for extended periods of time their general and job-specific skills or connections to industry may deteriorate ( Edin and | Chapter Figure Monthly Job Finding Rates by Duration of Unemployment in Previous Month December Probability of Reemployment Percent Less than Weeks Weeks Weeks Weeks Weeks Note : Seasonally-adjusted data as of December Data refer to the probability of reemployment in December based on duration of unemployment in November Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey Gustavsson ; Autor et al. ) These explanations are not mutually exclusive and both could affect the likelihood of transitioning from unem ployment to employment ( Jackman and Layard ) Pre-recession patterns in the rate of transition from long-term unem ployment to employment controlling for duration of unemployment do a good job predicting these transitions during this recovery ( Kroft et al. ) This implies that despite the much larger more diverse pool of long-term unemployed as compared with past recessions or even non-recessionary periods transitions from long-term unemployment back to employment are not any faster. Unemployment duration appears to be more important than worker characteristics in determining the transition back to employ ment. However the long-term unemployed were more likely during the recession and recovery to stay in the labor market than past transition rates from long-term unemployed to out of the labor force would have predicted.9 Some research suggests that the extensions of unemployment insurance encouraged the long-term unemployed to continue looking for work and reduced the likelihood that they exited the labor force ( Krueger Cramer Specifically Kroft et al. ( ) show that the transition probability from unemployment to non-employment fell markedly over the recession and began to recover around Their transition probabilities are constructed from a series in which monthly flows are harmonized to stocks for the employed unemployed and non-participants Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | and Cho ; Aaronson Mazumder and Schechter ; Kroft et al. ; Rothstein ) Why Long-term Unemployment Matters Higher levels of long-term unemployment are concerning because they place greater strain on household resources and sometimes necessitate drastic changes in household behavior such as selling a home or postpon ing medical care which can have disruptive impacts on family members the wider community and the economy. Long-term earnings loss after resuming work also appears to increase with the duration of unemploy ment ( Schmieder von Wachter and Bender ; Addison and Portugal ) Moreover it does not appear that these earnings losses are unique to experiencing unemployment during an economic expansion or recovery nor are they concentrated in the manufacturing or service sector ( Couch and Placzek ) Former Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke has said that long-term unemployment imposes economic costs on everyone not just the unemployed themselves as their loss of skills and lower rates of employment reduce the economy s overall productive capacity ( Bernanke ) Part-Time Work for Economic Reasons Part-time employment tends to grow in recessions as some businesses hold on to workers by cutting their hours and those businesses continuing to hire may need only part-time hours from new workers. Between December and December the share of the labor force usually working parttime rose from percent to percent. This increase was driven by a large rise in people working part-time for economic reasons defined as employees who would prefer to have full-time work but either can not find a full-time job or have a job that does not provide full-time hours ( even if it once did ) As the economy has recovered the share of the labor force that is part-time has begun to recede as all the growth in employment has been driven by growth in full-time employment as Figure shows. Five years into the recovery more than million more people are working full-time while the number of people employed in part-time jobs has been largely unchanged. Moreover part-time jobs have been increasingly held by those who say they do not want to work full-time Rates of part-time employment for economic reasons doubled dur ing the recession from percent to percent exceeding the previous peak | Chapter Figure Net Change in Employment Since January Household Survey Estimates Millions of Workers Dec-2014 Full-Time Part-Time Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations reached in as shown in Figure The share of the labor force working part-time for economic reasons has since fallen and the pace of the decline in this share picked up during declining percentage point over the months ending in December The rate is percent as of December percent of the way back to its pre-recession average with over one-third of this overall progress occurring in Patterns in Part-Time For Economic Reasons As a general rule the share of workers who are part-time but would prefer full-time work rises in a downturn and then trends slowly back down during the recovery and boom. As Figure shows in a typical business cycle rates of part-time employment rise and these jobs go disproportion ately to those who would prefer full-time work with rates of part-time work Care must be taken when comparing the share of workers who are part-time for economic reasons before and after the redesign of the Current Population Survey. CEA used the multiplicative adjustment factors reported by Polivka and Miller ( ) in order to place the pre-1994 estimates of the part-time for economic reasons rate on a comparable basis with postredesign estimates. For the part-time series for which Polikva and Miller do not report suitable adjustment factors the pre- and post-redesign series were spliced by multiplying the pre-1994 estimates by the ratio of the January rate to the December rate. This procedure generates similar results to the Polikva and Miller factors for series for which multiplicative factors are available Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Figure Rates of Part-Time Work Percent of Labor Force Dec-2014 Total Part-Time Part-Time for NonEconomic Reasons Part-Time for Economic Reasons Note : Shading denotes recession. See footnote for details on comparability over time Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; Polivka and Miller ( ) ; CEA calculations for other reasons declining. This shift likely reflects several factors : firms finding it easier to hire highly qualified workers for part-time jobs since fewer full-time jobs are available and therefore hiring more people for parttime work who would prefer full-time work ; firms cutting hours of full-time employees who are unable to find full-time work elsewhere ; and workers in part-time jobs increasing their preferences for full-time work as household income falls ( Bednarzik ; Bednarzik ; Maloney ) Figure also shows that following some recessions the rate did not fully recover to its prerecession low before rising again. This is partially a result of the fact that the relationship between unemployment and part-time for economic reasons has varied across recessions and may also be due partly due to differences in the length of the recovery period. Figure reports the change in the share of the labor force working part-time for economic reasons relative to the change in the unemployment rate during contractions and expansions over the last five decades. Like the current cycle both the 1980s recessions and the recession saw above-average increases in parttime employment for economic reasons for a given percentage point rise in the unemployment rate but did not see commensurately rapid declines as the unemployment rate declined in the ensuing expansion Figure uses the relationship between part-time employment for economic reasons and unemployment from prior recessions and the path of unemployment during the current business cycle to predict the path of | Chapter Figure Change in Share Part-Time for Economic Reasons Per Percentage-Point Change in the Unemployment Rate Ratio Expansion Contraction Business Cycle Note : The 1980s recessions are consolidated into a single cycle. The expansion period runs through quarters or until the next peak whichever is earlier Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; Polivka and Miller ( ) ; CEA calculations part-time employment for economic reasons. Consistent with the patterns described in the last paragraph predictions based on the 1980s recessions and the recession generate a path similar to that observed during the current business cycle : a relatively sharp initial increase followed by a recovery that while steady does not match the pace of the initial increase and thus leaves part-time employment for economic reasons elevated Modeling the path in this recession using relationships from other post-1957 recessions generates a much smaller initial increase but a broadly similar pace of recovery Figures and imply that the mystery of part-time employ ment for economic reasons in the Great Recession ( as well as of recessions in the 1980s and ) is the sharper increase of such work during the con traction not a lack of full-time job creation during the recovery. Similarities across the 1980s and recessions suggest that the behavior of part-time employment for economic reasons in the recession may not be due to factors unique to the Great Recession like its depth or duration. Instead it may reflect longer-term changes in the cyclical sensitivity of this measure suggesting that this challenge may return in future recessions Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Figure Share Part-Time for Economic Reasons Actual and Predicted Percent of Labor Force Actual : Q4 Predicted Based on Cycle Predicted Based on 1980s Cycles Predicted Based on Other Post1957 Cycles Note : The 1980s recessions are consolidated into a single cycle Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; Polivka and Miller ( ) ; CEA calculations The Outlook for the Rate of Part-Time for Economic Reasons The question arises of whether the share of employees who work part-time for economic reasons will remain elevated over the long term. The answer depends in large part on the reasons behind this elevation One possibility is that this type of part-time employment remains elevated because it recovers later even after the headline unemployment rate has fully recovered. The view suggests that part-time workers who prefer full-time work will accept more hours or a full-time job if it becomes avail able and therefore they represent a pool of available workers to businesses wishing to expand employment. In this situation a higher share of workers who are part-time for economic reasons indicates that there is more slack in the labor market than is suggested by a given unemployment rate. If this interpretation describes our current labor market and the robust labor mar ket momentum seen over continues then the rate of part-time work for economic reasons should continue to decline in the years ahead ultimately returning to pre-recession levels assuming the economy remains strong for long enough. Some evidence consistent with this scenario comes from the rapid decline in this rate in recent months even measured relative to the increased pace of progress in reducing unemployment. Over the rate of part-time work for economic reasons has declined by percentage point for each percentage-point reduction in the unemployment rate whereas | Chapter it declined on average by percentage point for each percentage-point reduction in the unemployment rate since the start of Furthermore experience from the late 1990s and mid-to-late 1960s provides historical precedent : part-time employment for economic reasons rapidly decreased relative to overall unemployment during these strong labor market periods On the other hand another possibility is that recent recessions have accelerated ongoing structural changes that cause employers to demand more part-time workers relative to full-time workers. In this scenario the part-time for economic reasons rate may remain elevated even once the unemployment rate has fully recovered depending on the supply of parttime workers. The more rapid recovery in the goods sector relative to the service sector may provide some evidence that employer demand for parttime workers in the service sector has shifted. To the extent that the overall rate remains elevated mainly due to the incomplete recovery of the labor market that incomplete recovery might be expected to affect both sectors similarly ( Figure ) The timing of the shifts in part-time work also suggest that the Affordable Care Act s employer responsibility provision which requires large employers to offer coverage to employees working or more hours per week or pay a penalty is not playing a meaningful role in recent trends in part-time work. First both the share of the labor force working part-time and the share in part-time jobs who would prefer to be in full-time jobs declined more sharply in than in the earlier years of the recovery. In contrast if the Affordable Care Act s employer responsibility provision was driving a substantial structural increase in the demand for part-time workers one would all else equal have expected the opposite that progress in reducing part-time employment would have slowed over the months leading up to the provision s implementation in Second the most striking way in which the behavior of part-time employment particularly among those who would prefer full-time in the most recent recession and recovery differs from prior recessions is that it rose unusually sharply during the contraction not that it has fallen unusually slowly during the recovery as discussed above. This unusually sharp increase occurred essentially entirely before the Affordable Care Act became law in March and many years before employer responsibility took effect so it can not have been caused by the Affordable Care Act. Finally as noted earlier other recent recessions most notably the recession and to a lesser extent the 1980s recession also experienced sharp rises in the rate of involuntarily part-time workers that were not fully reversed by this point in the ensuing recovery so the phenomenon may tell us more about a structural shift in the economy in the last several decades Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Figure Share of Employees Working Part-Time for Economic Reasons by Industry Percent of Industry Employment Dec-2014 Goods Industries Services Industries Note : Data are 12-month moving averages of non-seasonally adjusted data. Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations Labor Market Fluidity Labor market fluidity ( used interchangeably in this chapter with dynamism or churn ) refers broadly to the frequency of changes in who is working for whom in the labor market. From the worker s perspective this is measured by hires and separations ; from the firm s perspective it is measured by new positions ( job creation ) and eliminated positions ( job destruction ) Although separations hires creation destruction and other measures capture different concepts of fluidity increases in these measures generally indicate more fluidity A range of measures suggest that fluidity has risen in the labor market recovery as shown in Figure The number of new workers hired has steadily increased : there were million workers hired into new positions in November compared to million in November of the previous year The hires rate was percent in November a number that has nearly fully recovered to its rate of percent in the month prior to the recession s start The Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics ( or LEHD ) data are a restricted-access data source compiled and maintained by the Census Bureau. The LEHD data are the result of matching data across many sources in particular by matching household information from the Census and American Community Surveys to state administrative Unemployment Insurance system wage records and to employer data from economic censuses. For detail see Abowd et al. ( ) The job-to-job ( or J2J ) data are newly available data constructed from the LEHD and published by Census. The J2J data provide information on the flows of workers joining leaving or changing employers under various circumstances ( Hyatt et al. ) | Chapter Figure Hires Separations and Job-to-Job Flow Rates Percent of Employment J2J Hires JOLTS Hires : Q3 J2J Separations JOLTS Separations J2J Job-to-Job Hires Note : J2J job-to-job hires are generally equal to J2J job-to-job separations ( not shown ) Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey ; Census Bureau Job-toJob Flows Direct transitions of workers from one job to another also show recovery Worker flows out of jobs ( separations ) including voluntary quits have also slowly risen during the recovery. Naturally involuntary separations spiked during the recession but recovery in voluntary separations indicates that workers are feeling comfortable in changing employers which reflects the increasing strength of the labor market Consistent with the strong employment growth over the last months the rate of new job openings as a share of total positions is now above its pre-recession average after falling by more than percent dur ing the recession ( Figure ) This increase in job openings offers further opportunities for workers to change their employment status or situation if desired. Taken together these data indicate that greater fluidity has accom panied the labor market strengthening While the short-term trend shows increased labor market dynamism a growing body of evidence finds that there are long-run downward trends in fluidity that likely date back several decades. The recent gains in fluidity measures reflect the strength of the recovery and should therefore generally be viewed as positive. It is less clear however how the long-run decline should be viewed given that it has the potential for both positive aspects in terms of job stability and better matches and negative aspects in terms of potentially less effective reallocation of labor to its highest productivity uses Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Figure Job Opening Rates Vacancies as Percent of Total Positions Nov-2014 Notes : Shading denotes recession. Dashed line represents average Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Job Openings and Labor Turover Survey ; CEA calculations This section examines these longer-run trends and their potential impact on the economy Trends in Labor Market Fluidity Recent research has identified long-run declines in a variety of mea sures of worker mobility. Research has shown that workers are less likely to leave a job are less likely to move to a new job and are less likely to physi cally move for a job ( Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl ; Molloy Smith and Wozniak ; Hyatt and Spletzer ) Research has also identified longrun declines in dynamism in firm-side measures including job creation job destruction and the entry and exit of establishments from the marketplace ( Decker et al. ; Davis and Haltiwanger ) Taken together this body of work indicates a U.S. labor market characterized by considerably lower levels of fluidity of all kinds than was the case two to three decades ago Lower Hires and Separations Rates Worker flows have declined since at least the late 1990s including the entire period for which the best direct data on worker flows are avail able from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey ( JOLTS available since ) Hyatt and Spletzer ( ) document declines of percent ( using Current Population Survey data ) to percent ( using Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics data ) in hires and separations since | Chapter as shown in Figure Davis and Haltiwanger ( ) have a longer series on hires and separations that extends back to which shows a decline in worker flows over this longer period Other studies examine fluidity indirectly by looking at outcomes for which worker or job flows are likely important such as flows between labor market statuses long-distance migration and transitions between industries and occupations. Some of these indirect measures can be calculated over longer historical periods and also point to long-term declines in fluid ity. Hyatt and Spletzer ( ) find that job-to-job transitions declined by roughly percent from to Davis et al. ( ) show that flows into and out of unemployment fell by nearly one-half over the two decades prior to the early 2000s. Long-distance migration in the United States which typically involves a change of employer or labor force status has been in a decades-long decline falling by as much as percent since the late 1970s ( Molloy Smith and Wozniak ; Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl ) Industry occupation and employer transitions have also fallen markedly over a similar period with declines in those measures accelerating since the 1990s as shown in Figure Lower Job Creation and Job Destruction Rates More is known about job flows ( job creation and destruction ) than worker flows ( hires and separations ) since series data are available back to the 1980s. Literature based on these data concludes that job flows have markedly declined over the last to years. For example Decker et al ( ) and Davis and Haltiwanger ( ) document that job creation and job destruction fell from the late 1980s to just prior to the recession Hyatt and Spletzer ( ) find larger declines of roughly one-quarter to one-third for both job creation and destruction between the late 1990s and To the degree that this reflects structural improvements in the economy that lead to more stable jobs this would be an encouraging trend But a potential concern is that it could reflect less reallocation of resources toward their most productive uses and thus fewer high-paying jobs Factors in Decreasing in Labor Market Fluidity Differences in the duration of jobs and types of establishments captured by the three series explain the level differences. The smaller decline in the Current Population Survey may be related to the fact that it misses more short-term jobs than does the Longitudinal EmployerHousehold Dynamics data ( Abraham et al. ) and Hyatt and Speltzer ( ) show that the declining share of short-term jobs can explain some of the decline in hires and separations A caveat is that some studies using CPS data find less clear trends in transitions for the 1980s to the 1990s but again for the late 1990s onward the trend is clearly downward. Kambourov and Manovskii ( ) tabulate occupation mobility from the CPS and find an increasing trend Moscarini and Thomsson ( ) characterize the trend in occupational mobility as weakly increasing in the 1980s. In addition Stewart ( ) finds no trend in job-to-job flows from the 1980s to the 1990s using the annual retrospective question CPS question Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Figure Trends in Hires and Separations Percent of Total Employment LEHD Hires CPS Hires : Q3 JOLTS Hires Source : Hyatt and Spletzer ( ) ; Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; Bureau of Labor Statistics Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey ; Census Bureau Longitudinal EmployerHousehold Dynamics Figure Employer Occupation and Industry Transitions Percent of Total Population Age Employer Change Occupation Change Industry Change Source : Molloy Smith and Wozniak ( ) | Chapter The empirical literature has only recently begun to examine why job and worker transitions have fallen. Two basic hypotheses have been explored : that firms or that workers have changed over time in ways that lower fluidity. Evidence shows that the first of these can explain a portion of declining fluidity. The average age and number of associated establish ments per firm have both risen in recent decades ( Davis and Haltiwanger ; CEA calculations ) Older larger firms are associated with lower job flows as these firms are less likely to contract or expand rapidly. Consistent with this change in firm composition rates of firm entry and exit have also declined over the last three decades ( Figure ) Because the change in the composition of firms has shifted in a way that all else equal would suggest fewer worker hires and separations researchers have tested to see how much of the shift in worker flows can be explained by changes in firm composition. Hyatt and Spletzer ( ) and Davis and Haltiwanger ( ) decompose changes in worker flows into those due to job flows and those due to worker movements between existing jobs. They find that changes in job flows account for between one-third to one-half of the decline in worker flows. Because job flows are determined in part by firm size and age chang ing firm characteristics contribute to the decline in worker flows ( Hyatt and Spletzer ) In contrast changes in characteristics of the average worker like age and education have been found to contribute little to declines in fluidity ( Molloy Smith and Wozniak ; Davis and Haltiwanger ) Potential Consequences of Reduced Fluidity Some explanations for reduced fluidity may be benign. For example employers may be increasing efforts to reduce turnover for a variety of reasons : increased cost of switching workers as job training requirements increase or better worker-firm matching at the point of hire to name a few.14 A reduced level of labor market transitions may also have benefits for work ers like more stable jobs with less disruption that allow them to invest more in skills that their employer values Reduced flows could be cause for concern however because they may undermine workers abilities to improve their employment situations In particular reduced fluidity may preclude employees from realizing the wage gains of switching jobs or make it difficult for part-time workers to find full-time work or result in fewer high-paying jobs in productive industries Cairo ( ) finds that job-training requirements have risen over time which supports a theory that on-the-job experience has also become more important. Both would likely lead firms to want to lower turnover. No direct evidence exists on trends in the quality of workerfirm matches but a substantial literature outlines the importance of this matching for wages ( Nagyp l ; Crane ; Jovanovic ) Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Figure Firm and Establishment Entry Rates Percent of Total Firms/Establishments Establishments Firms Source : Census Bureau Business Dynamics Statistics ; CEA calculations A growing body of evidence finds that wages and earnings increase substan tially when a worker changes jobs as summarized in Table In general workers gain at rates considerably above inflation Even when workers ultimately stay with their employer the potential for them to land better employment can generate wage growth as incumbent employers raise wages to retain these workers ( Beaudry and DiNardo ) Lower fluidity may reduce workers abilities to raise their wages by changing jobs and consequently also their bargaining power with their incumbent employer. In this way reduced fluidity may contribute to slower wage growth. Alternatively lower fluidity may result from limited opportunities for wage growth through employer transitions. Regardless Table shows that the gains from switching jobs have varied over time. The largest wage gains from switching jobs were seen in the late 1990s while wage gains from switching jobs in the 2000s were much lower.15 Other consequences of lower fluidity are perhaps more speculative but warrant careful observation nonetheless. Greater fluidity or more precisely the conditions and institutions that enable greater fluidity may prevent the share of long-term unemployed from rising and may thereby reduce the negative consequences of long-term unemployment. More fluid labor Molloy Smith and Wozniak ( ) note that point estimates in both the PSID and NLSY are similar when the recession years are excluded | Chapter Table Wage and Earnings Gains Associated with Job Switching Data Source LEED to PSID Topel and Ward ( ) Age Group to Gain to Switching Jobs NLSY LEHD to to % % % % Molloy Smith and Wozniak ( ) Fallick Haltiwanger and McEntarfer ( ) Time Period : Q1 : Q4 : Q2 : Q2 : Q2 % % % % % % Note : Topel and Ward ( ) and Molloy Smith and Wozniak ( ) are wage regression models while Fallick Haltiwanger and McEntarfer ( ) use sample earnings medians from job switchers All regression estimates are statistically significant except for the Molloy Smith and Wozniak ( ) estimates from the 2000s markets may also be more resistant to cyclical shocks or at minimum may experience faster recoveries after a recession ( Blanchard and Wolfers ) If this is the case the slower recoveries in the shares of part-time for eco nomic reasons and in long-term unemployment in recent recessions could in fact be related to the long-run decline in fluidity Wage Growth and Job Quality In average real wages for production and nonsupervisory work ers increased percent after increasing percent in Although not sufficient these increases are a marked improvement from the 2000s including the pre-Great Recession years of to when real wage growth averaged percent a year as shown in Figure of Chapter While these recent wage gains are further evidence of a strengthening labor market there is more work to be done to ensure that middle-class families fully share in the benefits of the recovery The evidence presented below shows that was a strong year for growth across almost all sectors but it was particularly strong in several that have traditionally provided good middle-class jobs. A longer-run perspec tive however shows that over the past several decades the composition of jobs has shifted toward both high- and low-skilled sectors while employment in the middle of the skill distribution has declined Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Job Growth in Not only was the strongest year for job growth since the 1990s but the pickup in growth between and occurred more strongly in industries with higher average wages as shown in Figure For instance average weekly earnings for manufacturing workers are about $ higher than the average for all private-sector workers and manufacturing job growth almost doubled from a month in to a month in Similarly employment in the construction sector which has average weekly earnings about $ above the private-sector average rose by an average of a month in up from a month in It is important to note however that this like any estimate of job growth by industry or occupation does not necessarily tell the full story which depends not just on job growth across sectors but also on what is happening to job growth within sectors as well Patterns in Wage Growth since the 1980s As discussed in Chapter and shown in Table for most workers earnings gains have not kept pace with productivity gains over the last sev eral decades.17 The official estimate of labor productivity grew an average of percent a year between and To make it comparable to the real wage and compensation data used below CEA adjusted labor productivity using an index of consumer prices the CPI-U-RS yielding an estimate of percent annual growth in productivity.18 Over this period hourly com pensation for the average worker rose percent annually indicating that compensation did not keep up with productivity growth and that the share of gross domestic income going to capital was rising. Average hourly wages ( calculated from wage and salary earnings in the CPS microdata ) fell even Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Employment Statistics ; CEA calculations All of the consumer price deflation in Table and in this section is done using the CPI-U-RS as is common in the labor literature. The CPI-U-RS is the Consumer Price Index adjusted backwards to make a methodologically consistent historical series. Footnotes in this subsection indicate results using an alternative index the price index for Personal Consumption Expenditure ( PCE ) from the National Income and Product Accounts. The PCE price index has the property relative to the CPI of not covering the same consumer basket as the one consumers purchase through their wages for example it includes Medicare costs for the government and the costs facing nonprofits. However the PCE deflator also has the properties associated with using a chain-weighted index. As a result PCE-adjustment implies real wage increases over time that are about percentage point per year higher than CPIbased adjustment The difference between the two estimates of productivity growth reflects slower growth in prices of investment goods and the terms of trade relative to consumption good prices. As a result the implicit price deflator used to deflate productivity rises more slowly than consumer prices over this period. If the labor share was constant productivity adjusted for consumer prices should keep pace with wages adjusted for consumer prices | Chapter Figure Change in Job Growth vs. Average Earnings by Industry Change in Percent Annual Employment Growth vs. ( Percentage Points ) Average Weekly Mining and Earnings for All Private-Sector Workers : $ $ Education and Temporary Health Services Help Services Other Services Logging Construction Transportation and Warehousing Manufacturing Wholesale Trade Utilities Professional and Business Services * Financial Activities Leisure and Hospitality $ Information Retail Trade $ $ $ $ Average Weekly Earnings December $ $ Note : * Excludes Temporary Help Services ( shown separately ) Average earnings for Temporary Help Services are not seasonally adjusted Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Employment Statistics further short of productivity growth rising only percent a year because they do not include the faster-growing components of compensation like employer-paid health insurance. Finally median hourly wages grew only percent per year slower than average wages because the increase in wage inequality meant larger increases in wages for workers near the top raising the average much more than the median. In total the disconnect between the percent annual productivity growth and the percent annual growth in the median wage reflects the combination of these factors : a methodological issue involving different price indices the rapid rise of benefit costs and the increase in inequality.19 The slowdown in wage growth has been felt most in the middle and bottom of the wage distribution. Aside from the late 1990s a period that saw rapid wage growth across the distribution over most of the last three decades wages have been stagnant or deteriorating for all except the highest earners. Figure shows that these patterns have led to a widening in wage inequality since the late 1970s ( Juhn Murphy and Pierce ; Lemieux ; Autor Katz and Kearney ) Between and real wages for the highest earners ( the 90th percentile of the wage distribution ) have grown by around percent. At the same time median wages rose by If Table were produced using the PCE index the average annual percent increase would be for labor productivity ; for compensation ; for mean wages ; and for the median wage Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Table Average Annual Percent Change in Real Productivity Compensation and Wages Real Labor Productivity Labor Productivity * Labor Compensation * Mean Hourly Wage ( CPS ) * Median Hourly Wage ( CPS ) * Note : Series marked with ( * ) are adjusted for inflation using the CPI-U-RS. Wages are calculated using the same method as Figure Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Productivity and Costs ; Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ( Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups ) ; Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer Price Index ; CEA calculations percent while wages at the 10th percentile declined slightly.20 As a result the ratio between wages at the 90th and 10th percentiles widened by percent since The 90th-to-50th percentile ratio grew by percent and the ratio between the 50th and 10th percentiles increased only slightly. As the figure shows inequality at the bottom of the wage distribution that is between the 50th and 10th percentiles grew rapidly during the 1980s and has been relatively constant since whereas inequality between the highest earners and the rest of the distribution has grown since the late 1970s Figure shows that the lack of wage growth in the lower half of the wage distribution has been a continuing challenge for more than three decades. Lee ( ) documents that an important factor explaining this decline is the erosion of the real value of the minimum wage. Increasing the value of the minimum wage in to its real average value in would have directly increased wages for the lowest percent of wage earn ers.21 Economists have found that the minimum wage can also spill over to increase wages for those with wages above the new minimum since employers may adjust their compensation schedules to preserve relative pay among their workers ( Autor Manning and Smith ) Autor Manning and Smith ( ) find that the effect of the minimum wage on inequality in the lower part of the wage distribution can be quite substantial : an approxi mately percent increase in the minimum wage relative to the median wage reduces the ratio by about percent Using the PCE deflator 90th percentile wages would have grown by percent median wages by percent and 10th percentile wages by percent. While the levels would be increased with this deflator the evolution of inequality the differences between the levels is unaffected by the deflator Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ( Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups ) ; CEA calculations. Inflation-adjusted using the CPI-U-RS. This is the percentage of workers making below the inflation-adjusted value of the minimum wage | Chapter Figure Wage Inequality Real Hourly Wage Index = 90th Percentile 50th Percentile 10th Percentile Note : The figure depicts real hourly wage quantiles for workers age to excluding individuals who are self-employed who have real wages below $ or greater than $ ( in dollars ) or whose wages are imputed. Top-coded earnings adjusted following Lemieux ( ) Inflation adjusted using the CPI-U-RS Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ( Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups ) ; CEA calculations The Rise of the Skill Premium and Employment Growth in Highand Low-Skill Occupations The rise in inequality shown in Figure is also seen in earnings differentials for workers with different levels of education. Since the 1980s the college income premium the ratio of income among workers with at least a college education to workers with only a high school diploma has increased. In men and women with college educations earned incomes and percent higher respectively than men and women with only high school diplomas. Since about however these income gaps have widened so that by college-educated workers incomes were more than twice the incomes of high school graduates Economists Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz ( ) explain this phenomenon as a race between technological advancements that increase the demand for highly-skilled workers and the supply of such workers In particular they document a slowdown in the growth of the collegeeducated workforce around This slowdown has meant that growth in the demand for skills ( technology ) outpaced growth in the supply of skills ( educational attainment of workers ) leading the college earnings premium to increase In spite of the long-term rise in demand for skill employers appear to be offering less training than in the 1990s ( Figure ) To some extent Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Figure College Income Premium by Gender Ratio of College Income to High School Income Women Men Note : Income premia calculated using median annual income of persons and older. Prior to " high school graduates " refers to respondents with years of high school and " college graduates " refers to respondents with at least years of college Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ( Annual Social and Economic Supplement ) ; CEA calculations these changes may reflect shifts in industry structure : historically jobs with high vocational requirements are most likely to offer on-site training and financial assistance ( Altonji and Spletzer ) Nevertheless it appears that fewer workers are able to acquire new skills either on the job or with the support of their employer than in the past. Less access to training may con tribute to inequality since when employers invest in their workers human capital by paying for training or offering training on the job site workers also benefit in the form of future wage increases ( Bartel ; Lynch ) At the same time that wages and employment have been growing among high-skill workers employment in middle-skill jobs has declined especially relative to higher- and lower-skill jobs. Economists use the term polarization to describe this pattern : employment loss in the middle of the wage or job skill distribution combined with relative job growth at the bot tom and at the top. The concept of polarization has its roots in the large literature on skill-biased technological change that developed to try to understand changes in wage inequality since the 1970s ( Bound and Johnson ; Katz and Murphy ; Juhn Murphy and Pierce ) In the past decade economists have refined the skill-biased technological change model arguing that technology is a substitute for some but not all types of labor. For example Autor Levy and Murnane ( ) and Acemoglu and Autor ( ) develop a model in which technology can replace labor in tasks that are easily automated such as manual labor and in which highly | Chapter Percent Figure Percent of Workers Receiving Employer-Sponsored or On-the-Job Training Employer Paid for Training On-the-Job Training Note : Fraction of workers ages receiving training of any duration in the last year Source : Census Bureau Survey of Income and Program Participation ( Employment and Training Topical Module ) ; CEA calculations skilled managerial professions are complementary to labor. The tasks that are most easily automated tend to be in the middle of the skills distribution so that over time employment moves to both the lower and higher ends of the occupational ranking as shown in Figure where occupations are ranked by average wage Figure uses smoothed data from employment by occupations harmonized over a longer time period to show this pattern more clearly : since the late 1970s employment growth has been greatest in the highest and lowest earning occupations. The middle of the distribution has actually experienced employment losses with fewer workers employed in middlewage occupations in than in As demand falls for manual tasks wages and employment in these positions also fall relative to highly-skilled workers leading to greater inequality. The results from this research show that in theory automation can lead to both job and wage polarization ( Acemoglu and Autor ; Goos Manning and Salomon ) and some have demonstrated a link between changing tasks and other forms of wage inequality ( Black and SpitzOener ) This stylized model however has not always matched the data Some economists argue that the automation hypothesis can not explain the timing of the trends in wage inequality and employment growth by real wage level ( Card and DiNardo ; Mishel Shierholz and Schmitt ) Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Figure Change in Employment by Detailed Occupation Change in Total Employment Thousands Service Occupations Except Protective and Household Teachers Except Postsecondary Technicians and Related Support Occupations Executive Administrative and Managerial Occupations Management Related Occupations $ Secretaries Stenographers and Typists Machine Operators $ $ $ $ Average Hourly Wage ( in Dollars ) $ Note : Excludes five occupational categories with outlying wages and relatively small changes in employment ( Farm Occupations Except Managerial ; Private Household Occupations ; Engineers Architects and Surveyors ; Lawyers and Judges ; and Health Diagnosing Occupations ) Wages are calculated using the method of Figure and are adjusted for inflation using the CPI-U-RS Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations Figure Changes in Employment by Occupational Wage Percentile Change in Employment Share Percentage Points Percentile ( Ranked by Occupational Mean Wage ) Source : Census Bureau Census ; Census Bureau American Community Survey ; calculations by David Autor and Brendan Price | Chapter In particular Mishel Shierholz and Schmitt ( ) find that changes in employment across occupations explains little of the rise in inequality in the overall wage distribution in contrast to what would be expected if occupa tions accurately reflect differences in tasks for which technology may have shifted demand.22 Broader Measures of Job Quality Broader measures of compensation take into account the value of nonwage features of jobs. Sometimes these are benefits like employerprovided retirement plans paid vacation days and employer-sponsored health insurance but these can also be features like family-friendly schedul ing practices and possibilities for advancement. Research has found that trends in the combination of employer-provided benefits plus wages and salary ( called total compensation ) broadly mirror those in wage compensa tion both have become substantially more unequal since the early 1980s though compensation inequality has generally grown more rapidly than wage inequality ( Pierce ) Coverage of major employer benefits specifically health insurance and retirement plans are tracked for long periods of time in surveys such as the National Health Interview Survey and the Current Population Survey Changes in access to employer-sponsored health insurance and retirement plans are shown separately in Figures and Access to these benefits generally declined between and particularly for lower-skilled workers. Recently these trends have stabilized or begun to reverse : in the share of employees with access to retirement plans increased while access to employer-sponsored health insurance held relatively steady from Other important aspects of job quality are the number of hours a worker is required to work whether they are paid by salary and whether they are eligible for overtime pay for hours they work over hours a week Figure shows that since the mid-1990s more full-time workers have been earning salaries. Prior to the recession the share of full-time workers earning a salary was at or near its high. That share fell in the Great Recession as it did in the and recessions but has recently started to rise again. However concern remains about the long hours of some sala ried workers and whether they are properly compensated for those hours The value of the threshold at which salaried workers qualify for overtime pay has eroded since it was last raised in and over this period the share of Mishel Shierholz and Schmitt ( ) show that occupations explain a small and decreasing portion of the variance in wages Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Percent Figure Share of Workers With an Offer of Employer-Sponsored Insurance Coverage by Education College Graduate Some College High School Graduate Less than High School Diploma Source : National Health Interview Survey ; CEA calculations Percent Figure Share of Workers Included in Employer-Provided Retirement Plan by Education College Graduate Some College Less than High School Diploma High School Graduate Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ( Annual Social and Economic Supplement ) ; CEA calculations | Chapter Figure Share of Full-Time Workers Paid a Salary Percent of Full-Time Wage and Salary Workers Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ( Characteristics of Minimum Wage Workers ) salaried workers afforded overtime protection has fallen from percent to percent The Agenda for a Stronger Labor Market This chapter has documented strong progress in the labor market over the past year. The headline unemployment rate is now percent returned to its average and broader measures of labor underutilization show a similar pattern. Despite this progress however the labor market continues to face five related challenges. These challenges pre-date the Great Recession although a recovery may lessen these challenges going forward. Nevertheless policy is also needed to overcome the many obstacles to a better functioning labor market. The challenges described in this chapter decreased labor force participation ; more long-term unemployed workers ; more part-time workers particularly among those who would like fulltime hours ; lower labor market fluidity ; and insufficient real wage growth amidst a more polarized job market are potentially all inter-connected For example decreased labor force participation ; longer unemployment durations ; and more people working at least temporarily in part-time jobs when they want full-time jobs might all be related to decreased labor market fluidity. If transitions among jobs employers and firms are less common it can take longer for people to find work leading to longer unemployment Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | durations. In addition some of those workers may accept part-time work at least temporarily and some workers may stay out of the labor market because they are less likely to be aware of potential opportunities or find the longer searches needed too discouraging One key element of a successful strategy to address these challenges is providing workers with skills that help raise job security earnings and job quality and a highly-trained workforce can also contribute to further long-term growth. The President s plans to improve access to education and training from birth through college are at the forefront of this strategy. The President s Fiscal Year Budget shows this commitment through a range of proposals from funding for early learning initiatives including ensuring that all 4-year-olds have access to pre-school to proposing that two years of high-quality community college be free for hard-working students. In addition he has proposed expanding apprenticeships and improving our workforce training systems by expanding career counseling and training in high-growth fields To further help workers access jobs that match their skills and quali fications the President has also proposed working with states to spread best practices for occupational licensing systems and to reduce unnecessary training or high fees that keep people from doing jobs that best utilize their talents. This builds on the leadership that First Lady Michelle Obama and Dr. Jill Biden have undertaken to reduce licensing barriers for military spouses through which states have eased licensing requirements for cur rent military spouses and veterans A second key aspect of the President s proposals to support and help build the middle class are policies that help working families stay in the labor force by supporting flexible workplace practices access to paid leave and paid sick days and greater access to high quality child care. In addition to the work-family policies discussed in Chapter the Administration s proposal for a new secondary earner credit recognizes the additional costs that families with two earners face and therefore would help dual-earning couples make ends meet Moreover these policies are intricately linked to the President s early childhood education proposals since ensuring that children are well-cared for also supports their parents while they are at work. To this end the Administration has proposed a continuum of early learning opportunities that could support working parents while benefiting children s cognitive and socio-emotional development. These initiatives include tripling the existing child care tax credit for families with very young children and expanding access to high-quality early education including child care and preschool. These steps can help parents enter the labor market knowing | Chapter that their children are cared for in a safe and nurturing environment while also improving children s academic performance and future outcomes in adulthood Better skills and better employment supports are two key ingredients for higher wages and higher incomes but they are not sufficient. That is why the President supports raising the minimum wage a step that would help tens of millions of workers and help ensure that no full-time worker raises a family in poverty. Other institutional steps like strengthening collective bargaining would further help ensure that everyone shares in the benefits of growth Finally the Administration continues to prioritize reducing long-term unemployment. The President s FY Budget proposes $ billion for High-Growth Sector training grants disbursed across states based on their unemployment rates to double the number of dislocated workers who can receive the training necessary to transition to high-quality jobs. By making more funds available during economic downturns to provide training for those who face difficulties finding work in weak labor markets this proposal could also reduce increases in long-term unemployment during future downturns. The President has also engaged businesses in hiring and recruit ing the long-term unemployed The President s FY Budget also proposes a package of reforms to modernize the Unemployment Insurance ( UI ) program which provides critical income support to those who are unemployed. These reforms will improve the solvency of state programs strengthen the program s connec tion to work and reach more workers who lose a job through no fault of their own. In addition the proposal would make the UI program more tar geted and responsive to economic downturns by implementing an Extended Benefits program that provides added benefits as soon as a state experiences a sharp rise in unemployment even if a national increase in unemployment has not yet occurred Taking steps to foster more growth and high-quality jobs better pre pare workers for these jobs and ensure that all workers share in the benefits of these jobs are the central tenets of the President s approach to middle class economics. All of these actions will help capitalize on the strengths of the U.S. economy while moving to address the long-standing challenges in the labor market Achievements and Challenges in the U.S. Labor Market | Box : Immigration Reform and Labor Markets A large body of academic research finds that on balance immigra tion has strong benefits for both the U.S. economy in general and U.S labor markets in particular. Immigrants increase the productivity of the American workforce both directly through increases in innovation and indirectly through spillovers to U.S. workers. For example not only do high-skilled immigrants patent at a higher rate than their nonimmigrant peers but their innovation also has spillover effects on patenting by native-born workers ( Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle ) At the same time lower-skilled immigration can have positive effects on worker productivity by allowing for greater task specialization. While there is ongoing discussion in the academic literature about the direct wage and employment effects of immigration on native workers it is important to note that researchers have found positive effects of immigration on these outcomes ( for example Peri Shih and Sparber ) as well as negative ( for example Borjas et al. ) Nevertheless a number of recent studies suggest that complementarities between immigrant and nonimmigrant workers interactions that indirectly raise the productivity and thus wages of both groups may be substantial ( e.g. Peri and Sparber ) In addition to these benefits immigration has the potential to raise the overall labor force participation rate in the United States because immi grants participate in the workforce at higher rates than the native-born population ( CBO 2015a ) Researchers have shown that immigration is associated with a range of characteristics that may be related to greater labor force participation ( Chiquiar and Hanson ; Butcher and Piehl ) Despite these potential gains to the economy and to American workers from immigration the U.S. immigration system remains badly broken. In November President Obama announced a series of executive actions to begin moving our immigration system into the 21st century. These provisions included actions designed to better attract high-skilled immigrants and foreign entrepreneurs and to allow advanced-degree holders in science technology engineering and math ematics ( STEM ) fields to extend on-the-job training. The actions will also provide deferred action from removal to millions of undocumented workers who have substantial ties to the United States pass a criminal background check and pay payroll and income taxes. Drawing on a large body of research examining the economic effects of previous immigra tion reforms the Council of Economic Advisers ( 2014a ) estimated that the actions announced by the President would raise U.S. GDP by between and percent within ten years equivalent to $ to $ billion in additional real GDP ( in dollars ) in | While these gains are substantial they are small when com pared with the potential economic effects of Congressional action on commonsense immigration reform. The Congressional Budget Office ( ) found that the Border Security Economic Opportunity and Immigration Modernization Act ( S. ) the bipartisan immigration reform bill passed by the Senate in would increase real GDP by percent or roughly $ billion over ten years and would raise average wages for all workers by percent in twenty years. In addition CEA estimates that the Senate s commonsense immigration reform bill would raise the overall labor force participation rate by approximately percentage point in ten years | C H A P T E R THE ECONOMICS OF FAMILYFRIENDLY WORKPLACE POLICIES W omen greatly increased their participation in the labor force begin ning in the 20th century marking the start of a fundamental change in our workforce and families. In only percent of women worked outside the home a share that rose to percent by Today the majority of women percent work outside the home.1 A similar pattern is seen in the participation rate of mothers with small children : percent of whom currently work outside the home compared to only percent in These gains in women s labor force participation as well as their increased educational attainment have translated into large income gains for American families and have benefited the U.S. economy overall Essentially all of the income gains that middle-class American families have experienced since are due to the rise in women s earnings. By contrast wage growth for men over this same period has been flat. ( For a broader discussion of labor market trends see Chapter ) For example median fam ily income in was nearly $ higher than it was in If women today still had the same labor force participation and working hours as they Women s labor force participation data for age and over is calculated from the Decennial Census in and taken from the published Bureau of Labor Statistics data series for and Data are from the and Current Population Survey s Annual Economic and Social Supplement calculations that include women with their own children under age five living at home in and using the share that are in the labor force during the survey reference week did in median family income would be roughly $ lower.3 More generally our economy is $ trillion or percent larger than it would be without women s increased participation in the labor force and hours worked since While mothers have become important contributors to family income fathers have increasingly taken on caregiving responsibilities shifting pat terns in the organization of market work and non-market work within families. Today men are doing a larger share of household duties than in the past though mothers still spend almost twice as much time on household work as fathers. Mothers in dedicated more than hours a week to child care and related tasks a slight increase from around hours in By comparison fathers spent almost hours a week on child care and related tasks in a nearly three-fold increase since Fathers are also becoming more likely to assume significant child-care roles and today about percent of all stay-at-home parents are men ( Livingston ) More gen erally caregiving responsibilities are shouldered by workers of both genders all ages and in a variety of family situations. More than one-half of workers provide care for others including their children elderly parents and rela tives spouses adult children and returning veterans with disabilities.6 Workplaces however have been slower to adapt to changing fam ily dynamics. This has created greater conflicts between responsibilities at This is based on an accounting exercise that compares the median family income in to the ( counterfactual ) median that would have been obtained in had the distribution of women s work hours been the same as it was in The counterfactual is constructed by reweighting the family income distribution so that the reweighted distribution of family hours worked by women is identical to that observed in using the technique introduced by DiNardo Fortin and Lemieux ( ; henceforth DFL ) The procedure effectively gives more weight to the family earnings of observations in that are more likely ( based on the hours worked by women ) to have been observed in that is families with lower hours worked by women and less weight to observations less likely to come from The calculation is based on data on primary families only ( families within households containing the householder ) from the and Current Population Survey ASEC. DFL weights are based on a logistic regression of an indicator variable for whether an observation is from ( rather than ) on a set of indicator variables for categories of total hours ( in 100-hour increments ) worked by adult women in the family CEA calculated this using a growth account formula that relates the level of output to the supply of labor. Using the Current Population Survey from to CEA calculated the increase in hours worked by women and assumed that the average product of labor was unchanged Data are from the American Time Use Survey. Child care and related tasks are measured as any task identified under caring for and helping household children. Data from are analyzed by Bianchi Robinson and Milkie ( ) CEA used a similar methodology to generate estimates for From the BLS release Unpaid Eldercare in the United States and BLS Current Population Survey CEA calculated about percent of workers have either elder care responsibilities or dependent children | Chapter home and at work for men and women struggling to make ends meet and to help their children succeed. This interaction between family lives and work lives affects businesses and the economy. Many families deal with the challenges of work-family conflict as they attempt to balance breadwinning and caregiving responsibilities without the benefit of supportive familyfriendly workplace policies. Too often this forces workers to make trade-offs between the right job for their talents and the job that will allow them to best meet the needs of their families including the choice of whether to work at all. Family-friendly workplace polices make it easier for people to make the choices that are right for them and their families Because workers often favor companies with family-friendly policies the companies that adopt such policies are better able to attract and retain talent. For example nearly percent of working parents report that they have turned down a job offer because it would not have worked for their families ( Nielsen ) As more companies adopt such policies and as public policies provide more of these benefits to all workers people will have more freedom to choose their jobs according to where they will be most pro ductive. Thus family-friendly policies are a key component of the economic success of both families and businesses because they can help more workers succeed regardless of caregiving responsibilities This chapter examines changes in American family life and the implications for work. The first section discusses how rising labor market participation among women and changing patterns of caregiving for fathers have helped grow household incomes and our economy but has made the need for family-friendly workplace policies more acute. The next few sec tions examine access to important policies such as paid family leave paid sick leave and workplace flexibility including outlining policies at the State and local level. The chapter then turns to analyzing the economics of familyfriendly workplace policies including addressing why some companies have implemented family-friendly workplace policies and others have not and analyzing the evidence on how these policies can benefit both businesses and workers Recent Changes in American Family Life and Their Implications for Work Recent changes in American family life have altered the composition of our workforce daily routines and how many of today s workers navigate dual roles as breadwinners and caregivers. These changes in the way that families organize their work and family lives have created a greater need for policies to help American workers better balance work and family needs The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | Attachment to the Labor Force and Educational Attainment Have Increased Significantly Among American Women One of the largest changes in work and family life occurred over the last century as women became more-equal participants in the labor force by increasing their participation in paid work obtaining more education and training and widening the scope of occupation types they entered. Since the beginning of the 1950s women s labor force participation has increased by around percentage points while men s labor force participation has decreased by around percentage points ( Figure ) While women on average still tend to work fewer hours each week than men the gender gap in weekly hours worked has narrowed by around three hours since As discussed in Chapter prime-age women s labor force participation grew steadily between and at an average pace of percentage point a year and then accelerated to percentage point a year between and However women s labor force participation and hours worked have declined in recent years. As described in Chapter more than one-half of the decrease in labor force participation for both men and women since is due to the aging of the population rather than changes in the choices people are making. Much of the rest of the decline reflects other trends including a labor market still healing following the Great Recession In women accounted for percent of all workers and percent of all hours worked.8 Because labor force participation is a key driver of economic growth the greater attachment of women to the labor market has implications for both families and the economy. However sheer volume is not the only or even necessarily the most important way that women s roles in the economy have changed. Women have also increased their labor market skills over this period by acquiring more education and training receiving greater experience on the job and moving into previously maledominated professions Women s greater participation in the labor market has coincided with a record number of women earning higher education degrees ( Figure ) These are related trends : as more women have stayed in the labor force throughout their careers chosen previously male-dominated occupations and sought career advancement they have invested in more education to CEA calculated this number using hours worked last week in the Current Population Survey ASEC in and since usual hours worked is not available in earlier years Women s share of employment was calculated using the monthly Current Population Survey of workers ages and older. Women s hours as a share of all hours were calculated using the Current Population Survey ASEC Aggregate hours were calculated by multiplying usual weekly hours last year by weeks worked last year | Chapter Figure Labor Force Participation by Sex Percent Dec-2014 Men Women Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey Percent Figure Percent of Young Men and Women with a Bachelor 's Degree or Higher Women- At Least a Bachelor 's Degree Men- At Least a Bachelor 's Degree Women- At Least Some Graduate School Men- At Least Some Graduate School Note : Data are for men and women ages Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | prepare themselves for these opportunities ( Goldin and Katz ) As of academic year women received percent of bachelor s degrees.9 In addition women have increasingly enrolled in formerly male-dominated professional and graduate degree programs. For example today women receive percent of doctoral degrees ( which includes PhDs MDs and law degrees ) compared to percent in academic year If these patterns continue women will soon represent a growing majority of highly educated workers.10 Rising educational attainment among women has opened up new career opportunities which may have contributed to the decrease in occu pational segregation. Today women comprise much larger shares of many traditionally male occupations such as physicians dentists economists and lawyers than they did fifty years ago ( Goldin and Katz ) About twothirds of occupations in were percent or more male ; today about percent of occupations fall into that category.11 Higher rates of labor force participation combined with increased educational investments and broader career choice among women have translated into earnings gains for women relative to men and have mark edly increased the importance of women s income in the household. More than percent of mothers are now the sole or primary source of income for the household reflecting both an increase in female-headed households and increased earnings among married women ( Wang Parker and Taylor ) In employed married women s earnings comprised percent of their family s earnings up from percent in ( Figure ) Families Are Adjusting to New Caregiving Needs As mothers increasingly participate in the labor force and patterns of fathers caregiving change conflict between work and caregiving has grown. The result is ever more families trying to balance work and family Unless otherwise specified data in this paragraph comes from U.S. Department of Education National Center for Education Statistics ( ) The Condition of Education ( NCES ) Indicator Restricting to those age to and assuming that as many female and male workers with college degrees enter the labor force at age next year as entered this year while those at age leave women would be percent of workers with college degrees in while in years women would be percent of college-educated workers CEA calculations using the Current Population Survey Annual Economic and Social Supplement in and Only those currently employed were included and IPUMS occupational codes were used CEA used the Current Population Survey Annual Economic and Social Supplement in and to calculate the portion of husband and wife wage and salary income from married women. Households where married women earned $ or more than $ million were omitted from analysis | Chapter Percent Figure Employed Married Women 's Contribution to Family Earnings Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations obligations and an increasing proportion of households in which all par ents work. Today all parents are working in more than out of every households with children up from out of in ( Figure ) The share of families with infants where all parents work has exhibited a similar increase ( Figure ) These increases are due to two separate trends : the rise in dual-earner families discussed previously and an increase in single-parent families. As of percent of families with children were headed by a single parent compared to percent in Over three-quarters of the single-parent families in were headed by women. Partners in two-parent families are increasingly sharing caregiving responsibilities more equally meaning that both parents have responsibility for both caregiving and work. However the rise in single-parent families means that a growing number of households with children have only one adult and as such that one adult has primary responsibility for both caregiving and work. For these households family-friendly workplace policies are especially important since it can be more difficult for single parents to make alternative arrange ments when work-family conflicts arise As mothers have entered the labor force in greater numbers fathers are increasingly taking on child-care responsibilities. The share of fathers Including biological step and adoptive parents Census Table FM-1 The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | Figure Percent of Households with Children in Which All Parents Work Percent Children of Any Age Youngest Child Under Months Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations who stay at home while a spouse works has doubled in the last years.15 Today around percent of stay-at-home parents are fathers ( Livingston ) The role of fathers is continuing to evolve and both employed and non-employed fathers are spending more time on child care than they did even a decade ago.16 As shown in Figure fathers are more likely now than a decade ago to help bathe and diaper read to kids and help with homework.17 On average fathers spent fewer hours a week on paid work in than in and more hours a week on child care and hours a week more on housework ( Figure ) So fathers are working more hours than in the past when the work of child care and household tasks is included but a much larger share of their work is home production. Despite these shifts social science surveys show that the majority of men and women believe that men should spend more time caring for children possibly reflecting the fact that fathers on average still spend less time on child care than mothers.18 Census Bureau Table MC-1 CEA calculations using American Time Use Survey based on Bianchi Robinson and Milkie ( ) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Survey of Family Growth In mothers spent hours per week on child care according to the ATUS data used to calculate men s time spent on child care in Figure Data from the wave of the General Social Survey show that percent of men and percent of women think that men should spend more time caring for children | Chapter Figure Fathers Reporting Role in Child Care Activities for Selected Years Percent Help with Homework Read to Kids Bathe and Diaper Note : Data show the percentage of resident fathers ages who report they participate in the activity at least several times per week Source : Center for Disease Control and Prevention National Survey of Family Growth ; CEA calculations Hours per Week Figure Fathers ' Average Weekly Time Use Child Care ( ) Housework ( ) Child Care ( ) Housework ( ) Paid work ( ) Paid work ( ) Note : Fathers are defined as adult men ages with children under Source : Bianchi et al. ( ) ; Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | Greater longevity among older adults means that many workers also act as caregivers for other adults such as the elderly or people with dis abilities. Each year approximately million Americans ( percent of the population aged and older ) provide unpaid care to an elderly relative or friend.19 Most people providing eldercare are employed ( percent ) and about one-half work full-time.20 Just as working parents must juggle caregiv ing and work responsibilities many eldercare providers face similar if not greater competing demands While most eldercare providers are balancing work on top of their caregiving responsibilities ( Figure ) one-fifth of eldercare providers are also providing care for young children.21 Despite the increased potential for work-family conflict parents who provide eldercare have even higher rates of employment than eldercare providers without dependent children : percent are employed and percent work full-time. Now that baby boom ers are entering retirement it is likely that the sandwich generation those caring for elderly relatives and young children will continue to grow over the next years ( Figure ) The Effects of Work-Family Conflict As both men and women increasingly perform multiple roles many struggle to meet their work and family goals. Among dual-earning couples the likelihood of reporting work-family conflict has become especially pronounced among fathers. In percent of fathers in dual-earner couples reported work-family conflict compared to percent in a percentage-point increase in just one generation ( Figure ; Galinsky Aumann and Bond ) Although in mothers in dual-earning cou ples were more likely to report work-family conflict than fathers this pattern has since reversed ; in fathers were more likely to report work-family conflict consistent with the rise in time spent on child care among fathers Conflicts between work and family may arise because work obliga tions encroach on family responsibilities but conflict can also arise when family encroaches on work. Both genders increasingly perceive that their work responsibilities interfere with their family obligations. In per cent of full-time working men and women reported that their job demands interfered with their family life sometimes or often up from percent in ( Figure ) In contrast a smaller share of full-time workers report Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations ; BLS release Unpaid Eldercare in the United States All data in this paragraph is from BLS release Unpaid Eldercare in the United States | Chapter Figure Percent of All Unpaid Eldercare Providers Who Are Employed Percent All Parents Men Women Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey and ; CEA calculations Figure Share of Households with Children Under and Adults Over Percent Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | Figure Percentage of Mothers and Fathers Reporting Work-Family Conflict for Selected Years Percent Fathers in Dual-Earner Couples Mothers in Dual-Earner Couples Source : Family and Work Institute National Study of the Changing Workforce ; Employment Standards Administration Quality of Employment Survey as analyzed in Galinsky Aumann and Bond ( ) Figure Percentage of Full-Time Workers Who Report Work-Family Conflict for Selected Years Percent Work Interferes with Family Family Interferes with Work Source : General Social Survey ; CEA calculations | Chapter that family responsibilities interfere with work about to percent in both and Work and family conflict can also affect co-workers and employers as conflicts lead to greater absenteeism lower productivity and greater turnover.23 Lessening the constraints families face as they seek to balance work and family can benefit more than just individual families but also our overall economy. By expanding family-friendly workplace policies caregiv ers have more options to make the right choice for them. For example when workers must choose between spending the first few months at home with a new baby or keeping their job families are put in a difficult position and the economy potentially loses a worker who would prefer to stay in the labor force if only they had time off. Similarly policies that encourage workplace flexibility can help more families meet both their family and professional goals something that is good for both them and our economy As discussed the benefits of more flexible workplace policies will spill over to other workers employers and the overall economy. This chapter examines two major types of workplace policy paid leave and the broader category of workplace flexibility policies. It also documents where these policies are found today and what types of workers have access to them including through State and local efforts to expand access. The chapter then turns to the economics of such policies reviewing analysis that examines the benefits of these policies for business and the economy Access to Family-Friendly Workplace Policies Two of the most important policies that firms can offer to allow work ers to better balance work and family are access to paid leave and workplace flexibility. Paid leave includes access to family leave sick leave and other leave that allow workers to take paid time off to care for themselves or a family member Workplace flexibility generally refers to arrangements that allow workers to shift the time or location of their work through flexible or alternative hours telecommuting policies or alternative work locations It can also include partial employment options such as job sharing and phased retirement of older workers. Flexibility can include shifts in arrival and departure times the schedule of breaks and overtime and the number of days or hours worked per week such as a compressed workweek or the ability to accrue and use comp time at the employee s discretion. Scheduling NORC at University of Chicago ; General Social Survey and ; CEA calculations See e.g. Dalton and Mesch ( ) ; NACEW ( ) ; Gov. UK ( ) ; Ton ( ) ; Baughman DiNardi and Holtz-Eakin ( ) The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | adjustments can be an important tool to address unexpected issues outside of work. For instance if a family member is sick allowing workers to work from home may be an alternative to the worker taking paid leave in some jobs. Workplace flexibility is not a substitute for leave policies however Instead workplace flexibility can be a complement to leave policies allowing workers to cope with emergencies with the least disruption to their work Access and Use of Leave in the United States The Family Medical Leave Act ( FMLA ) significantly expanded access to leave by requiring employers to offer up to weeks of unpaid leave for qualifying reasons including the birth of a child. The FMLA increased unpaid leave use and coverage without reducing women s employ ment or wages ( Waldfogel ) Many workers however are exempt from the FMLA including employees who have been with the firm for less than months and have worked fewer than hours those at private busi nesses with fewer than employees and those who work part-time.24 A recent survey found that the FMLA covered only about percent of work ers ( Klerman Daley and Pozniak ) As of almost one-third of workers reported no access to unpaid leave ( Table ) Further the FMLA only guarantees access to unpaid leave for covered workers not paid leave The distinction between paid and unpaid leave is important espe cially for low-wage workers. Although unpaid leave may provide some flexibility it is not a realistic option if workers can not afford to take it. The implementation of paid family leave in California illustrates this point. The unpaid leave guaranteed by the FMLA enabled some mothers mostly those with more education in higher-paying fields to take maternity leave prior to California s paid family leave policy. However it was not until California guaranteed access to paid family leave benefits through its State-based fam ily leave plan that lower-income mothers began taking maternity leave in greater numbers ( Rossin-Slater Ruhm and Waldfogel ) Although the expanded leave opportunities provided by FMLA made real progress for American workers two decades ago the United States today significantly lags its international peers in leave provision as discussed in Box Approximately percent of workers reported in that they wanted to take leave in a given week but could not do so compared to percent of The FMLA also excludes some employees of otherwise eligible employers ( such as those with more than employees in total ) ; for example those who work at a location where the employer has fewer than employees within miles | Chapter Table Access to Leave ( ATUS ) Percent Unpaid Percent Paid Vacation Reason Own Illness Family Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations workers who did take leave.25 In addition according to a recent FMLA sur vey percent of female employees had an unmet need for leave ( compared to percent of male employees ) while percent of workers of color had an unmet need for leave ( compared to percent of White workers ) ( Klerman Daley and Pozniak ) After vacation sick leave is the most common type of paid leave employees have access to : approximately percent of workers report hav ing access to some form of paid leave they could take in the event of their own illness but only percent said they thought that they would be able to use paid leave to take care of ill family members. Overall less than onehalf of workers ( percent ) reported being able to take paid leave for any family-related reason. Even when workers have access to some forms of paid leave it can not always be used for all purposes. For instance paid vacation days may be impractical to use for illness because an employer might require scheduling the time in advance Only a minority of workers percent report access to paid fam ily leave for the birth of a child. Mothers are only slightly more likely than fathers to be able to access leave upon the birth of a child : percent of working men say that they could take paid leave for the birth of a child com pared to percent of working women. At the time of the American Time Use Survey only residents of California and New Jersey covering about percent of the U.S. population had State-run paid leave policies.27 Since the Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations and published tables. The calculations in this paragraph and the ones following reflect responses to whether workers believe that they can take leave assuming they receive their employer s approval as asked in the American Time Use Survey ( unless otherwise specified ) To the extent that employers do not approve of leave particularly unpaid leave these statistics overstate the availability of leave The study defined reasons for having an unmet need for leave as i ) the individual is not eligible for FMLA ii ) the reason for leave is not covered by the FMLA and iii ) the individual has exhausted her available entitlement for the leave year. The study did not inquire about conditions that would necessitate leave ( Klerman Daley and Pozniak ) Since the American Time Use Survey paid leave module was conducted Rhode Island has also implemented a paid family leave program The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | Box : International Comparisons : Access to Paid Leave in Other Countries The United States is the only developed country in the world that does not ensure paid maternity leave ( International Labour Organization ) Even in the developing world only Papua New Guinea does not ensure paid maternity leave. In addition to guaranteeing paid maternity leave other countries have acted to extend the amount and type of required parental leave. As of the majority of countries ( percent of all countries and territories and percent of developed countries ) surveyed by the International Labour Organization guaranteed paid maternity leave for a period of at least weeks the minimum duration recommended by the Maternity Protection Convention to ensure the health of mother and child ( International Labour Organization ) Other countries have also moved toward offering paternity leave in addition to maternity leave. As of percent of countries and ter ritories for which data are available provide both paternity and maternity leave and paternity leave is paid in percent of these countries. In contrast just percent of countries had statutory paternity leave provi sions in Like maternity leave the duration of paternity leave varies across countries from one day in Tunisia to days in Iceland Slovenia and Finland ( International Labour Organization ) Countries ensure paid maternity leave in different ways. The International Labour Organization contends that maternity leave should be provided through social insurance or public funds in order to provide broad coverage and mitigate discrimination against women in hiring that might arise if employers are fully responsible for financing maternity leave. In the majority of countries ( percent ) provided for maternity leave through social insurance programs while a quarter relied solely on employer mandates. Sixteen percent of countries com bine employer mandates and social insurance programs. In developed economies percent have programs financed exclusively through social contributions while percent have programs that involve an employer requirement. Since however both developed and devel oping countries have shifted from employer mandates to more collective systems survey was conducted Rhode Island has implemented a paid family leave program. The remainder of those reporting access to paid leave in the survey either had employers that voluntarily provided paid family leave or could utilize other forms of paid leave such as vacation time or compensa tion time for the birth of a child. These responses also do not indicate the | Chapter Table Access to Leave ( NCS ) Percent Paid Sick Leave Percent Paid Vacation Percent Paid Holidays Civilian Private Industry State and Local Gov't Leave Type Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics National Compensation Survey Employee Benefits Survey March duration of leave ; some of those who have access to paid family leave can take only a few paid days off work Access to paid leave varies by hours worked firm size and sector of employment. According to a nationally representative employer survey percent of employees have access to paid sick leave. Private employers however are much less likely to offer paid sick leave than public-sector employers ( Table ) : percent of private-sector employees have access to paid sick leave compared to percent among public-sector employees. In contrast private employers were more likely than public-sector employers to offer either paid vacation or holiday time.28 However employer surveys suggest that the availability of formal paid leave programs to workers is much lower than employee surveys indicate According to an employer survey only percent of private-sector workers have access to a formal paid family leave policy including only percent of part-time workers ( Van Giezen ) Workers at smaller firms also have less access to paid leave only percent of those at establishments with fewer than workers ( Van Giezen ) Although employer and employee surveys often give different impressions of benefits availability ( Box ) the discrepancy in this case may be due to workers reporting that they can use some paid time for caregiving for example paid sick days or accrued vacation time but not necessarily that they have coverage by a formal paid leave program Even when workers have access to leave they may not be able to use it. Some workers especially lower-income workers and those who are their family s primary breadwinner can not forego wages by taking unpaid leave Other workers may be pressured by their employer not to take leave. For these reasons it is important to also examine the actual use of leave. As shown in Table approximately percent of workers took either paid or unpaid leave during a typical week Bureau of Labor Statistics National Compensation Survey The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | Box : Why is There Such a Large Difference in Reported Prevalence Between the American Time Use Survey the National Compensation Survey and the National Study of Employers ? One important reason for the difference between the three surveys is that employers report in the employer-based surveys that they provide flexibility for some or most workers but do not otherwise indicate the prevalence. If many employers only provide a benefit to a minority of their workers the percent of workers with a benefit will be smaller than the percent of firms offering the same benefit. In addition there may be a difference between an organization s policies and their implementa tion. The National Study of Employers attempted to address this issue by asking if the organization allows employees to or provides the following benefits or programs rather than if it has written policies. However if workers are unaware that their managers would be willing to implement such practices are unaware of such policies or fear negative consequences from exercising such options they will report less avail ability of such arrangements than will their employers Second the National Study of Employers is a survey of employers in which the respondent is an organization rather than an individual As a result the data describe the formal benefits provided by a typical employer or how they are interpreted at the organizational level rather than how they are experienced by a typical employee. Given that by definition larger employers represent more workers than do smaller firms statistics about the average employer may not be representative of the experiences of the average worker The National Compensation Survey is also an employer survey but unlike the National Study of Employers it is weighted by the number of employees in a firm so larger firms are given more weight. As such the study reports statistics about the share of employees who are covered by a policy not the share of employers who offer one. Also unlike the National Study of Employers it only inquires about formal leave policies The American Time Use Survey ( ATUS ) in contrast is based on employee responses to whether they are able to access leave and flexible work arrangements and therefore captures informal policies and fungi bility across different types of benefits. This survey also captures worker perceptions about having access to leave. But to the extent employers do not approve of leave these statistics overstate the availability of leave However if workers are not informed of their company s policies the ATUS may understate access to leave. Finally the ATUS data on work ers are from while those from the employers are from The prevalence of such practices may have grown in the interim | Chapter Table Leave Use and Hours Percent Who Used Leave in Last Week Hours of Leave Taken Among Those Who Used Leave Access to Paid or Unpaid Leave Access to Paid Leave Access to Unpaid Leave Access to Schedule/Location Changes Utilization Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations The most common reasons workers cited for not being able to take leave included too much work ( percent ) and could not afford loss in income ( percent ) An additional percent reported not taking leave because they feared losing their job ( Figure ) Lower-wage workers were much more likely to cite could not afford loss of income as a reason they did not take desired leave while higher-wage workers were more likely to cite too much work. These responses demonstrate that there is unmet demand for leave policies especially paid leave for low-income workers Workplace Flexibility Access in the United States Workplace flexibility encompasses a range of policies that broadly speaking enable workers to adjust aspects of work as needed including starting and ending time days of work and location. Many workplaces are able to accommodate some flexibility in scheduling particularly when it concerns occasional changes in starting and quitting times. As shown below percent of employers report allowing at least some workers to periodically change their starting and quitting times within some range of hours in This is a slight increase from and a larger increase from However only percent of employers allowed most or all employees to do so indicating that this is often a benefit for only a few employees. Less than one-half of employers ( percent ) allowed at least some workers to change starting and quitting times on a daily basis and only percent said that they allowed most or all of their workers to do so ( Figure ) Only percent of firms report allowing workers to change their work times essentially at will or to alter the days on which they work ( Figure ) As with paid leave there are some differences across employer and worker responses on this issue. Around percent of employees report that they have flexibility in when they work but only percent report flexibility Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations Families and Work Institute National Study of Employers and The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | Figure Reason for Not Taking Needed Leave Percent Too Much Work Fear Loss of Job Could n't Afford It Note : Among workers who reported needing to take leave Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations Percent Figure Percent of Firms Offering Flexibility in the Scheduling of Hours Some Employees Most or All Employees Periodically Change Change Starting and Compress Workweek by Starting and Quitting Times Quitting Times on a Daily Working Longer Hours on within Some Range of Basis Fewer Days for At Least Hours Part of the Year Note : Survey includes firms with over employees Source : Families and Work Institute National Study of Employers | Chapter Percent Figure Percent of Workers with Access to Flexible Work Arrangements Scheduling Location Scheduling or Location Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations in where they work ( Figure ) Flexibility in hours worked is more com mon for part-time workers at percent ( Bond Galinsky and Sakai ) In addition though there is little data on the issue there are anecdotal reports that low-wage workers face unpredictable schedules that they have little control over ( Kantor ) Flexibility in work location is less common than flexibility in either work days or hours and there is substantial variation across industries and occupations. At least some of this difference is likely attributable to the fact that many jobs practically require an individual to be physically pres ent at the worksite. For example teachers sales clerks and assembly-line workers can not fulfill many of their obligations from an off-site location Managers and members of teams may need face-to-face contact. For other workers however a substantial fraction of their work could in principle be conducted from home or a satellite office. As a likely result of these factors about percent of workers in mining occupations report access to location flexibility compared to over percent of workers in information services.31 One study estimated that in more than one-half of all jobs were ame nable to telecommuting at least on a part-time basis ( Potter ) and that fraction has likely increased since then as a result of the spread of high-speed Internet and mobile technology ( Smith ) Statistics in this section are from Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations unless otherwise specified The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | While many employers allow some workers to telecommute the vast majority of employers limit which employees have access to this option As shown in Figure percent of employers reported allowing some workers to work at home occasionally while only percent of employers allowed most or all of their employees to do so ( Figure ) Similarly percent reported having some workers who worked from home on a regular basis but only percent had all or most of their employees based out of their home ( Bond Galinksy and Sakai ) In about percent of workers who had access to flexible work arrangements changed either their schedule or location in the previous week Of those who utilized workplace flexibility about percent changed their location. College-educated workers who used flexibility were more likely than less-educated workers to change their location ( percent compared to percent ) and men were slightly more likely to change their location than were women. Men s greater access to flexibility in workplace location is partially due to differences in the industries and occupations in which men and women work.32 About percent of workers who used flexible arrange ments combined location flexibility with scheduling flexibility Flexibility can also be used to help workers reduce the hours they need to work to stay in their jobs ; for example through job sharing. In percent of employers reported allowing some workers to share jobs and percent reported allowing at least some individuals to move from full-time to part-time work and back again while remaining at the same position or level ( Figure ) Few firms allowed most or all employees to take advan tage of these forms of flexibility ( Matos and Galinsky ) Disparities in Access to Paid Leave and Flexible Work Arrangements Lack of access to paid leave or flexible work arrangements may as has been suggested relate to industry-specific practices or job requirements However this translates into uneven access across demographic and other worker characteristics since those factors often correlate with job and sector choice. Family-friendly workplace policies are often a form of compensa tion and groups that are more likely to be highly compensated are also more likely to have access to these policies. Evaluations have found that total com pensation inequality ( for example access to health benefits and paid leave ) was about percent higher than wage inequality alone and unequal leave access accounted for over one-third of this additional gap ( Pierce ) In order to see if differences in industry and occupation explained men being more likely to change their location CEA regressed likelihood to switch on gender industry and occupation | Chapter Figure Percent of Firms Offering Flexibility in the Location of Work Percent Some Employees Most or All Employees Work Some Regular Paid Hours at Home Work Some Regular Paid Hours at Home Occasionally on a Regular Basis Note : Survey includes firms with over employees Source : Families and Work Institute National Study of Employers Figure Percent of Firms Offering Flexibility in the Number of Hours of Work Percent Some Employees Most or All Employees Move Between Fulland Part-Time Work While Remaining in the Same Position or Level Share Jobs Return to Work Gradually After Childbirth or Adoption Phase into Retirement by Working Reduced Hours Prior to Full Retirement Note : Survey includes firms with over employees Source : Families and Work Institute National Study of Employers as analyzed in Matos and Galinsky ( ) The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | Box : Small Business and Manufacturing Small Businesses. Some argue that while flexible scheduling may work in large firms each member of a small business team can be critical to business operations making it too costly to implement such practices in small firms. However flexibility can be a great advantage to small firms which may be better able to understand the flexibility needs of each of their employees and come up with a solution that benefits both the business and workers. Moreover since flexibility can increase retention it may be particularly helpful for small businesses as losing members of a small business team can be particularly costly. In fact data shows that small firms ( to employees ) provide more flexibility to their employees than do large firms ( and more employees ) across five dimensions of flexibility : changing starting and quitting times working some regular hours at home occasionally having control over when to take breaks returning to work gradually after childbirth or adoption and taking time off during the workday to attend to important family or personal needs without loss of pay. ( Matos and Galinsky ) Manufacturing. Manufacturing workers are less likely to have flexible work arrangements. This difference may be due to technological difficulties that limit the amount of flexibility manufacturing firms can give their workers. For firms that rely on formal shifts employees may not be able to leave at non-standard times without disrupting their col leagues. In addition the on-site physical nature of many manufacturing jobs may make telecommuting impossible. Despite these challenges there are strategies that some manufacturing companies have used to increase workplace flexibility. Increasing the breadth of training can help ensure that workers can more effectively fill in or otherwise compensate for one another in case a worker can not be present at a particular time Data do show substantial cross-industry differences in access to flex ible scheduling. As shown in Figure less than percent of workers in construction and transportation and utilities have flexibility to change their hours or location compared to about percent in information and leisure and hospitality Paid leave access appears to be strongly related to the pay level of the industry with high-wage industries offering more benefits. For example in the leisure and hospitality sector where the average hourly wage is about $ less than percent of workers report having some form of paid leave compared to almost percent of workers in the financial-activities sector ( Figure ) In some industries corporate culture may affect workers willingness to take significant leave suggesting that factors other than | Chapter Figure Access to Scheduling and Location Flexibility by Industry Leisure and Hospitality Information Wholesale and Retail Trade Professional and Business Services Financial Activities Other Services Public Administration Agriculture Forestry Hunting Manufacturing Mining Educational and Health Services Transportation and Utilities Construction Percent Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations Figure Access to Paid and Unpaid Leave by Industry Access to Unpaid Leave Access to Paid Leave Leisure and Hospitality Agriculture Forestry Hunting Construction Other Services Wholesale and Retail Trade Mining Professional and Business Services Information Educational and Health Services Transportation and Utilities Manufacturing Financial Activities Public Administration Percent Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | Table Access to Leave and Workplace Flexibility by Demographic Educational and Worker Characteristics Policy Type Total Percent Percent Flexibility in Percent Percent Access to Percent Flexibility in Percent the Access to Unpaid Scheduling of Flexibility in the Location Any Paid Leave Leave Hours Days Worked of Work Flexibility Demographic Characteristics Male Female White Non-Hispanic Black Non-Hispanic Asian Non-Hispanic Hispanic Educational Attainment ( Workers and Older ) Less than High School High School Some College Bachelor 's Degree or Higher $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Weekly Earnings ( Quartiles $ ) Hours Worked Full-Time Part-Time Note : Sample excludes self-employed workers. Weekly earnings are for full-time wage and salary workers with one job Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics American Time Use Survey ; CEA calculations compensation level alone are relevant for leave access and use ( Bernard ) Table shows differences in reported workplace flexibility by worker characteristics and type of flexibility. The American Time Use Survey inquired about specific types of workplace flexibility workers can access. In general workers who are likely to report flexibility in their schedule are also more likely to report having access to flexibility in where they do their work There are modest disparities in access to unpaid leave across demo graphic groups likely because not all workers are covered under the Federal | Chapter Box : January Presidential Initiatives to Expand Leave Access for Federal Employees While most Federal employees have access to paid sick leave and vacation time the government has fallen behind industry-leading companies and offers no paid family or parental leave. Often Federal employees have not been on the job long enough to have accrued enough leave upon the introduction of a new child into the home. In order to recruit and retain the best possible workforce the President announced in January several initiatives he is taking to help expand access to paid parental leave for Federal employees Presidential Memorandum Modernizing Federal Leave Policies for Childbirth Adoption or Foster Placement. The President issued a Presidential Memorandum directing agencies to update their policies to allow for the advance of six weeks of paid sick leave for parents or those caring for ill family members and other sick leave eligible uses. This will allow mothers spouses and partners with a new child the opportunity to take paid time off even if they have not yet accrued enough sick leave. It will also allow both parents to attend proceedings relating to the adoption of a child. Advanced annual leave is to be made available to employees for placement of a foster child in their home. Finally it directs agencies to consider providing access to affordable emergency backup dependent care services for up to five days a year consistent with available resources Parental Leave Proposal for Federal Employees. The President s Fiscal Year Budget includes a legislative proposal that would expand access to paid parental leave for Federal employees by offering six weeks of paid administrative leave for the birth adoption or foster placement of a child. In addition the proposal would clarify that new parents can use sick days to care for a healthy newborn or newly adopted or fostered child. ( Adoptive parents are already entitled to use sick days for other purposes related to the adoption of a child under the Federal Employees Family Friendly Leave Act ) Family and Medical Leave Act which guarantees access to unpaid leave for workers that are covered by the law. Disparities in access to paid leave are typically more substantial. The largest differences in access to paid leave and workplace flexibility occur across Hispanics and non-Hispanics with only percent of Hispanics having access to paid leave compared to percent among non-Hispanic Whites. This disparity is not fully explained by differ ences in the industries and occupations that Hispanics and non-Hispanics work in nor is it fully explained by differences in wages and education Accounting for differences in industry occupation wages and education The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | accounts for less than half of the difference in paid leave access between Hispanics and non-Hispanics.33 Higher-wage workers are significantly more likely to have access to paid leave compared to lower-wage workers consistent with the finding above that higher-paying industries also offer more paid leave ( Table ) Employee surveys suggest that college-educated workers are twice as likely to have access to paid leave as workers without a high school degree ( percent versus percent ) Comparing wage levels full-time workers in the top income quartile are times as likely to have access to paid leave as the workers in the bottom quartile ( percent versus percent ) Therefore the unequal availability of paid leave can exacerbate not only compensation inequality but also inequality in well-being since the highest-income work ers are most likely to have access to policies that enable them to balance work and family State and Local Initiatives to Expand Access to Work-Family Friendly Policies Beyond employers voluntarily providing access to paid leave for employees some State and local governments have moved to expand access to family-friendly policies to all workers spurred in part by worker demand for these policies but also because some businesses recognize the value in a set of consistent policies for all workers. In fact the vast majority of businesses see either positive or no effect from State paid leave policies ( Appelbaum and Milkman ) State Paid Family Leave Currently three states have implemented paid family leave programs ( Table ) In addition Washington State has passed paid leave legisla tion but has not yet implemented the program. A number of states are also considering the feasibility of similar programs.34 For example in the U.S. Department of Labor awarded $ in competitive Paid Leave Analysis Grants to the District of Columbia Massachusetts Montana and Rhode Island to study the feasibility of state-wide paid leave programs. The grantees were selected from a larger pool of applicants. The Department of Labor announced in January that it will offer $ million in new funding To conduct this analysis CEA examined the relationship between access to leave and worker characteristics. After controlling for wages education industries and occupations percent of the difference in access to leave between Hispanics and non-Hispanics remained unexplained According to the National Partnership for Women and Families around states have pending legislation on some kind of paid leave program | Chapter Table State Leave Policies as of January State Type Year Effective Duration Implementation Approximately percent maximum of $ per week Replacement Rate California Family Leave weeks Temporary Disability Insurance New Jersey Family Leave weeks Temporary Disability Insurance percent maximum of $ per week Rhode Island Family Leave weeks Temporary Disability Insurance Around percent maximum of $ per week Sick Leave days Paid by employers percent Connecticut Paid by employers percent Massachusetts District of Columbia Sick Leave hours Paid by employers percent Sick Leave days Paid by employers percent California Sick Leave days Source : California Employment Department ; New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development ; Rhode Island Department of Labor and Training ; California Governor 's Office of Business and Economic Development ( ) ; Connecticut Department of Labor ( ) ; Secretary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts ; District of Columbia ( ) for the program which could provide competitive grants to an additional to states or municipalities California implemented paid family leave in Under California law paid family leave benefits are available to almost all workers. The pro gram provides six weeks of paid family leave at approximately percent of usual weekly earnings with a maximum weekly benefit of $ as of which is indexed to the State s average weekly wage. The paid family leave program was developed as a component of the existing temporary disability insurance system. The system is funded through a payroll tax which is percent of the first $ of an employee s State Disability Insurance ( SDI ) taxable wages in ( California Employment Development Department ) This tax funds both the temporary disability insurance system and the paid leave system. By implementing paid leave through the existing disability insurance system California was able to capitalize on their existing admin istrative and revenue collection institutions. Businesses may alternatively choose to cover employees through a voluntary plan that provides coverage rights and benefits that are at least as good as the state-mandated plan with at least one greater right or benefit than provided by the State plan Businesses choosing voluntary plans must also get the agreement of the majority of their employees Pew estimates that million workers have used the California Paid Family Leave program since its inception ( Pew Charitable Trusts ) The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | Because California enacted its policy a decade ago some evidence on the policy s impacts in that state is available. Following implementation of the program most businesses reported no negative effect on profitability. A survey of employers affected by California s paid family leave initiative found that the vast majority over percent reported no negative effect on profitability turnover or morale ( Appelbaum and Milkman ) Empirical research also found that California s leave policy increased hours worked and earnings among mothers with one- to three-year-old children by up to percent particularly among lower-wage mothers who were unlikely to be able to afford to take unpaid leave ( Rossin-Slater Ruhm and Waldfogel ) New Jersey became the second state to provide its workers with access to paid family leave in The New Jersey program also piggybacks off of the state s Temporary Disability Insurance program to create Family Leave Insurance. All employees in New Jersey whose employers are subject to the New Jersey Unemployment Compensation law are covered regardless of the number of employees. Workers contribute percent of their first $ in earnings. Unlike California and Rhode Island the revenue for the family leave insurance program is collected through a separate tax rate from the Temporary Disability Insurance program although the wage base is the same as that that is used for both unemployment compensation and temporary disability insurance. Family Leave Insurance is available to work ers with at least calendar weeks of covered employment and at least $ a week ( or $ annually ) in earnings in the weeks preceding leave Covered workers are eligible for six weeks of partial wage replacement in the months after becoming a parent or any time for the care of an ailing family member. The wage replacement is paid at two-thirds of the worker s average weekly wage up to $ a week. Employers can also choose to provide coverage through an approved Family Leave Insurance private plan and opt-out of the State plan. Private plans must however provide benefits that are at least as generous as the State plan and the cost to the worker can not exceed the payroll tax they would face under the State plan ( New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development ) Rhode Island was the third State to enact paid family leave by extend ing its Temporary Disability Insurance program ( which has been in place since ) to create a Temporary Caregiver Insurance program ( TCI ) and markedly expand access to paid leave among Rhode Island workers TCI became effective at the start of and provides covered workers with income support when they take up to four weeks of paid time away from work to care for a new child or a seriously ill family member. Weekly Temporary Caregiver Insurance benefits total approximately percent | Chapter of an employee s weekly wage up to a maximum of $ Temporary Caregiver Insurance leverages the benefits of extending the Temporary Disability Insurance ( TDI ) program to incorporate new benefits for caregiv ing. Rhode Island covers the additional benefits under the previous payroll Temporary Disability Insurance Tax of percent of a workers first $ in earnings. This employee paid tax covers both the TDI program and the TCI program. Additional benefits may be available to workers with children under the age of and disabled children over This weekly dependency allowance is paid as the greater of $ or percent of the standard benefit rate ( Rhode Island Department of Labor and Training ) New York Hawaii and Puerto Rico also have temporary disability insurance systems and could easily implement programs similar to those in California New Jersey and Rhode Island. Washington was the first state to pass a paid leave law not administered through a disability insurance pro gram though it has not yet been implemented due to the lack of a financing mechanism State Paid Sick Leave At the start of Connecticut was the only state along with a few cities that guaranteed workers the right to earn paid sick leave. But momen tum was building at both the State and city level. By the end of the year both California and Massachusetts had enacted paid sick leave policies along with cities such as Eugene Oregon San Diego and Oakland In the District of Columbia passed a paid sick leave law that provides paid sick leave to workers in most industries who have been with their employer for at least days. Workers can use sick leave for illness preventative care or services related to domestic violence for themselves or a family member. The rate of sick leave accrual is based on employer size : employers with or more employees are required to provide an hour of paid leave for every hours worked up to a maximum of days while employers with fewer than employees must provide an hour of paid sick leave for every hours worked to a maximum of days a year ( District of Columbia ) In Connecticut implemented legislation that required certain employers to offer paid sick leave to their workers. The law covers hourly ( non-exempt ) workers in the service sector employed by firms with at least employees. Manufacturers and nationally chartered non-profits that provide recreation child care and education are not required to provide Benefits are percent of the wages earned in the highest quarter of the base period. For workers who are earning a steady salary over the quarter this is approximately percent of their weekly wages The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | paid leave and per diem and temporary workers are also not covered ( Connecticut Department of Labor ) While only about to percent of Connecticut s workers are covered due to the many exceptions most part-time workers were covered ( Appelbaum et al. ) Covered workers in Connecticut earn an hour of paid leave for every hours worked up to a total of hours of paid leave ( days ) in a calendar year. In addition to personal illness workers are able to use this leave to care for a sick spouse a sick child or if they are a victim of family violence or sexual assault The California legislature passed paid sick leave legislation in September After July all employers will be required to provide paid sick leave. Employees are eligible after working days for an employer in California. Employees accrue at least an hour of sick leave for every hours worked which employers may limit to days a year. In contrast to the laws in the District of Columbia and Connecticut the California legislation extends to both small- and large-employers but exempts some in-home service providers and some employees who are covered by collective bar gaining arrangements. Like both the District of Columbia and Connecticut California employees will be able to use paid sick leave to care for themselves or family members ( California Governor s Office of Business and Economic Development ; Kalt ) In November Massachusetts passed a ballot initiative requir ing employers with at least employees to offer paid sick leave ( workers at smaller employers can take unpaid leave as provided for in the law ) Workers earn at least an hour of sick leave for every hours worked up to a maximum of hours a year. Workers can use this earned leave for illness or injury affecting the employee or his or her child spouse parent or spouse s parent ( or to attend routine medical appointments for the same group ) or to address the effects of domestic violence on the employee or his or her dependent child. CEA estimates that as of May when it becomes effec tive approximately percent of Massachusetts employees will have access to paid sick leave ( Longitudinal Business Database ) Cities across the country have also enacted statutes providing covered employees with the opportunity to accrue paid sick leave. These include San Francisco ; Oakland ; Seattle ; Portland Oregon ; New York City ; Jersey City ; and Newark. In addition there are active campaigns in around other States and cities to make paid sick leave mandatory. However at least States have legislation barring cities and counties from passing their own paid sick leave legislation According to the Business Dynamics Survey approximately percent of employees in Massachusetts were employed at firms with workers in | Chapter Right-to-Request Provisions One way to help workers gain access to flexibility in the workplace is to make it easier for workers to simply ask for these benefits. This practice is spelled out in right-to-request policies which lay out the circumstances and procedures by which workers can ask their supervisors to consider alter native work arrangements to meet their needs for flexibility. Workers may be hesitant to enquire about their employer s flexible scheduling policies because they fear this request will reflect poorly upon them or cause them to lose their job. One-fifth of American adults and more than one-third of working parents and caregivers report that they believe they have been denied a promotion raise or new job because they need a flexible work schedule ( Nielsen ) In addition anecdotal evidence particularly from the service and retail sectors suggest that even part-time employees can be penalized for requesting limits on their availability ( Greenhouse ) Right-to-request laws attempt to reduce punitive behavior by employers when workers make a scheduling request. Under right-to-request laws employers can not retaliate against an employee who requests a flexible work arrangement. In addition the laws create an incentive for employers to consider implementing flexible workplace policies Some local and State governments in the United States have already implemented right-to-request laws ( Table ) In San Francisco passed the Family Friendly Workplace Ordinance which allows some work ers to request flexible or predictable working arrangement to help meet their responsibilities in caring for children elderly parents or relatives with seri ous health conditions ( City and County of San Francisco ) Vermont passed similar legislation that allows workers to request workplace flexibility for any reason ( Vermont State Legislature ) These laws do not require the employer to accept the request ; they only require employers to consider the requests provide a written response and not retaliate against workers for making such requests. Employers are able to deny requests that would negatively affect business performance or impose high business costs ( City and County of San Francisco ; Vermont State Legislature ) As these policies were implemented recently there is not yet empirical data on how businesses and employees have responded Other countries including the United Kingdom New Zealand and Australia have also adopted right-to-request laws.37 Most requests are submitted by those with child care responsibilities and in its early years of Under the Act of Part-Time and Fixed-Term Contracts ( TzBfG ) employees in Germany who have been working for more than months at a company with more than employees can request to switch to part-time work. This request can only be declined for business reasons. See Foster and Sule ( ) The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | Box : Japan s Strategy to Grow the Economy by Increasing Women s Involvement Japan has experienced decades of low growth. In response Prime Minister Shinz Abe has developed a strategy to put Japan back on a path to sustained growth. An important part of this strategy is creating a society in which women are supported in taking a more substantial role in work and decision making. Currently many Japanese women must choose between career and family. As a result the labor force participa tion rate among prime-age Japanese women has recently been well below that of other developed countries. It is currently around percent about percentage points below that of Japanese men and about percentage points above the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) average. However female labor force par ticipation in Japan has risen about percentage points since The focus on women s participation in Japan began in earnest in the last three years and since there has been a notable uptick in female labor force participation The Abe policies are focused on creating a more broadly inclusive professional environment for women in Japan with the goal of increas ing economic growth by taking greater advantage of the talents of women in the labor market and government. The International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) estimates that increasing female labor force participation in Japan could add another percent to growth each year and raise income per capita by percent One avenue that the government is pursuing to raise female labor force participation is child care. Under Abe the government is creating new spaces in nursery schools to eliminate child care waiting lists and provide more high quality care and thereby enable women who want to continue to work after starting a family to do so. Currently percent of Japanese women leave work when they have their first child. Other policies include initiatives to increase the representation of women in leadership positions to percent by and to encourage private businesses to add at least one woman to their boards. Japan provides weeks of paid maternity leave at roughly two-thirds of pay and an additional weeks of paid parental leave which makes it around average in the OECD for total leave available to mothers ( OECD ) Japan also provides protections for pregnant workers : pregnant workers or workers who just had a baby can not be assigned to work injurious to pregnancy childbirth nursing and related matters ( ILO ) These policies can provide important lessons for U.S. policy makers in consid ering how to raise female labor force participation | Chapter Table Local Right to Request Laws Locality Date Effective Covered Workers Flexibility Uses San Francisco ( City and January County ) Workers who have worked for their current employer for at least months and who work at least hours per week on a regular basis Employers with fewer than employees are exempt Caring for a child under the age of a relative with a serious health condition and/or a parent older than Vermont Workers can request flexible All public and private work arrangements sector workers or predictable schedules for any reason January Employer Responsibilities Employers must meet with the employee and respond to the request within days of the meeting. Any denial must be in writing and describe the business reason for the denial Employers must consider requests at least twice a year. Employers may deny if the request poses costs to the business Source : City and County of San Francisco ( ) ; Vermont State Legislature ( ) implementation employers fully or partially accepted more than percent of these requests for flexibility ( Georgetown University Federal Legislation Clinic ) Perhaps unsurprisingly the percentage of employers offering workplace flexibility increased after the implementation of these laws. In the United Kingdom for example more than percent of employers have flexible work arrangements in the workplace ; only percent of employers reported such arrangements in ( NACEW ) U.K. employers have realized business benefits from flexible work arrangements including improved employee relations better recruitment and retention lower absenteeism and increased productivity ( NACEW ) The right-to-request law there was recently expanded to cover all workers regardless of parent or caregiver status ( Gov. UK ) The evi dence suggests that right-to-request laws make it easier and more likely for employees to ask for and obtain flexible work arrangements. Flexible work arrangements can also lead to working environments better matched to employees needs and a more productive workforce for employers The Administration recognizes that the benefits of workplace flexibil ity programs can only be realized if workers feel comfortable asking for them With that understanding the President signed a Presidential Memorandum in June encouraging every agency in the Federal Government to expand flexible workplace policies as much as possible. The memorandum also makes it clear that Federal workers have the right-to-request a flexible The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | work arrangement without fear of retaliation. As a result Federal agencies will periodically make their employees aware of the workplace flexibilities available to them and remind them that they may request any of those flex ibilities without fear of retaliation. Supervisors must consider these requests carefully confer with requesting employees and render decisions in a timely fashion. Since workers may be unaware of their options with respect to workplace flexibility or the circumstances under which they are permitted to use them this step will enable Federal employees to better balance their personal and professional obligations by providing clarity on those issues By instructing agencies to extend their flexibility policies and encour aging workers to request schedules that fit their needs this memorandum builds on previous efforts to promote workplace flexibility in the Federal government. For example increased telecommunication capacities devel oped in part under President Bill Clinton s direction have enabled Federal employees to work remotely through adverse weather situations. Workers ability to change their work location has resulted in significant cost savings For example during the winter of telecommuting capabilities saved over $ million for every day the Federal government was closed due to heavy snow for a total savings of more than $ million ( CEA ) The Economic Case for FamilyFriendly Workplace Policies Paid leave and workplace flexibility hold great potential to benefit businesses as well as our economy overall through improved economic pro ductivity. A body of research finds that these practices can benefit employers by improving their ability to recruit and retain talent lowering costly worker turnover and minimizing loss of firm-specific skills and human capital as well as by boosting morale and worker productivity. The following subsec tions present evidence on the impacts of paid leave and workplace flexibility on absenteeism and worker health two dimensions of workforce quality performance about which there is a great deal of information and then turn to the broader literature on other aspects of workforce performance including turnover. Taken together these two strands of research suggest that work-family friendly policies have significantly improved worker per formance in firms and industries that have tried them While many companies do offer these benefits many other companies do not : as previously shown fewer than one-third of full-time workers have flexibility in their hours worked and less than one-half of workers have access to any kind of paid leave. The question of why these policies have not | Chapter reached more workers is an important one and the literature offers several explanations reviewed in the sections below Impact of Leave and Flexibility on Worker Health and Absenteeism Both paid leave and workplace flexibility policies can improve worker health and workplace flexibility can reduce absenteeism. Improved worker health may indirectly improve productivity and morale as healthy workers are able to work to their full potential Paid sick leave creates a healthier work environment by encouraging workers to stay home when they are sick making them less likely to infect others and cause further productivity losses. For example a study showed that employee absences fell more rapidly after the peak of the H1N1 pandemic among public sector workers ( who had much higher access to paid sick leave ) compared to private sector workers who were much less likely to have paid sick leave ( Drago and Miller ) Evidence suggests that on net paid sick days do not lower business profits. A survey of employers affected by California s paid leave initia tive found that around percent reported no negative effect on profitability ( Appelbaum and Milkman ) Another study examining the implemen tation of San Francisco s paid sick leave law in found no evidence of a negative economic effect. Relative to surrounding areas that did not have a paid sick leave law total employment and the total number of businesses increased in San Francisco after the law s implementation ( Petro ) In addition a study of employers in Connecticut after that State imple mented a paid sick leave program found that employees did not abuse the policy by taking unnecessary sick days ( Appelbaum ) Research suggests that paid parental leave policies can provide health benefits that extend to children such as higher birth weight and lower infant mortality. There are several channels through which improved health can occur. With paid leave parents can better monitor their children s health ( Ruhm ) In particular Rossin-Slater ( ) found that among collegeeducated mothers an expansion of unpaid leave increased birth weight and decreased premature births and infant mortality. The existing evidence on child development emphasizes the importance of the early childhood and prenatal environment so benefits of better health in infanthood are likely to persist as children age ( Almond and Currie ) In support of this hypothesis a study of Norway s maternity leave reform found children whose mothers were eligible for extended maternity leave had higher educa tional attainment lower teen pregnancy rates higher IQ scores and higher adulthood earnings ( Carneiro Loken and Salvanes ) In addition more The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | paternity leave taken at birth is associated with fathers being more involved in child care nine months later which has benefits for both the child and the mother ( Nepmonyaschy and Waldfogel ) Flexible work arrangements can also improve worker health. A work place intervention conducted at Midwestern grocery stores found that workers supervised by family supportive managers reported improved phys ical and mental health ( Work Family and Health Network 2008a ) Another study found that a workplace intervention at a retail company to allow employees greater control over their work schedule resulted in employees being less likely to report feeling obligated to come to work or not see a doctor when they were sick. The intervention also improved sleep quality and energy and reduced psychological stress ( Work Family and Health Network 2008b ) Workplace flexibility can also help reduce absenteeism which can be costly to a firm by creating uncertainty over the workforce size and com position that a manager can expect on any given day. In companies where multiple workers perform similar tasks workers can help compensate for missing colleagues. In smaller firms or firms where each worker s job is different and critical to a company s mission however unplanned absences may be especially costly. Studies that follow workers as they switch between firms that offer a flexible work schedule ( such as work-at-home options ) to those that did not found that workers tended to miss work more often in firms without flexible arrangements ( Dionne and Dostie ; Yasbek ; Comfort Johnson and Wallace ; Akyeampong ) Perhaps the most compelling study of the impact of workplace flexibility on absenteeism comes from within a large public utility that temporarily allowed workers in one of its sub-units to choose their working hours without changing the total number of hours worked. The other sub-units retained the standard scheduling. The sub-unit with a flexible schedule reported a reduction in absences of more than percent while the absenteeism rate in other sub-units essentially remained unchanged ( Figure ; Dalton and Mesch ) When the company reverted back to standard scheduling for all of the sub-units after a one-year trial the absenteeism rates of the two sub-unit groups became once again similar A recent Gallup Poll ( ) estimates that the annual cost of work force absences due to poor health was $ billion. If the findings in Dalton and Mesch ( ) generalize across industries and if all of this reduction | Chapter Figure Average Absence Rates With and Without Flexible Work Scheduling Absence Rate Offered a Flexible Work Schedule Not Offered a Flexible Work Schedule Before the Program During the Program After the Program Source : Dalton and Mesch ( ) translates into lower costs for employers then the implied savings due to offering flexibility could be around $ billion a year.38 The Role of Family-Friendly Policies in Worker Recruitment Retention and Productivity Paid leave and flexible work arrangements are forms of compensa tion similar to wages or health and retirement benefits. Employers have discretion over which benefits to provide to their employees resulting in differing compensation packages. Economists have long considered the total wage and benefits bundle to be important to workers in selecting jobs ( Bauman ; Woodbury ; Eberts and Stone ; Summers ; Gruber and Krueger ; Sheiner ; Olson ) There is evidence that workers take into account the entire compensation package not only wages when considering job offers. For example workers must be paid higher wages to accept jobs without health insurance partly to help pay for their health expenses ( CEA ) Similarly analysis of data on employ ers found that when offered little workplace flexibility workers require higher wages to help pay for services such as emergency child care and As discussed earlier Dalton and Mesch ( ) find that a flexible schedule reduced absences by more than percent. Applying that percentage to $ billion translates to savings of about $ billion a year The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | eldercare ( Baughman DiNardi and Holtz-Eakin ) These studies show clearly that workers value family-friendly benefits and that offering these benefits is a form of compensation. Research shows that higher compensa tion improves business ability to attract and retain talent as well as generally improving worker performance ( Dal Bo Finan and Rossi ; Cappelli and Chauvin ; Akerlof and Yellen ; Bewley ) Therefore it is not surprising that firms that offer these benefits have been shown to be more productive ( Bloom Krestchmer and Van Reenen ; Bloom et al ; A Better Balance ; Corporate Voices for Working Families ; NACEW ) In addition to the academic analyses cited above survey evidence also indicates that employees highly value access to leave and flexibility. Nearly one-half of working parents say they have chosen to pass up a job they felt would conflict with family obligations ( Nielsen ) As shown in Figure a very high share of Americans support such policies and more than one-half of workers feel they could do their job better if allowed a more flexible schedule ( Nielsen ) In another survey of human resource managers two-thirds cited family-supportive policies such as flexible hours as the single most important factor in attracting and retaining employees ( Williams ) Employers that have adopted these practices cite many economic benefits such as reduced worker absenteeism and turnover improvements in their ability to attract and retain workers and other positive changes that translate into increased worker productivity ( A Better Balance ; Corporate Voices for Working Families ) Research by Claudia Goldin has focused on a new reason for gender segregation particularly in high-skill occupations : highly educated women are more often choosing career paths in which the wage penalties for flex ibility are smaller such as dentistry veterinary medicine optometry and pharmacy and where the slowdown in wage growth for small periods of time out of the labor force is less ( Goldin ) However survey evidence suggests that both men and women value family-friendly workplace policies and men are increasingly also prioritizing jobs that allow more flexibility or include paid parental leave. For example a survey of high-skilled work ing fathers conducted by researchers at Boston College found that percent said that the availability of paid paternity leave was an important consider ation in seeking a new job if they planned to have another child. Likewise percent reported that workplace flexibility policies allowing them to actively engage with their children were an important job characteristic ( Harrington et al. ) Recruitment and retention are particularly important channels through which work-family friendly policies can improve productivity and | Chapter the bottom line for businesses. More successful recruiting means firms can get the employees they want faster and improved retention saves the direct and indirect costs of turnover. These costs can be considerable : for example one study found that hiring costs account for more than $ per hire in large firms or approximately percent of total annual labor costs for a full-time equivalent worker.39 Low retention is particularly costly for firms that extensively train their workers with skills specific to their workplace ( Becker ; Mincer ; Lazear ) One study notes that visible costs such as advertising and orientation costs account for only to percent of total turnover costs ( Baughman DiNardi and Holtz-Eakin ) But after including costs such as productivity losses related to training new employees another study estimates that the median cost of turnover was percent of an employee s annual salary ( Boushey and Glynn ) It is not surprising therefore that firms have strong incentives to reduce voluntary turnovers ( Pencavel ) Research has shown that firms that invest in The study included more than large organizations. Data referred to the calendar year The average size of the company in the report has annual revenue of $ billion and roughly employees. See PriceWaterhouseCoopers LLP ( ) The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | their workforce with higher pay fuller training better benefits and more convenient schedules outperform their competitors ( Ton ) There are several ways that paid leave and flexible work arrange ments can help reduce turnover. A Gallup Poll found that access to flexible work arrangements was highly correlated with greater worker engagement and higher well-being ( Harter and Agrawal ) In a survey of randomly selected employers in New York employers that offered sick leave and child care assistance had significantly lower rates of turnover ( Baughman DiNardi and Holtz-Eakin ) Other studies report that firms with more flexible telecommuting practices had lower turnover ( Yasbek ; Computer Economics ) Case studies of firms highlighted in Box also provide qualitative insights into perceived benefits Paid parental leave in particular can help businesses retain talented workers after childbirth. Studies show that paid maternity leave increases the likelihood that mothers return to their employer following the birth of a child and particularly when combined with statutory job protection paid maternity leave can increase mothers wages and employment in the long run ( Rossin-Slater Ruhm and Waldfogel ; Waldfogel Higuchi and Abe ) At a macroeconomic level paid leave could contribute to higher labor force participation and a stronger economy and can also raise business profits if the costs of providing paid leave are lower than the costs of turnover costs In addition to the evidence on recruitment and retention several studies document a positive relationship between workplace flexibility and worker productivity. For example a study of over firms in the United States United Kingdom France and Germany found a significant positive relationship between work-life balance practices and total factor productiv ity ( Bloom Krestchmer and Van Reenen ) The authors argue that this correlation could be driven by a third factor good management. Wellmanaged firms both have higher productivity and often embrace flexible workplace practices. But importantly the study finds no evidence that work place flexibility harms productivity. In a randomized evaluation designed to eliminate a role for management in affecting worker productivity call center employees at a travel agency in China found productivity increased when workers chose where they worked. When workers were allowed to choose the optimal place to work based on their preferences and circumstances whether from home or the office productivity increased percent ( Bloom et al. ) | Chapter Box : Reimagining the Structure of Work at JetBlue Since the airline s founding in JetBlue has followed a flexible work-from-home model for nearly all of its customer service representatives. After initial training JetBlue crewmembers work from home and regularly attend monthly and quarterly training sessions and team meetings at their local Support Center ( Salt Lake City or in Orlando ) JetBlue cites the business case for improving workplace flex ibility for its crewmembers stating that when they can better attend to their home life it leads to happier and more productive crewmembers and lower overhead which leads to lower ticket prices for their custom ers and higher profits and profit sharing for its crewmembers The Business Case for Wider Adoption of Flexible Workplace Practices and Policies The evidence cited above suggests that paid leave and flexible work arrangements benefit workers and employers. Workers are happier healthier and more likely to remain with the more flexible firm ; for firms this means lower turnover less absenteeism easier recruiting of talent and more productive workers. Yet despite these benefits many firms have still not adopted such practices. If these practices generate such large economic benefits for both workers and firms why do more workers not already have access to them ? Researchers have put forth two explanations for this puzzle. One broad explanation is that managers either are unaware that these policies can benefit them or they simply do not have the capacity to implement these policies. A second explanation posits that firms differ in the benefits that family-friendly policies can provide with some firms benefiting greatly and others much less so. Under this explanation managers are aware of the benefits of such practices to their firms and implementation rates reflect the fact that only some managers will find it worthwhile to enact these policies Research has found considerable evidence for the first of these expla nations. Economists find that lack of information is one factor that may contribute to the incomplete adoption of the best management practices ( Bloom and Van Reenen ) For example even in manufacturing where productivity is relatively easily quantified managers sometimes appear to fail to make profit-maximizing choices ( Romer ; Bloom and Van Reenen ; Levitt ; Cho and Rust ; Bloom Kretschmer and Van Reenen ; Yasbek ) This may be because it takes time for managers to learn and incorporate new techniques and policies or because firms can The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | be persuaded to adopt such policies under only intense outside pressure. In addition as the labor force changes the best practices from previous years may not be best-suited to today s workforce ( Griliches ; Cohen and Levinthal ; Levitt and March ; Nelson and Winter ) If imple menting new work-family policies is costly for firms adoption may lag leav ing firms with outdated human resources practices until either labor-market competition forces a change or until new management arrives The second possible explanation holds that costs and benefits of family-friendly practices may differ across firms. For example it might be possible for financial services employees to occasionally work from home while it is often infeasible for food service employees. Theory then predicts that firms and industries with the greatest potential net gains from adopting flexible practices should be among the first to embrace them. Since existing studies of the effect of flexible arrangements come from firms that have already adopted these practices the evidence presented above may overstate the economic benefits that some firms without flexible arrangements would enjoy if such flexibility were widely adopted. On the other hand if flexible arrangements were coordinated across firms or part of a Federal program costs would be spread out among employers making such offerings more beneficial for them. In addition it would prevent employers who refuse to provide flexibility to their workers from pricing their goods and services lower than competitors who do provide flexibility However there is still an economic rationale for why employers and the U.S. economy could benefit from wider adoption of flexible workplace practices. Promoting work-life balance may help society in ways that are not taken into account by either employers or employees ( what economists call social benefits or positive externalities ) For example some economic models have emphasized that firms may be reluctant to offer benefits pack ages that are particularly attractive to workers for whom the benefits are most costly to provide. The classic example is health insurance which may attract the sickest workers. If a similar dynamic operates with flexible work place arrangements then too few employers may offer such arrangements and those that do will pay a higher cost. Summers ( ) explains this as an example of asymmetric information. Suppose that providing the benefit is costly and that a firm does not have accurate information about an indi vidual s probability of using the benefit. A firm-offered benefit attracts the workers who value it most. If the benefit is most costly to provide to these workers the firm s cost of offering the benefit will increase. The cost would be lower if all firms offered the same benefit allowing more workers to ben efit from the increased flexibility ( Levine provides a related argument ) In addition on average adopting flexible practices likely encourages labor | Chapter force participation among those workers that would otherwise find it too costly to work or invest in workplace skills. For example Goldin ( ) documents that as women perceived more options for long-term future careers their educational attainment increased. In this way when potential workers are better able to envision a long-term attachment to the labor force their skill development may increase Family-friendly practices can also help encourage better bonding between parents and children which has been shown to lead to better out comes for children in adulthood. For instance researchers have shown that children of women who receive paid maternity leave earn percent higher wages at age ( Carneiro Loken and Salvanes ) Enabling workers who are sick or who have sick children to stay home can also benefit others as illness is more quickly curtailed in schools and the workplace In decision making firms may be best persuaded by evidence of impacts on other firms bottom lines. An innovative paper studying the impact on firm profits tracked the announcements of new work-life balance policies ( such as dependent care or flexible work arrangements ) by Fortune companies in The Wall Street Journal. The paper found that on average firms stock prices rose in the days following announcements of work-life balance initiatives ( Arthur ) Such evidence indicates that flexible prac tices boost investors perceptions of the value of a firm which may derive from their beliefs about the impact of the policies on worker productivity It may also be due to a perception about the value of working parents and caregivers in the company and the effect of work-life balance initiatives on these employees. Greater representation of women in top management positions is associated with better firm performance on several dimensions ( Catalyst ) and research also finds that women can help drive innova tion and better target female customers and employees ( Hewlett Marshall and Sherbin ) Conclusion With women and men increasingly sharing breadwinning and care giving responsibilities today s working families need a modern work place one with workplace flexibility paid family and sick leave access to family-supporting and work-supporting policies like quality child care and eldercare to allow them to make the choices that best fit their needs. Such policies lead to higher labor force participation greater labor productivity and work engagement and better allocation of talent across the economy The International Monetary Fund and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development have both identified child care policies and The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies | paid leave as important drivers of female labor force participation ( ElborghWoytek et al. ) Caregivers will continue to face complex decisions about whether to combine their caregiving duties with participation in the labor force and many will choose to stay out of the labor force or reduce their work hours in order to best meet the needs of their families. However policies should make it easier for those who by choice or necessity are combining caregiving with paid work. Not only are such policies helpful to parents but access to policies like paid leave better facilitate children s development and therefore their long-run outcomes including higher wages as adults While many employers have already adapted to the changing realities of the American workforce there is still a long way to go. More than one-half of workers believe they could do their jobs better with more flexibility and almost one-half of parents say they have passed up a job because of its con flict with family obligations. An increasing share of parents in dual-earner families report that work interferes with their home life. More than onequarter of workers report that they have no access to any form of leave even unpaid ; less than one-half of workers have access to paid leave for the birth or adoption of a child. These numbers also contain important disparities by ethnicity income education and sector of employment As in all business decisions the critical factors that determine adop tion of a new management strategy are the costs and benefits of a program Almost one-third of firms cite costs or limited funds as obstacles to imple menting workplace flexibility arrangements. Yet there is evidence that adopting workplace flexibility arrangements leads to significant benefits for employers in the form of reduced turnover improved recruitment and increased productivity. Implementing these practices may also reduce costs for employers by improving employee health and decreasing absenteeism The wider adoption of such practices would result in benefits to society ( in the form of improved employment outcomes and more efficient allocation of workers to employers ) that may be even greater than the gains to individual firms and workers. The best available evidence suggests that encouraging more firms to consider adopting flexible practices can poten tially boost productivity improve morale and benefit the U.S. economy as a whole. To put a number on it if women s employment increased enough to close the male-female employment gap that would raise GDP by percent.40 CEA calculated this number by raising the employment-to-population ratio and work week for women to the average level for men and applying this to a growth-accounting model that holds the average product of labor constant. For a similar calculation see Goldman Sachs ( ) which estimates an increase of up to percent | Chapter C H A P T E R BUSINESS TAX REFORM AND ECONOMIC GROWTH T he U.S. tax system for both individuals and businesses is overdue for reform. On the individual side the system should do more to encourage and reward work increase the accumulation of human capital and ensure that economic gains are widely shared. The necessary reforms should also make the system simpler and more efficient and should reduce the deficit Business tax reform should increase productivity output and living stan dards complementing other efforts to improve the productivity of the U.S economy like additional investments in infrastructure. The focus of this chapter is business tax reform ; individual reforms are discussed in Box The U.S. corporate income tax combines the highest statutory rate among advanced economies with a base narrowed by loopholes tax expen ditures and tax planning strategies. In addition to the corporate income tax the United States operates a second parallel system of business taxation for pass-through entities businesses whose earnings are taxed on the own ers income tax returns rather than a separate entity-level return. The U.S system of business taxation allows some companies to avoid significant tax liability while others pay tax at a high rate. It distorts important economic decisions about where to produce how to finance investments and what industries and assets to invest in. The system is also too complicated and that complexity hurts America s small businesses and allows large corpora tions to reduce their tax liability by shifting profits around the globe The current system of business taxation reduces productivity output and wages through its impact on the quantity of investment the location of production and profits the means of financing new investments and the allocation of investment across assets and industries. The high statutory rate and complicated rules for taxing income in different countries discourage locating highly profitable investments in the United States. Reduced invest ment in turn reduces U.S. productivity and output. Loopholes that allow multinational firms to shift profits to low-tax jurisdictions abroad require higher taxes on domestic businesses and families. The significant tax prefer ence for debt encourages excessive borrowing which in turn increases bank ruptcy costs and financial fragility and thus reduces macroeconomic stabil ity. Tax expenditures that privilege certain industries and assets encourage investment in low-return lightly taxed projects while high-return heavily taxed projects are ignored Business tax reform can increase the quantity and quality of invest ment in the United States by reducing the economic distortions caused by disparities in tax rates across jurisdictions across industries across assets across means of financing and across different forms of business. The qual ity of investment refers not to the dollar value of investment expenditure but to the kinds of investments American firms make. The quality of invest ment increases when high-return projects are prioritized over low-return projects. Quality increases when businesses choose to finance their invest ments using the financial products that best share risk and not those that generate the largest tax savings. And the quality of investment increases when firms make decisions to invest in one country instead of another based on considerations such as the quality of the workforce the strength of economic institutions and the location of customers rather than where the tax rates are lowest Tax reform is not just about removing policy-induced distortions that lead to inefficient decisions by businesses. In some carefully delineated cases tax policy can play a role in remedying distortions fundamental to private markets that lead firms to for example underinvest in research or clean energy because the firm does not capture the full economy-wide benefits of their expenditures. The quality of investment also increases when businesses recognize the benefits and costs their investments create for others such as the spillovers associated with new research insights or the harm associated with polluting activities Improvements in both the quantity and quality of investment increase productivity and in doing so increase American living standards. Since increases in productivity have more than quadrupled the amount of output each American worker generates per hour worked. If a worker has access to the most useful equipment not the equipment that receives the best tax treatment she or he will be able to produce more per hour worked If firms pursue all research for which the benefits exceed the costs workers will then be able to leverage those new innovations to increase output The President s approach to business tax reform reduces dispari ties in tax rates across jurisdictions across industries across assets across means of financing and across different forms of business. In doing so it encourages domestic investment and increases the quality of investment | Chapter and productivity. Specifically the approach broadens the tax base lowers the top corporate rate and reforms the taxation of income earned abroad. It moderates the incentives to shift profits to tax havens and encourages highreturn domestic investment. This approach significantly simplifies the tax system for small businesses and corrects for externalities benefits and costs that firms actions have on unrelated individuals. In addition the one-time revenue that is generated by reform is used to fund a substantial six-year increase in public infrastructure investment This chapter reviews the role of productivity in long-run growth and summarizes the international context for business tax reform. It then describes the President s approach to business tax reform and examines how that approach can increase productivity and output. The chapter concludes with a consideration of alternative approaches to reform The Sources of Productivity Growth Long-term growth in output comes from two sources : increases in the number of hours worked and increases in the output per hour worked otherwise known as labor productivity. Large changes in the quantity of labor are typically driven by demographic forces such as births deaths and immigration. For example the movement of the baby boom generation into retirement will be a major driver of changes in the quantity of labor in the next decade ( Council of Economic Advisers ) However the longer-term trend in participation will also be affected by Americans per sonal choices about family work and retirement. Chapter analyzes trend changes in participation as well as other labor market challenges that may affect participation decisions. Chapter examines policies affecting partici pation among working families in particular including paid leave and access to more flexible work environments Labor productivity depends on three factors : labor quality the amount of capital workers have at their disposal and total factor productiv ity ( TFP ) Labor quality reflects worker characteristics such as education and experience which generally allow workers to produce more output per hour worked. The capital stock is the land buildings machinery and equip ment workers have at their disposal. Increases in the quantity of capital each worker has at his or her disposal referred to as capital deepening also boost output per hour worked. Lastly TFP determines the amount of output that can be produced from a given amount of capital and labor. TFP includes things like the quality of technology which allows workers to produce more with less as well as other difficult to measure aspects of productivity such as the quality of the match between a worker and his or her job and workers Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | ability to focus on their work. Put differently growth in TFP is any increase in output not accounted for by an increase in inputs. TFP increases with sci entific breakthroughs organizational innovations the development of new applications for existing technologies and any efficiency improvements not uniquely associated with a single input. Figure shows how each of these three factors has contributed to productivity growth over the last years splitting that growth into the three broad periods discussed in Chapter Figure contains three important lessons : Productivity has increased tremendously. On average workers in could produce more than four times as much as their counterparts more than years ago. This four-fold improvement reflects the cumulative effect of annual productivity growth averaging percent each year since Roughly one-half of the increase in productivity is due to higher TFP about percent to workers today having more capital at their disposal and about percent to increased education and training Annual productivity growth varied substantially over the last years. Productivity growth was especially rapid in the post-war decades slowed in the 1970s and sped up again in the 1990s. As noted in Chapter slower productivity growth since has had a very large impact on household incomes in fact if the to productivity growth rate had continued incomes would have been percent higher in Variation in the growth rate of productivity is almost entirely due to variation in the growth rate of TFP. The increase in productivity due to capital deepening and improvements in labor quality varied only modestly across the three periods shown in Figure However variations in the growth rate of TFP were large and economically meaningful. The growth rate of TFP between and at its highest was more than four times the growth rate of TFP between and at its lowest The Historical and International Context for Business Tax Reform Since the last major reform of the U.S. system of business taxation in the international environment has changed significantly. In the early 1980s the top U.S. statutory corporate income tax rate was close to the average for the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) an association of developed market economies ( Figure ) The United States cut the corporate tax rate well below the OECD average in The estimates presented in Figure differ slightly from those presented in Chapter as they rely on a different data series produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) | Chapter Figure Sources of Productivity Growth Over Selected Periods Percentage Points Annual Rate Total Factor Productivity Growth Capital Deepening Improved Labor Quality Overall Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Multifactor Productivity ; CEA Calculations Figure Statutory Corporate Tax Rates in the U.S. and OECD Percent OECD Weighted Average ( excluding United States ) United States Source : OECD StatExtracts and World Tax Database ; CEA Calculations Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | but other countries soon followed suit and by the U.S. rate was roughly percentage points above the OECD average ( Figure ) This section focuses on international comparisons of corporate income taxes as the share of large businesses accounted for by pass-through entities in the United States is unusually high relative to the share in other countries ; also the U.S. pass-through regime itself is somewhat atypical ( Treasury ) The rates presented reflect corporate income taxes imposed by both the central government and sub-central government. In the United States the Federal statutory corporate tax rate is percent and after accounting for their deductibility from Federal taxes State corporate taxes increase the rate by percent While the top U.S. statutory corporate income tax rate is the highest among OECD economies other measures of corporate tax rates show a different picture. The effective tax rate which accounts for differences in the definition of the taxable income across countries is slightly below the average for the other large advanced economies of the G-7 ( Figure ) The effective tax rate is the ratio of corporate taxes paid to pre-tax income On average for the years to corporations headquartered in the United States paid an effective tax rate aggregated across all countries of percent. The average rate for the G-7 over this period was percent Percent Figure Statutory Corporate Income Tax Rates OECD Weighted Average ( excluding United States ) : Ireland Slovenia Czech Republic Hungary Poland Chile Finland Iceland Turkey Estonia United Kingdom Switzerland Slovak Republic Sweden Korea Denmark Austria Netherlands Greece Canada Israel Norway Italy New Zealand Luxembourg Australia Mexico Spain Germany Portugal Belgium France Japan United States Country Source : OECD StatExtracs and World Tax Database ; CEA Calculations | Chapter Figure Effective Tax Rates in the G-7 Percent G-7 Weighted Average ( excluding United States ) : France United Kingdom Canada United Germany Italy Japan States Country Source : PwC and Business Roundtable ( ) ; OECD StatExtracts ; CEA Calculations As with the statutory corporate rate effective tax rates varied substantially across countries from a low of percent for Canada to a high of per cent for Japan. Note however that several countries have enacted significant corporate tax legislation since including Canada Germany Japan and the United Kingdom Similarly the U.S. effective marginal tax rate is only modestly above the average for the other countries of the G-7 ( Figure ) The effective marginal tax rate is the tax rate that would apply to a hypothetical project earning the minimum required return sufficient to obtain financing. The U.S. effective marginal tax rate on a domestic investment in was percent while the average for the other G-7 countries was percent Importantly the rates presented in Figure exclude the effects of tempo rary policies. For example the United States has offered a temporary bonus depreciation provision that allows firms to deduct their investment expenses more rapidly in every year since which is excluded from these esti mates. Incorporating bonus depreciation into the analysis would reduce the estimated effective marginal tax rate on new investment Each of these tax rates the statutory rate the effective rate and the effective marginal rate are relevant for different economic decisions : The statutory rate is the amount of additional tax paid on an addi tional dollar of profit without any accompanying changes in deductions for business expenses. It thus captures the relevant financial incentive for Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | Figure Effective Marginal Tax Rates in the G-7 Percent G-7 Weighted Average ( excluding United States ) : Germany United States France United Kingdom Italy Canada Country Japan Source : U.S. Department of the Treasury ; OECD StatExtracts ; CEA Calculations decisions about tax planning strategies that shift profits between countries without changes in the underlying economic activity. Every dollar of profit moved from the United States where it is subject to a 39-percent statutory rate to a country with for example a 20-percent statutory rate would reduce corporate taxes by cents The effective rate is the total amount of tax paid as a share of pretax income. If a company could relocate the entirety of its operations and income from one country to another the effective tax rate would be the rel evant one for making such a decision. However because firms operate and pay corporate taxes in multiple countries effective tax rates would generally be computed for and apply to decisions about locating particular projects or investments in different countries. The effective tax rate for these discrete decisions is known as the effective average tax rate and differs for each proj ect depending on its precise characteristics The effective marginal rate is the effective rate for a project that gen erates the minimum return sufficient to obtain financing under prevailing market conditions. It is the relevant tax rate for firms deciding precisely when to stop scaling up their investment spending under the assumption that each increase in spending generates a slightly smaller return. Facing such a decision firms will stop increasing spending when the last dollar spent generates a return just large enough to first pay tax at the effective marginal rate and then to pay investors the required return. This last dollar | Chapter of investment is known as the marginal dollar of investment leading to the label effective marginal rate The corporate income tax affects all of these decisions simultaneously and the analysis of any potential approach to tax reform must consider its impact on each of them. Tax reform that seeks lower rates without reduc ing revenue reform financed by closing loopholes and broadening the tax base must prioritize between lowering the statutory rate the effective aver age rate and the effective marginal rate as lowering any one rate reduces revenue The U.S. corporate income tax is often described as a tax on world wide income and therefore out of step with the territorial systems used elsewhere. A pure worldwide system would tax all income earned anywhere in the world ; in contrast a pure territorial system would exempt all foreign income from taxation. In practice all systems including the U.S. corporate income tax reflect some combination of worldwide and territorial con cepts. While U.S. corporations owe tax on income earned anywhere in the world this tax is only due if and when foreign earnings are paid to a U.S parent company by its foreign subsidiaries. Taxation of foreign earnings can be deferred indefinitely by keeping the earnings in foreign subsidiaries. This aspect of the U.S. system is known as deferral and means that in practice the U.S. approach to corporate taxation is far from that of a pure worldwide system. ( For the role of deferral in encouraging the recent wave of corporate inversions see Box ) Incorporating deferral and other complex rules for the taxation of U.S. multinationals into the analysis simulations by Rosanne Altshuler and Harry Grubert ( ) illustrate how far from a worldwide system the U.S corporate income tax is. Their analysis assumes a statutory corporate rate of percent but otherwise matches the features of current U.S. law.2 The simulations show that the effective marginal tax rate on investments by a hypothetical U.S. multinational in a low-tax country is percent after accounting for shifting of intangibles and the effective marginal tax rate on investments in a high-tax country is percent after accounting for earn ings stripping ( Figure ) For these computations the low-tax country is assumed to have a statutory rate of percent and the high-tax country a rate of percent. The activities in each country and the associated tax planning strategies correspond to typical behavior of U.S. companies in such countries. These simulations suggest that though the United States The authors use a 30-percent statutory rate because [ t ] here seems to be a growing consensus that the United States should reduce its corporate statutory rate in response to the dramatic and continuing decline in corporate statutory rates abroad. Thus even though their analysis does not use the current rate it is particularly relevant to discussions of the U.S. approach to taxing multinational corporations in the context of reform Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | Figure Effective Marginal Tax Rates in Several Tax Systems Worldwide Theoretical Territorial U.S. Current Law at percent rate Investment in a Low-Tax Country Investment in a High-Tax Country Source : Grubert and Altshuler ( ) ostensibly imposes a worldwide tax the difference in effective marginal tax rates between high- and low-tax jurisdictions abroad can look more like a territorial system. Moreover the tax rates in both high- and low-tax countries can be well below the rates that would apply under either a true worldwide system or even a theoretically ideal territorial system unaffected by base erosion or profit shifting Over the last years the dual challenges of base erosion and profit shifting have increased significantly ( Clausing ) Base erosion refers to the disappearance of corporate income ( the tax base ) as a result of tax planning strategies ( see Box ) Profit shifting is a particular form of base erosion in which firms report profits in low-tax jurisdictions rather than in high-tax jurisdictions reducing their global tax liability. The revenue loss attributable to earnings missing from the U.S. corporate tax base as a result of base erosion may amount to percent of corporate tax receipts ( Clausing ) Table updates the estimates of Gravelle ( ) that show U.S controlled foreign corporation profits in a particular country as a share of GDP for each country. In U.S. controlled foreign corporation prof its reported in Bermuda were more than times the size of Bermuda s economy. Even in the Netherlands which has a much larger economy than Bermuda U.S. controlled foreign corporation profits amounted to percent of GDP. It is unlikely that the high concentration of U.S. profits for | Chapter Box : Corporate Inversions Under the U.S. corporate income tax system American firms pay tax on profits earned anywhere in the world. However these taxes are due only if and when the money is paid as a dividend to the U.S parent by its foreign subsidiaries. As a result American firms have accumulated as much as $ trillion of overseas profits. The significant and growing value of these profits has spurred interest among U.S. firms in finding ways to use or distribute them without paying tax. One strategy for avoiding tax is an inversion a maneuver whereby a U.S. parent firm merges with a foreign parent such that the shareholders of the foreign company own at least percent of the equity in the combined entity and then declares that the foreign company is the parent company for tax purposes. Because the original foreign subsidiaries of the U.S firm continue to be subsidiaries of a U.S. firm such a maneuver does not exempt their future earnings from tax. However the new foreign parent can facilitate financial transactions that provide low-tax access to the earnings of those subsidiaries. For example once inverted the foreign subsidiaries can lend money directly to the new parent company without going through the U.S. parent. These transactions are known as hopscotch loans and until recently such loans did not trigger any tax liability since the funds never pass through the U.S. company The benefits of an inversion extend beyond low-tax access to the earnings of foreign subsidiaries. For example inversions can also facili tate earnings stripping a strategy in which firms shift profits that would be taxed in the United States into other lower-tax countries. One easy way of accomplishing earnings stripping is for an inverted U.S. corporation to borrow from its new foreign parent. The interest payments of the U.S corporation are deductible at the high statutory rate that applies under the U.S. corporate tax and the interest income is taxed to the foreign parent at its lower rate. Rules that restrict the ability of U.S. corporations to avoid taxation on passive income abroad limit non-inverted entities ability to use this strategy. However the interest income of the foreign parent is not subject to these rules ; an inverted firm s ability to use this strategy is limited only by weaker rules restricting interest deductions In September the U.S. Department of the Treasury released a notice announcing forthcoming regulations that would limit some of the benefits of inverting. These rules restricted firms ability to structure the hopscotch loan transactions described above as well as making several other changes. While these actions make inversions less attractive legis lation is needed to fully address the incentives to invert both through broader reforms that reduce the value of post-inversion tax planning strategies and specific measures that limit a company s ability to invert Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | The Administration has proposed increasing the ownership thresh old that must be met for a foreign affiliate to become the parent of a U.S company through an inversion from the current 20-percent threshold to a 50-percent threshold. The higher threshold would eliminate inver sions in which a small foreign company becomes the parent of a large U.S. company that are not justified by business considerations other than the tax benefits the countries shown in Table reflects the actual business activity of these firms rather than tax planning An important limitation of the international comparisons presented in this section is that they focus only on taxes imposed on corporate profits Other taxes paid by corporations can also significantly affect the profitability of business investments. In particular real estate taxes on land and buildings property taxes on equipment and inventories and sales taxes on purchases of business inputs increase both effective tax rates and effective marginal tax rates. Incorporating these factors into the analysis tends to increase tax rates in the United States relative to other countries Table U.S. Controlled Foreign Corporation Profits Relative to GDP Country Foreign Corporation Profits Relative to GDP ( % ) Bahamas Bermuda British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Cyprus Ireland Luxembourg Netherlands Netherlands Antilles Source : IRS Statistics of Income ; United Nations ; CEA calculations | Chapter Box : Base Erosion and Profit Shifting The related challenges of base erosion and profit shifting hurt the global economy weaken government budgets and heighten public concern about the equitable distribution of tax burdens. Base erosion refers to the disappearance of business income ( the tax base ) as a result of tax planning strategies. Examples of corporate tax planning strategies include : exploiting differences in how income or residency is defined by different countries ; choosing low-tax jurisdictions to hold intellectual property and other assets ; and manipulating the terms of intra-firm transactions to control where earnings are taxed. Profit shifting is one form of base erosion in which firms shift profits from one typically hightax country to another typically low-tax country to reduce their overall worldwide tax liability Tax planning strategies hurt the global economy because they lead to socially wasteful expenditures on the accounting legal and other advisory services required to structure the financial transactions and legal arrangements that minimize tax payments. Reforms that harmonize the treatment of income and deduction items across countries as well as address other harmful tax practices improve productivity and wellbeing by allowing firms to compete on the merits of their services and not the quality of their tax advisors. Historically a primary objective for international tax negotiations was to prevent double taxation. Today countries must solve the problem of double non-taxation the creation of stateless income that slips through the gaps between tax systems and is not taxed in any country In recognition of the challenges posed by base erosion and profit shifting the G-20 and OECD have led a coordinated international response that seeks to improve tax policy and tax administration. The OECD developed an action plan released in July and endorsed by G-20 leaders in September ( OECD ) The action plan articu lates actions and a series of deliverables reports recommendations and model tax rules to be completed by December In September the OECD released a set of recommendations to address of the actions ( OECD ) Discussion drafts for the remaining eight items are scheduled to be released over the course of Recent announcements show that the OECD Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project in combination with other legal and economic developments is having an impact on international tax policy. In October Ireland announced policy changes that would effectively shut down a widely used tax avoidance strategy the Double Irish which allows some multinational firms to legally pay extremely low effective tax rates ( Noonan ) The Double Irish and its variants let firms funnel Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | profits through Ireland into low- or zero-tax jurisdictions and dramati cally reduce the tax paid on the associated sales. The strategy relies on a provision of Irish law that allows firms to incorporate in Ireland while being resident for tax purposes in other countries. Like other mismatches between the tax systems that operate in different countries this mismatch in residence and tax treatment facilitates base erosion and profit shifting Subsequently in November the United Kingdom and Germany reached agreement on a joint proposal for dealing with pref erential intellectual property ( IP ) regimes. The proposal would require the United Kingdom to close its current preferential IP regime to new entrants in June and to abolish it entirely by June Preferential IP regimes can fall under the heading of harmful tax practices : policies that seek to attract highly mobile income with no economic relationship to the taxing country by offering very low rates on that income. Such policies are harmful because they encourage firms to aggressively shift profits between countries solely to reduce tax liability. The agreement between the United Kingdom and Germany endorsed an approach that allows countries to offer reduced rates for IP provided that the property derives from significant economic activity in the country. This approach ensures that countries can implement their preferred policies to pro mote innovation and economic development but discourages policies designed primarily to siphon off tax revenue from other countries The action plan also includes efforts to neutralize hybrid mis matches limit treaty shopping reduce earnings stripping through intra-firm financial transactions stop the creation of stateless income and improve dispute resolution among others. As one example of these efforts consider the action item on hybrid mismatches. A hybrid mismatch occurs when a particular financial instrument or business entity is treated differently by two different countries. For example a financial security may be treated as a debt security in one country and an equity security in another. In certain cases companies can obtain two deductions for one act of borrowing or generate a deduction without a corresponding income inclusion. The Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project proposes to combat such mismatches by increasing the coher ence of international tax laws. Concretely this action item encourages steps such as drafting model treaties encouraging member countries to adopt laws that deny domestic deductions for payments also deductible in another jurisdiction and issuing guidance for tie-breaker rules if multiple countries apply incompatible rules to a single transaction The Administration firmly supports the G-20/OECD Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project and continues to actively engage with the international community to develop new and effective solutions to | Chapter the tax compliance challenges raised by our modern economy. The President s Budget for Fiscal Year also proposes specific changes to U.S. tax law that will make it harder to create stateless income or achieve double non-taxation. These proposals will benefit the American public because when gaps between tax systems allow firms to shift profits out of the United States and reduce their tax liability the burden of financing our public programs shifts to other businesses and individu als. Moreover as home to some of the world s most recognizable and innovative companies we benefit when companies are able to play by clear well-defined rules The President s Approach to Business Tax Reform The President s approach to business tax reform seeks to improve the quantity and quality of U.S. investment and thus productivity and output The reserve for revenue-neutral business tax reform in the President s Fiscal Year Budget details numerous specific reform proposals including a comprehensive discussion of the President s international reform propos als. The Administration s overall approach to reform has been described previously in The President s Framework for Business Tax Reform released in The President s approach would : Cut the corporate rate to percent paid for by closing loopholes and structural reforms. At percent down from percent the U.S. corporate rate would be generally in line with other large OECD economies. The rate cut would be paid for in part by closing loopholes provisions that benefit a specific industry without a sound justification in broader spillovers. The special provisions for oil and gas that President Ronald Reagan unsuccess fully targeted for elimination in his tax reform plan are one clear example Closing loopholes alone however would not raise sufficient funds to pay for the rate reduction nor would it sufficiently address the disparities in tax rates across means of financing and different business activities that reduce the quality of investment. As a result this approach would also require addi tional structural reforms : addressing accelerated depreciation deductions for the depreciation of tangible capital at a more rapid pace than the assets lose value and reducing the tax preference for debt-financed investment Sound combinations of these measures would result in more similar taxation of different types of investment and forms of financing Make permanent expand and reform key incentives. The test for any incentive is whether it is motivated by a positive externality which Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | as discussed below leads to inefficiently low levels of the corresponding business activity in the private economy. The Framework identified three categories of incentives as passing this test : incentives for research for clean energy and for manufacturing. The reserve for revenue-neutral tax reform in the FY Budget includes proposals that would make permanent and improve the Research and Experimentation Tax Credit and the Renewable Electricity Production Tax Credit make permanent the Investment Tax Credit for clean energy projects and provide a new investment tax credit for projects that provide for carbon capture and sequestration. The Budget also includes a fee on large highly leveraged financial institutions to reflect the negative externalities that financial firm size and leverage can impose on the broader economy Simplify and reduce taxes for small businesses. Small businesses are disproportionately organized as pass-through entities and while many base-broadening reforms apply to both corporate and pass-through busi nesses rate reductions only benefit corporations. The reserve for revenueneutral reform in the FY Budget includes proposals that would simplify complex accounting rules for small businesses and allow more generous depreciation deductions for tangible investment for small businesses both simplifying and reducing their taxes. With appropriate reforms for small businesses like these business tax reform can be implemented on a standalone basis without broader individual reform Establish a hybrid international system with a minimum tax on the earnings of foreign subsidiaries. The current U.S. system applies the full statutory rate to foreign earnings but only if and when those earnings are repatriated. The President s approach would replace the current system of indefinite deferral with a new hybrid system based on a minimum tax. The minimum tax would apply a 19-percent rate to the active foreign earnings of U.S. companies at the time the income is earned. Once the minimum tax has been paid earnings could be repatriated without incurring any further tax liability. Foreign tax credits would be allowed only against the minimum tax liability for the country in which the foreign tax is paid and for only per cent of the amount of foreign taxes paid. Firms would also receive an allow ance for corporate equity. This allowance a deduction from the minimum tax base would provide businesses with a modest return on equity invested in active business assets. This system would be more effective at preventing base erosion than the current system and would reduce the importance of tax considerations for some location decisions while also having the potential to improve the global competitiveness of U.S. corporations. A smarter hybrid reflects a balance of competing neutrality concepts in rejecting both a pure territorial system one that exempts all foreign income from taxation and | Chapter a pure worldwide system. It would also eliminate the inefficiencies associ ated with the ability to choose the timing of repatriations under the current system. This comprehensive reform proposal stands in contrast to proposals for a repatriation holiday which would exacerbate the inefficiencies of the current international system while also losing revenue Impose a toll charge on the existing stock of accumulated foreign profits as part of the transition to the new international system and use the revenue to finance infrastructure investment. Under current law the exist ing stock of accumulated profits is subject to tax if repatriated but need not be repatriated. Under the new system repatriation would incur no tax liabil ity. To avoid a windfall from the transition the President s Budget proposes a one-time toll charge of percent on accumulated foreign profits. The rev enue raised by this toll would be used to pay for infrastructure investment Add nothing to the deficit in either the short or long run. Most plans consistent with the President s approach generate one-time revenue during the transition to the new system. This transition revenue can obscure signifi cant future revenue loses if reform is viewed from a short-run perspective It is essential to measure the revenue impact of business tax reform when fully in effect so that reform does not add to the deficit in the longer term A long-term view is particularly important when reform includes measures like moving to economic depreciation which shifts the timing of revenue collected but not the total amount of revenue. Since that shift pulls revenue forward into the traditional 10-year budget window it results in inflated savings. The President s approach to business tax reform would not add to the deficit in either the short or long run The Potential for Business Tax Reform to Boost Productivity Productivity is a primary long-run determinant of living standards together with factors like how growth is shared and who is able to participate in the economy that are discussed in Chapter and throughout this Report The President s approach to business tax reform boosts productivity and living standards through four channels : encouraging domestic investment improving the quality of investment reducing the inefficiencies of the inter national tax system and investing in infrastructure. This section reviews each of these channels in turn Encouraging Domestic Investment Business tax reform can increase domestic investment in two ways First reform can reduce effective marginal tax rates for businesses which Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | Box : Improving the Tax Code for Families The President s approach to business tax reform complements his plan to improve the tax code for individuals and families making it fairer by eliminating some of the biggest loopholes and using the savings to pay for investments that help middle-class families get ahead part of an overall approach the President has termed middle-class economics. As in previous years the Budget baseline assumes the continuation of the expansions of the Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) and the Child Tax Credit enacted in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of benefitting million families with million children Studies have shown that previous EITC expansions have significantly increased employment among eligible individuals and the Recovery Act expansions implement the same pro-work model ( Executive Office of the President and U.S. Treasury Department ) In addition recent research suggests that the EITC and Child Tax Credit can improve health and educational outcomes for the children whose parents receive the credits ( Chetty Friedman and Rockoff ; Hoynes Miller and Simon ; Manoli and Turner ) Simplify and expand child care tax benefits. The Budget proposes to make the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit available in full for families with incomes up to $ and expands the credit for families with children under age five to pay for one-half the cost of care up to $ ( a $ maximum credit ) This proposal is designed to make it easier for families to afford high-quality child care because that both helps working families manage what is often their largest expense and invests more in the next generation by supporting child development Under current law there are two types of tax benefits for families : a tax credit for child and dependent care expenses and employer-provided tax-preferred flexible spending accounts to pay for child care expenses For some families obtaining the maximum benefit from current policies requires using both the credit and a flexible spending account The Budget repeals dependent care flexible spending accounts so that families need not perform calculations to compare tax benefits under multiple competing tax benefits and invests the savings in a single improved child care tax credit Support employment. Building on the EITC and Child Tax Credit expansions enacted in the Recovery Act the Budget proposes an expan sion of the EITC for workers without children and for noncustodial par ents. The EITC is a highly effective antipoverty policy but the maximum credit for workers without children is only about $ Expanding the credit for this population would benefit million low-income workers and extend the pro-work impacts of the policy to a broader population | Chapter ( Executive Office of the President and U.S. Department of the Treasury ) The Budget also proposes a tax benefit based on the earnings of the lower-earning spouse in two-earner families. When both spouses work families incur additional expenses for commuting professional obliga tions child care and elder care. When layered on top of other costs including Federal and State taxes these work-related costs can lead to a high implicit tax rate on work especially for parents of young children and couples caring for aging parents ( Kearney and Turner ) This proposal for a new second-earner credit helps ensure that the tax code supports work by offsetting a portion of the additional costs that a family incurs when both spouses are working such as commuting and childcare expenses. The new $ second-earner tax benefit would benefit million American families Consolidate and improve tax benefits for education. Building on bipartisan Congressional proposals the Budget proposes a significant simplification of the tax benefits for education combined with an expan sion targeted to those individuals least likely to attend college without financial aid. In most cases students and their families can claim one of three tax benefits based on current educational expenses : the American Opportunity Tax Credit the Lifetime Learning Credit and the tuition and fees deduction. Choosing and claiming education tax benefits can require complex calculations and under current law the benefits often flow to those families in which children are most likely to attend col lege even without any additional assistance. One analysis found that percent of individuals claiming the tuition and fees deduction would have received a larger benefit if they claimed a tax credit instead ( GAO ) The Budget proposes that the three tax benefits based on current educational expenses be combined into a single improved American Opportunity Tax Credit Expand access to workplace retirement savings. The Budget also calls for the creation of a new automatic Individual Retirement Account ( IRA ) for workers whose employers do not offer another retirement plan. The automatic IRA would guarantee every American working at a firm with more than employees access to easy payroll-based retire ment savings. Americans face a daunting array of choices when it comes to their retirement savings and while some workers are automatically enrolled in a retirement savings plan by their employer with an option to opt out others have to open an account manage contributions and research and select investments on their own. However the evidence is clear : individuals with access to an easy way to save at work will save and those who lack such access rarely receive any tax benefits for retirement Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | at all ( Choi et al. ) The automatic IRA would allow individuals to begin saving for retirement without needing to confront complicated choices about which tax-preferred vehicle to use and what portfolio to select Reform the taxation of capital income. The Budget proposes to close the single largest loophole allowing capital income to go untaxed : the step up in basis at death. Families that spend down their wealth dur ing their lifetimes must pay tax on their capital gains as they sell their assets but the tiny fraction of families wealthy enough that they never need to sell their assets can pass those assets to their heirs without ever paying the tax on the capital gain. Moreover if the heirs ever sell the assets the cost at which they are considered to have acquired the assets is the value at the time the assets are inherited. This treatment creates an inefficiency known as the lock-in effect in which older individuals for whom the best course of action would be to sell their assets and invest in a new enterprise instead hold on to the assets to avoid paying any capital gains tax. In addition the President s Budget would increase the top tax rate on capital gains and dividends from percent under current law to percent Close loopholes and limit tax expenditures. Consistent with previ ous Budgets the FY Budget proposes a limit on tax expenditures for high-income families. Deductions and exclusions from income generate a tax benefit for each dollar of the tax-advantaged activity equal to the individual s marginal rate. Because marginal rates typically rise with income these tax benefits such as the mortgage interest deduction charitable deduction and deduction for State and local taxes provide more value to high-income families than for middle-income families and can lead to inefficiencies by excessively subsidizing certain taxpayer behavior. The FY Budget proposes to limit the value of these tax benefits to percent. If a taxpayer s marginal rate is percent such that under current law a dollar of tax-preferred activity generates cents of tax savings under the proposal it would generate only cents By reducing the tax savings associated with these deductions the pro posal reduces the corresponding inefficiencies. In addition the Budget includes additional proposals that would implement the Buffett Rule the principle that no household making over $ million each year should pay a smaller share of their income in taxes than middle-class families pay will increase investment the size of the capital stock and output. Second reform can reduce the effective average tax rate on highly profitable busi ness investments which will encourage firms to locate mobile high-return investments in the United States | Chapter As discussed above the effective marginal tax rate is the ratio of tax paid to pre-tax income for a project yielding the minimum required return to obtain financing under prevailing market conditions. When effective marginal rates are higher potential projects need to generate more income if the business is to pay the tax and still provide investors with the required return. Businesses will therefore limit their activities to higher-return projects. Thus all else equal a higher effective marginal rate for businesses will tend to reduce the level of investment and a lower effective marginal rate will tend to encourage additional projects and a larger capital stock.3 Increases in the capital available for each worker s use also referred to as capital deepening boost productivity wages and output One approach to business tax reform would prioritize changes that reduce effective marginal tax rates for businesses. The core of such a reform is allowing firms to immediately deduct the full cost of their investments known as expensing. Expensing reduces the effective tax rate on equityfinanced investments that generate the minimum required return to zero That is it reduces the effective marginal tax rate on equity-financed invest ments to zero. However a corporate tax system with expensing would continue to impose a positive tax on investments that generate a higher return.4 In contrast a reform that reduces the effective marginal tax rate to zero by lowering the statutory rate to zero would eliminate taxation on high-return investments as well and thus come at a much greater revenue loss. An additional benefit of an approach oriented around expensing is that it cuts taxes only on new investments. Investments made in the past would be unaffected. Because tax cuts today do not spur additional investment in the past the revenue loss associated with tax cuts on past investment spurs no additional investment and generates no increase in productivity. ( See Box for a discussion of the use of expensing as a temporary policy during economic downturns. ) However while expensing has a number of attractive features the exclusive focus on the marginal investment misses several critical points that are increasingly important in the modern global economy. Firms face other important decisions that are also affected by the business tax system To take one example consider a firm deciding where to locate a plant. When a project s return substantially exceeds investors required return there is no See for example Cummins et al. ( ) Chirinko et al. ( ) Hassett and Hubbard ( ) Hassett and Newmark ( ) The discussion in this section focuses on business income taxes in isolation. Even with expensing the effective marginal tax rate could remain positive as a result of other taxes such as sales and property taxes. While incorporating other taxes into the analysis would affect the level of tax they would not affect any of the conclusions about the changes in tax rates resulting from the policy changes discussed in this section Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | question a firm will pursue the project. But the firm has flexibility over the choice of country. For this decision the value of accelerated depreciation deductions is small relative to the profit the plan generates. The tax on these higher returns sometimes referred to as excess returns will depend largely on the statutory rate. As the excess returns grow in size the relevant tax rate converges to the statutory rate. These types of investment location decisions are increasingly important in an interconnected global economy and may be particularly important for the type of investment we most want to attract and retain ( Devereux and Griffith ) An alternative approach to reform therefore focuses on reducing the statutory rate to reduce the effective average tax rate on highly profitable investments. The effective average tax rate is the ratio of taxes paid to pretax profits for a particular investment. If an investment yields only enough to pay the required return after taxes the effective average tax rate on that investment is equal to the effective marginal tax rate. However if the invest ment return exceeds that minimum amount the effective average tax rate on the investment exceeds the effective marginal tax rate. Therefore reductions in the statutory rate are essential to encourage additional internationally mobile high-return investments in the United States Moreover many of the disparities in tax rates across industries and assets across means of financing and across organizational forms that dam age the quality of investment ( discussed next ) are reduced at lower statutory rates. Lower statutory rates can also relieve some of the otherwise irreducible tension between capital export neutrality and capital ownership neutrality in international taxation ( discussed below ) Finally it is worth considering the nearly universal view among business people and tax practitioners that the statutory rate is particularly salient in business decisionmaking In total given the tension between reform that exclusively targets the effective marginal tax rate by accelerating depreciation and reform that low ers the statutory tax rate with an eye toward attracting mobile high-return investment and reducing other distortions the President s approach to business tax reform targets the statutory rate. Such an approach encourages additional domestic investment by reducing the disparity in tax rates across jurisdictions and also reduces disparities in tax rates across industry asset means of financing and organizational form Improving the Quality of Investment It is not just the quantity of investment that matters for the economy but also the quality. Quality does not mean more expensive higher-tech machinery but instead means that each dollar is invested in the area where it generates the highest return and in the form that most efficiently allocates | Chapter risks and managerial talents.5 The quality of investment depends not on the level of taxation but on its form. In particular maximizing the quality of investment requires a tax system that does not distort business decisions except in the cases where markets by themselves would not result in opti mal outcomes Reducing Distortions in the Allocation of Investment by Industry and Asset. Targeted tax preferences lead to dispersion in tax rates across industries and assets. According to the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) effective marginal tax rates for businesses subject to the corporate income range from percent for the broadcasting and telecommunications indus try to percent for certain manufacturing sectors motion picture and sound recording and some financial sectors ( CBO ) As a result of these disparities for any given level of the capital stock firms will pursue lower-return projects in tax-preferred sectors rather than higher-return projects in tax-disadvantaged sectors. These disparities in tax rates also exist across asset types and the cross-asset disparities can be much larger. CBO estimates that the effective marginal tax rate on mining structures is only percent while the effective marginal tax rate on prepackaged software is percent By reducing these distortions the economy can become more produc tive even with no change in the level of investment and savings. One recent study concluded that percent of the aggregate capital stock appears to be misallocated as a result of corporate tax distortions ( Fatica ) Inefficient capital allocation lowers productivity and living standards ( Auerbach and Hassett ) The President s approach to reform would take significant steps to reduce the disparities in tax rates across industry and asset. For example the FY Budget calls for the elimination of numerous fossil fuel preferences that not only advantage fossil fuel production in general but also pick winners and losers among fossil fuel technologies. The Budget also proposes repeal of an excise tax credit for certain distilled spirits that can lead to distortions even within a relatively small class of production activities Reducing Distortions in the Financing of Investment. The current U.S. system of business taxation imposes a substantially higher tax burden on equity-financed investment than debt-financed investment. Tax reform that reduces this disparity can reduce overleveraging which increases finan cial fragility since firms have less of a cushion in downturns and prevent fire In Chapter and throughout this Report policies are discussed that can help ensure that workers are better allocated to the activities in which they will be most productive. For example implementing policies that reduce unnecessary distortions in workers choices such as improving work-family balance result in more workers choosing jobs based on where they will be most productive Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | Box : Temporary Countercyclical Policies to Promote Investment Policies that temporarily reduce effective marginal tax rates can play an important role in increasing the quantity of investment and out put in the short run when the economy is operating below its potential One example of such a policy is the bonus depreciation provision that was enacted on an emergency basis to help combat the Great Recession Bonus depreciation accelerates the timing of the depreciation deduc tions firms take for their tangible investment ; it operates as a de facto interest-free loan firms get larger deductions today reducing current tax payments and smaller deductions in the future increasing future tax payments When credit markets seized up during the financial crisis some businesses had difficulty borrowing at any interest rate. As a result if they did not have sufficient cash on hand to finance all of their ongoing projects they had to reduce investment below their desired level. Bonus depreciation moderated the economic damage of dysfunctional credit markets by providing firms making at least some new investment with a substantial infusion of cash that they could use to increase investment further. Research by Eric Zwick and James Mahon ( ) finds that bonus depreciation increased investment by percent between and with the largest effects among financially constrained firms These temporary business tax cuts contributed to the fact that business investment has increased at a 5.3-percent annual rate over the course of this economic recovery which is notably faster than the pace seen in the 2000s recovery Moreover while firms limited by borrowing constraints could direct every dollar of this cash infusion into new investment the cost to the Federal Government was only the interest charge incurred by deferring a tax payment that would have been due today into the future Because interest rates on Federal debt fell at the outset of the crisis and rates have remained low since that time the cost of financing the implicit loan has been modest. As a result the impact on output per dollar cost to the government of stimulus policies like this one can be quite high This same logic applies to targeted policies that expand expensing for small businesses. Bonus depreciation allows firms to deduct a portion of their investment expenses immediately ; expensing allows them to deduct the entire cost. Small businesses are more likely to be credit con strained than large businesses. This logic also helps explain why policies such as extending net operating loss carrybacks which allows firms to take deductions for operating losses immediately that they would other wise not be able to claim until future years may be effective in spurring | Chapter investment in the midst of a financial crisis even though such policies do not affect the effective marginal tax rate in standard economic models Permanent business tax reform however focuses on long-run growth not short-term challenges. The overall strengthening of the economy combined with the fact that more credit is flowing to businesses means both the effectiveness and desirability of bonus depreciation are considerably less today than they were in the recent past. Moreover making bonus depreciation permanent or indefinitely extending it would cost more than $ billion over the next years As a result the President s Budget would allow bonus depreciation to lapse at the end of sales contagion and larger and less efficient macroeconomic fluctuations ( de Mooij Slemrod ) Firms decisions with regard to financing their investments also affect bankruptcy risk the extent to which investment risk is distributed in the population and potentially also the management quality of the firm itself ( Weichenrieder and Klautke ) The tax advan tage for interest arises because firms can deduct interest payments but not dividend payments from taxable income while individuals must pay tax on both interest and dividend income though they pay tax on dividends at a reduced rate The Treasury Department estimates that the effective marginal tax rate on equity-financed investment is percent while the effective marginal tax rate on debt-financed investment is percent ( Figure ) ( Tax rates can be negative if the tax benefits of the activity such as additional credits or deductions exceed the additional tax paid on the associated income. In the case of debt-financed investment the combination of interest deductions and accelerated depreciation more than offset the tax paid at the corporate level. ) The Treasury Department estimates that as of the United States had the second-lowest tax rate on debt-financed investment in machinery in the OECD and the largest debt-equity disparity for such investments. Even taking into account individual-level taxes which tax equity returns more lightly than interest payments the disparity is still large with a percent tax rate for equity investment and a percent rate for debt. By reducing the statutory rate the President s approach to business tax reform would moderate the debt-equity disparity. Since the statutory rate determines the value of an additional deduction a reduction in the statutory rate reduces the value of the deduction for interest payments. Additional reforms to the treatment of interest expense could further moderate the disparity Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | Figure Effective Marginal Tax Rates by Source of Financing Equity Debt Corporate Taxes Only Corporate and Individual Taxes Source : U.S. Department of the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis Addressing Positive and Negative Externalities of Business Behavior Business activity often generates spillovers that impact other firms and the general public even when they are not involved in the activity. These spillover effects are known as externalities and can be either positive or negative. For example future generations of Americans benefit from the research and development activity we undertake today in the form of new products and services which they will be able to enjoy and the higher wages resulting from increased productivity. Research and development generates positive externalities. Polluting activities such as burning fossil fuels gener ate negative externalities through increases in carbon dioxide emissions and particulate matter The quality of American investment is maximized when firms financial incentives to make particular investments reflect the externalities those investments impose on others. Business tax reform can play a role in aligning the social and private incentives for different activities by appropri ately subsidizing or penalizing activities where research conclusively estab lishes positive or negative spillovers. The President s Framework for Business Tax Reform identified three areas where targeted incentives are appropriate : research and development clean energy and manufacturing. The FY Budget identifies one further area where a tax is appropriate : highly lever aged financial firms | Chapter Numerous studies find that the total returns to research and develop ment are significantly larger than the private returns earned by the investors who fund it ( Hall Mairesse and Mohnen ; Tyson and Linden ) This evidence suggests that the social returns range from one to two times the private returns a disparity which leads to private-sector underinvest ment in the absence of policies such as the Research and Experimentation Tax Credit. Studies that directly evaluate the Research and Experimentation Tax Credit find that each dollar of foregone tax revenue through the credit generally causes firms to invest at least one dollar in research and devel opment ( Hall ; Hall and Van Reenen ; Executive Office of the President and U.S. Department of the Treasury ) While energy production is essential for the modern economy pol luting activities also pose significant harm. Greenhouse gas emissions will lead to significant environmental costs for future generations and other pollutants such as particulate matter and ozone lead to immediate health consequences. Appropriate subsidies for clean energy can help address these challenges and ensure that Americans benefit from high-quality invest ment in the energy sector. ( See Chapter for additional discussion of the Administration s energy strategy. ) Spillovers also provide the argument for policies that focus specifically on the manufacturing sector. Encouraging manufacturing investment and production may support higher-wage jobs. Investment in new production capacity and proximity to the manufacturing process create spillovers across firms and industries leading to the ideas capabilities and technologies that enable innovation ( Greenstone Hornbeck and Moretti ) To the degree these effects are operating in the economy targeted incentives for manufac turing investment would be justified The FY Budget includes a fee on large highly leveraged financial institutions. This fee would apply to banks and other financial institu tions with assets of at least $ billion affecting approximately firms Excessive leverage entails potentially serious costs to American families and other businesses in cases of default and the problem is most acute in the financial sector where balance sheets may be particularly fragile. Excessive borrowing may arise because these costs are not entirely borne by the firms deciding how much to borrow. By increasing the cost to firms and there fore discouraging excessively risky financing decisions for large financial institutions the financial fee will reduce the resources devoted to address ing the corresponding damages of default and increase American families wellbeing Reducing Distortions in the Choice of Business Form. Business own ers can choose between several different legal structures for their operations Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | For tax purposes the primary distinction is between the C corporation a corporation subject to the corporate income tax and alternative structures treated as pass-through entities. Many rules such as those for determining depreciation deductions are similar for C corporations and pass-through entities. However there are important differences the most notable of which are the rate structure and the treatment of distributions. The top Federal corporate tax rate is percent while the top individual tax rate is percent. Thus corporations pay at a maximum rate of percent while owners of pass-through entities pay a maximum rate of percent on their business earnings. However distributions to business owners are tax-free for the owners of pass-through businesses and taxable for the owners of C corporations Overall the tax system currently advantages large pass-through enti ties over large C corporations. This advantage arises because the combina tion of corporate income taxes and individual income taxes faced by owners of a C corporation exceeds the single layer of taxation faced by owners of a pass-through entity. As a result according to the Treasury Department s analysis shown in Figure C corporations face a percent effective marginal tax rate while pass-through entities face a percent rate. Similar estimates by the Congressional Budget Office put the effective tax rate for C corporations at percentage points and the rate for pass-through entities at percentage points ( CBO ) As the tax treatment of corporate and pass-through businesses is not identical the tax system encourages firms to change their corporate structure in order to reduce their tax liability. Empirical research confirms that these differences induce changes in the ownership structure of firms.6 By changing the legal structures under which businesses operate relative to what they would be in the absence of these taxes the distortion in business form reduces productivity and output. For example in most cases publicly traded businesses are taxed as C corporations. However the tax bias against C corporations may discourage some businesses from accessing public capi tal markets and therefore lead to inefficient ownership structures The difference between the top corporate tax rate and the top indi vidual tax rate has changed over time and the increase in this disparity in the late 1980s when the top corporate rate went from percentage points above the individual rate to percentage points below led to a large shift in the distribution of revenue across business forms ( CBO ) The share of business receipts accounted for by C corporations has continued to fall since that time as a result of other tax and non-tax changes in the economy See for example Goolsbee ( ) Gordon and MacKie-Mason ( ) and MacKieMason and Gordon ( ) | Chapter Percent Figure Effective Marginal Tax Rates Overall Business Tax Rate : Corporate Business Structure Pass-through Source : U.S. Department of the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis Overall since the C corporation share of business receipts has fallen from nearly percent to just above percent ( Figure ) To the degree this trend has been driven by tax considerations it represents an inefficient way for businesses to choose to organize themselves and a bias against the C corporate form. By reducing the statutory rate on C corporations the President s approach to business tax reform would reduce the current bias against investment in the corporate form Reducing the Inefficiencies of the International Tax System Business tax reform can also increase productivity and output by reducing disparities in tax rates across countries and across activities. The structure of production processes corporate ownership relations and intrafirm financing are all influenced by tax considerations. Higher tax rates on corporate earnings in a particular country reduce investment in that coun try.7 Because corporate income tax liability can depend on the country of residence of a business s corporate parent corporate taxes can also affect the ownership structure of firms. One example of this effect is the series of highprofile corporate inversions rearrangements of the ownership structure of U.S. corporations so as to obtain a foreign parent for tax purposes that See for example Cummins and Hubbard ( ) Devereux and Griffith ( ) Desai et al. ( ) Grubert and Mutti ( ) Hines ( ) Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | Figure C Corporation Share of Total Business Receipts Note : RICs and REITs excluded from both C corporation share and total Source : IRS Statistics of Income ; CEA calculations has received significant press attention over the last year ( see Box ) In addition differences in tax rates across countries can lead firms to engage in complicated financial transactions to shift profits from high-tax countries to low-tax countries ( Bartelsman and Beetsma Huizinga and Laeven Dharmapala ) Unfortunately achieving neutrality with respect to all of these busi ness decisions simultaneously is difficult because for any country acting alone reforms that move toward neutrality on one dimension often move away from neutrality on another. For example a firm will structure its pro duction processes in an efficient manner across countries if it pays the same tax rate in every country. This neutrality concept is known as capital export neutrality. On the other hand a local firm will be owned by the parent that generates the most economic value if all parent companies face the same tax rate on local production regardless of which country the parent firm is based in. This concept is referred to as capital ownership neutrality. Under the first objective features of the current U.S. tax system such as indefinite deferral which allows firms to defer paying tax on foreign income until it is repatri ated are a problem and should be eliminated. Under the second objective foreign income should be exempt from taxation entirely not just deferred Moving in either direction makes the other problem worse. Moreover these two notions of neutrality are only two of many widely discussed notions of neutrality when it comes to the taxation of multinational firms | Chapter The President s hybrid approach to international taxation reflects a sensible compromise between competing neutrality concepts moderates the challenges of base erosion and profit shifting and reduces inefficien cies generated by the current system of indefinite deferral. By imposing a minimum level of tax the value of setting up shell corporations in tax havens with tax rates near zero is dramatically reduced. Under current law a firm might establish a subsidiary in a low- or zero-tax jurisdiction and then arrange its affairs so that as much income is reported by that subsidiary as possible. However the President s approach would impose a minimum tax of percent on earnings in every country paid when the income is earned. Thus while a firm would see a modest benefit if it shifts profits from a country with a tax rate above percent to a country with a tax rate below that level the incentive to find tax havens that offer a zero tax rate is substantially reduced In isolation a minimum tax might encourage other countries to target subsidiaries of U.S. multinationals for specific taxes intended to soak up the revenue of the minimum tax. While treaty provisions limit the ability of foreign governments to target American firms by virtue of their being American firms a modest reduction in the value of foreign tax credits for purposes of the minimum tax computation further protects against efforts by other countries to soak up the minimum tax revenue. This reduction ensures that U.S. corporations are not completely indifferent to the level of tax while achieving the objective of dramatically reducing the impact of rate differentials across countries An allowance for corporate equity for purposes of computing the minimum tax ensures that American firms can compete on an even footing anywhere in the world when it comes to productive investment. Thus the minimum tax would include a deduction for firms based on their equity investments abroad. This allowance would serve to reduce effective marginal tax rates on American firms when it comes to buying foreign businesses or performing productive activity abroad Finally tax-free repatriation means that firms will no longer have an incentive to stockpile profits in their foreign affiliates. Instead once they have paid the minimum tax they could repatriate their earnings at any time without any additional tax liability. Critically the President s approach to business tax reform would allow tax-free repatriation under a fully reformed system. Allowing a repatriation holiday under the current system would both lose revenue and exacerbate its inefficiencies compounding our exist ing challenges While the harms of so-called trapped cash can be over-stated under the President s minimum tax proposal there would no longer be any reason Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | for it to exist provided the existing stock of accumulated profits is effectively taxed at the outset. However allowing tax-free repatriation of existing prof its which would incur tax if repatriated today would provide an unmer ited windfall. To avoid this outcome implementation of the minimum tax and tax-free repatriation would be accompanied by a toll charge on accumu lated profits. These profits could then be repatriated with no additional tax under the new system Investing in Infrastructure Business tax reform is part of the President s broader approach to improving the economy and raising productivity. The transition to a new international system would raise substantial one-time revenue. The President s Budget proposes to use these funds for a six-year investment in infrastructure ensuring that temporary revenues are matched to tem porary costs so that the business tax reform as a whole does not raise the long-run deficit A quality transportation network is essential to a vibrant economy Investments by previous generations of Americans from the Erie Canal to the Transcontinental Railroad to the Interstate Highway System were instrumental in increasing productivity and generating economic growth A high-performing transportation network keeps jobs in America allows businesses to expand and lowers prices on household goods for American families. Better infrastructure allows businesses to manage their inventories and transport goods more cheaply and efficiently as well as access a variety of suppliers and markets for their products making it more cost-effective for manufacturers to keep production in or move production to the United States The economic benefits of smart infrastructure investment are longterm competitiveness productivity innovation lower prices and higher incomes ( Gramlich Munnell ) The costs of inadequate infrastruc ture investment are exhibited all around us. Americans spend billion hours in traffic each year costing families more than $ billion in extra fuel and lost time ( Schrank Eisele and Lomax ) American businesses pay $ billion a year in direct freight transportation costs due to bottle necks ( White and Grenzeback ) Infrastructure investment is a natural partner for business tax reform as both are motivated by the goal of increasing investment productivity and ultimately the well-being of American families. Devoting transition revenue raised by business tax reform to infrastructure investment boosts the overall productivity impact of tax reform | Chapter Four Alternative Approaches to Business Tax Reform Analysts have offered four primary alternative approaches to reform This section considers the merits of each approach Eliminate the Corporate Income Tax Numerous commentators have called for complete repeal of the corporate income tax. However the details of what repeal could plausibly mean vary widely. One version would repeal the corporate income tax and make no other changes to the tax system. Such an approach suffers from insurmountable compliance problems and would lead to revenue losses far in excess of current corporate tax receipts. Income would rapidly shift into the now-untaxed corporate form allowing individuals to indefinitely defer taxes and evasion strategies that disguise more heavily taxed wage income as lightly taxed dividend income would become widespread. Moreover repeal ing the corporate income tax without increasing the deficit would require massive deeply damaging cuts to important programs like Medicare Medicaid and Social Security as well as federal investments in areas such as national security research and education A somewhat more nuanced approach to corporate income tax repeal would combine repeal with an increase in the tax rate on capital gains and dividends to match tax rates on earned income. However taxing capital gains and dividends at the rate on earned income would be unlikely to raise enough money to cut the corporate rate by even percentage points let alone Increasing rates on capital gains and dividends can finance only a small reduction in the corporate rate for three primary reasons. First these forms of income are already subject to partial taxation. Second individuals can use a variety of strategies such as timing shifts in financial transactions to avoid realization-based capital income taxes. And third substantial capi tal income avoids individual-level taxation because it is held by tax-exempt entities such as pension funds and foundations. In the presence of a corpo rate tax the corporations in which these tax-exempt entities have invested of course are subject to tax Absent a much larger overhaul of capital taxation which would need to include accrual accounting for capital gains retaining the corpo rate income tax as a withholding tax to address tax-exempt entities and tax evasion and providing credits or deductions when corporate earnings are distributed to owners who are not tax-exempt purely individual-level capital taxation is not a viable policy. Eric Toder and Alan Viard ( ) have recently advanced a more fleshed-out proposal that would repeal the Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | corporate income tax tax capital gains on accrual for publicly traded com panies and tax companies that are not publicly traded under a pass-through regime. Instead of paying tax on the proceeds of asset sales shareholders of publicly traded corporations would pay tax on the change in market value of their shares each year and no additional tax when the assets are ultimately sold. However even if the substantive and political challenges in transition ing to a new system could be overcome their framework replaces only onehalf of the revenue from the corporate tax Cut the Top Individual Rate in Parallel with the Corporate Rate The desire for neutrality with respect to organizational form and the desire to cut taxes on pass-through businesses have been used to justify argu ments that individual and corporate tax reform need to be done together and in particular that there should be parity between the top individual rate and the top corporate rate. This argument is motivated by valid con cerns. Different rates on activities with different labels create opportunities for gamesmanship ; for example building up income inside a corporation rather than paying annual tax on it at the individual level. But overall this argument suffers from serious economic and practical objections. On the economic merits it is important to remember that C-corporation income is partially taxed at two levels while pass-through income is only taxed at one level. As a result C corporations face an effective marginal rate that is percentage points higher than that on pass-through businesses as discussed above. Although the President s approach would cut and simplify taxes for small business including small pass-through entities for larger businesses reform should move in the direction of greater parity with the goal of equal effective rates for C corporations and pass-through entities when individual and corporate taxes are combined a goal that would not be served by par allel reductions in individual and corporate tax rates. Meanwhile lowering the top individual rate across-the-board is both expensive and regressive while significantly lowering the individual rate only for pass-through busi nesses but not for individual taxpayers would greatly exacerbate the existing compliance problems associated with relabeling wages and salaries as business income by high-income individuals Finally while reducing the top individual rate is often motivated by reference to small business reducing it is an inefficient way to target small businesses. Already percent of small businesses pay tax at rates of percent or below ( Knittel et al. ) Most of the revenue loss from a top rate cut reflects the expense of a tax cut for high-income individuals. Tools like expanding expensing for small businesses and reforming accounting requirements can be used to ensure that reform taken as a whole both | Chapter simplifies and cuts taxes for small businesses without cutting the tax rate on high-income professionals and large firms Adopt a Territorial Tax System It is sometimes argued that all other major economies use a territo rial tax system though in practice many of them deviate significantly from a pure territorial system. A country that operates a pure territorial system would tax firms only on the income earned in that country and exclude from taxation all income earned elsewhere in the world. Territorial taxation ensures that local firms are owned by the parent company that generates the largest economic benefits from ownership. However this result comes at the expense of an inefficient global allocation of capital and production Firms operating in a low-tax country pay less tax and firms will respond by attempting to shift as much production as possible to low-tax countries A territorial approach exacerbates the problems of inefficient alloca tion of capital around the world with excess capital in countries with low tax rates. Low-return investments are pursued in low-tax countries ; however high-return investments in higher-tax countries are not. In addition a ter ritorial system exacerbates the challenges of base erosion and profit shifting as it increases the financial rewards of shifting income abroad. Countries around the world are facing difficult questions about how to address base erosion ( see Box ) While explicit anti-erosion provisions can moderate these effects they will not eliminate them. Offsetting the revenue loss arising from base erosion by multinationals will require higher tax rates on domes tic U.S. companies further discouraging investment in the United States or higher tax rates on individuals. And while it is often asserted that moving to a territorial system eliminates the incentive for corporations to invert this is an overstatement. The incentive to relocate abroad is eliminated if the tax system is residence-neutral. Relocating can still be desirable if it facilitates tax-avoidance strategies such as earnings stripping which can be more effec tive with a foreign parent even under a territorial system Substituting a fully territorial tax system privileges a single neutrality concept above and at the expense of all other neutrality concepts and exacerbates several challenges associated with tax avoidance. The hybrid international system in the President s approach reflects a sensible compro mise between competing neutrality concepts moderates the challenges of base erosion and profit shifting and reduces the economic waste associated with the current system of indefinite deferral Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | Allow Expensing for New Investment Another alternative paradigm for business tax reform would focus on reducing the effective marginal tax rate for businesses with the objective of spurring additional investment and ultimately a larger capital stock. This alternative approach would feature two major components : full expensing and full repeal of interest deductibility. Rather than eliminating accelerated depreciation this approach would go in the opposite direction by allow ing immediate deductions for new investment. Since the combination of expensing and interest deductibility results in negative effective tax rates this approach would also repeal the tax deduction for net interest The primary advantage of this alternative approach is potentially larger impacts on productivity and output compared to an approach that focuses on reducing the statutory rate. By reducing the effective marginal tax rate on new business investment it would boost investment the capi tal stock and productivity. In addition a well-designed tax system based around expensing may be better suited to achieving neutrality between debt and equity financing than reforms within the current corporate tax paradigm. Expensing would also avoid the need to determine depreciation schedules for tax purposes ( though not for accounting purposes ) and there fore reduce the bookkeeping required to track assets tax basis The primary disadvantage of the proposal is the additional revenue cost associated with more generous depreciation schedules which would require either a smaller rate reduction or other offsetting tax increases. If the cost of expensing is offset with a smaller rate reduction the impact of the plan on average tax rates and the ability to attract mobile high-return investment under the proposal is reduced. This could lead to smaller effects of reform on productivity and a smaller reduction in costly tax avoidance behavior. Moreover if as some argue depreciation provisions have only a modest impact on investment decisions this alternative paradigm would be bad for investment and growth. It would provide businesses with a large tax benefit that has little impact on their investment decisions ( expensing ) while taking away a benefit that has a larger impact on their investment deci sions ( interest deductibility ) and providing a smaller rate cut In addition an expensing approach that does not repeal interest deductibility would exacerbate the non-neutralities of the current system by reducing the effective marginal tax rate on debt-financed projects even further below zero effectively subsidizing them and thus encouraging investments that are socially wasteful. Finally shifting to such a system would face significant technical challenges both with structuring the transition and with handling the taxation of financial institutions and would require cor responding reforms to taxation of capital income at the individual level | Chapter Conclusion Longer-term economic growth relies on continued increases in pro ductivity that enable each American worker to produce more for every hour on the job. Business tax reform offers the potential to boost productivity by improving the quantity and quality of investment in the United States However it can only do this if it is done carefully and does not exacerbate other challenges ; for example by adding to the medium- or long-term defi cit or crowding out other public investments. Rather business tax reform can and should complement the rest of the growth agenda including by funding investments in infrastructure as well as a broader agenda involv ing individual tax reform and a set of other policies that guarantees all Americans can share in this growth Business Tax Reform and Economic Growth | C H A P T E R THE ENERGY REVOLUTION : ECONOMIC BENEFITS AND THE FOUNDATION FOR A LOW-CARBON ENERGY FUTURE O ver the past ten years the U.S. economy has undergone a revolution in the production and consumption of energy. Increasing production of oil natural gas and renewable energy has contributed broadly to employ ment and gross domestic product ( GDP ) growth during the recovery from the Great Recession. Energy efficiency has increased with gasoline con sumption falling percent over the last decade despite a percent increase in real GDP. Declining net oil imports have helped reduce the U.S. trade deficit and improve energy security. On balance the energy revolution lays the foundation for U.S. leadership in global efforts to address climate change and paves the way toward a low-carbon energy future Recent changes in the energy sector and their consequences for economic growth and combating climate change have been remarkable Breakthroughs in unconventional oil and natural gas extraction technol ogy have reversed the decades-long decline in their production. Continued technological progress in wind solar and biofuels as well as innovation and deployment policies at the local State and Federal levels has caused an equally dramatic boom in the use of renewables. The composition of the Nation s energy sources has begun to shift : petroleum and coal are now being replaced by the growing use of natural gas and renewables which are cleaner sources with lower or even zero carbon emissions. In renew able energy sources accounted for one-half of new installed capacity and natural gas units comprised most of the remainder. These developments have contributed to a dramatic drop in the price of oil amidst geopolitical tension that might otherwise have caused oil prices to increase. Although oil prices will continue to fluctuate the energy-sector developments will have a durable impact on our economy and our climate over the longer run regard less of future fluctuations in the price of oil To further build on this progress foster continuing economic growth and ensure that growth is sustainable for future generations the President will continue his aggressive All-of-the-Above strategy for a cleaner energy future. The strategy has three elements the first of which is to support economic growth and job creation. Expanded production of oil natural gas and renewables has raised employment in these industries during a period of labor market slack. Technological innovation and greater production help reduce energy prices to the benefit of energy-consuming businesses and households. These developments have contributed broadly to employment and GDP growth and will continue to do so The second element of the President s energy strategy is improving energy security. Lower net oil imports reduce the macroeconomic vulner ability of the United States to foreign oil supply disruptions. In today s domestic liquid fuels markets and globally integrated oil markets a sudden international supply disruption means a sharp jump in prices. The combina tion of declining gasoline demand increasing domestic crude oil production and increasing use of biofuels however enhances the resilience of the U.S economy to these oil price shocks. Although international oil supply shocks and oil price volatility will always present risks reductions in net petroleum imports and the lower domestic oil consumption will reduce those risks. To further reduce net oil imports in the long run the Administration has taken steps to curb petroleum demand by aggressively raising standards for vehicle fuel economy. Efforts are also being made to boost the use of biofuels elec tric vehicles natural gas and other petroleum substitutes The third element of the All-of-the-Above Energy Strategy addresses the challenges of global climate change. The need to act now to stem cli mate change is clear ; delaying would only lead to larger costs for future generations. Delaying action is costly because it means less incentive for research and development of effective carbon-reducing technologies while at the same time encouraging investments in older and carbon-intensive technologies. After having delayed making up for lost time requires more stringent and costly policies in the future. In practice delay also may render unrealistic the climate targets that are within reach today. Delaying action imposes greater mitigation costs and economic damages than would have otherwise occurred. Higher temperatures more acidic oceans and increas ingly severe storms droughts and wildfires could all result from avoidable higher greenhouse gas emissions The energy revolution lays the groundwork for reducing domestic greenhouse gas emissions. From through the United States cut | Chapter its total carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) pollution by percent partly reflecting a domestic shift toward cleaner natural gas increased use of renewables and improved energy efficiency. Although the reductions in CO2 emissions rep resent an historic shift from past trends much more work remains The Climate Action Plan is the centerpiece of the President s efforts to confront climate change. With this plan the President has put in motion steps that will immediately and substantially reduce greenhouse gas emis sions. These steps include direct regulation of emissions such as the Clean Power Plan which will further the shift toward cleaner sources of electric ity and complement carbon regulations already in place for other sectors such as fuel economy and greenhouse gas standards for light medium and heavy-duty vehicles The President s Climate Action steps also include a strategy to reduce methane emissions ( a potent greenhouse gas ) Through a recent announce ment the Administration identified opportunities to further reduce meth ane emissions from the oil and gas sector ; this topic is also a focus of the Quadrennial Energy Review. Additionally the Administration supports research development and commercialization of technologies that help to bring down the costs of renewables ; for example through solar programs such as the U.S. Department of Energy s SunShot initiative which seeks to make solar energy cost-competitive with other forms of electricity by These efforts support continuing U.S. leadership in global efforts to address climate change as evidenced by the November joint announcement of climate targets with China This chapter discusses the three elements of the All-of-the-Above Energy Strategy and takes stock of both the progress that has been made to date and the work that remains to be done to transition to a low-carbon energy system. The third element laying the foundation for a clean energy future dovetails with the President s Climate Action Plan which is the focus of the final section in this chapter. The chapter builds on two previous Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) reports : The All-of-the-Above Energy Strategy as a Path to Sustainable Economic Growth ( CEA 2014a ) and The Cost of Delaying Action to Stem Climate Change ( CEA 2014b ) The Energy Revolution : Historical Perspective and Economic Benefits The Energy Revolution in Historical Perspective Over the past two centuries the amount of energy consumed in the United States has increased dramatically and our energy sources have The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future become more convenient. As Figure shows wood was the main U.S energy source through the middle of the 19th century. The use of coal rose sharply through the early 20th century plateaued and then increased in the 1970s for the generation of electricity. For most of the 20th century petroleum consumption grew sharply dropping off temporarily after the oil crises of the 1970s but then resuming its growth albeit at a slower pace than previously. Natural gas consumption spread during the second half of the 20th century with greater use of this fuel in homes and industry and to meet peak electricity demand. During the last quarter of the 20th century nuclear electricity generation burgeoned to the point that it now supplies percent of electricity and wood the original biofuel saw a small regional resur gence ( primarily for home heating ) because of the increases in home heat ing oil prices in the 1970s. Meanwhile production of renewables which includes biomass and biofuels hydroelectric wind solar and geothermal energy has approached nuclear energy production levels Energy consumption trends have already shifted dramatically in the 21st century ( Figure 6-1b ) : coal consumption dropped by percent between its peak and ; and total petroleum consumption declined by percent between its peak and Natural gas consumption has risen sharply with much of this increase displacing coal for electricity gen eration. In addition total energy obtained from renewables rose percent between and The decline in petroleum consumption starting in was unex pected. In the case of energy industry-standard benchmark projections are produced annually by the Energy Information Administration ( EIA ) in its Annual Energy Outlook. Revisions to those projections include the effects of unforeseen developments in the energy sector. Figure 6-2a shows U.S. petro leum consumption since and projected consumption from the and editions of the Annual Energy Outlook. Only nine years ago EIA projected an increase in petroleum consumption during the subse quent years. But events dramatically affected subsequent projections : by EIA had reduced both the level and rate of growth of its projection ; its outlook now projects petroleum consumption to decline through after a slight increase over the next five years. The reversal in projected petroleum consumption is led by the reversal in actual and projected gaso line consumption ( Figure 6-2b ) : the EIA projection of consumption in is percent below the projection made in Actual gasoline consumption declined between and mainly due to the recession and rising fuel prices but much of the revision to the levels reflects the largely unexpected fuel economy improvements stemming from the Energy Independence and Security Act of and the Administration s subsequent | Chapter Figure 6-1a U.S. Energy Consumption by Source Quadrillion Btu Petroleum Natural Gas Coal Renewable Wood Nuclear Source : Energy Information Administration Energy Perspectives ( ) and Monthly Energy Review ( Dec ) Figure 6-1b U.S. Energy Consumption by Source Quadrillion Btu Petroleum Natural Gas Coal Nuclear Renewable Wood Source : Energy Information Administration Monthly Energy Review ( Dec ) The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future Figure 6-2a U.S.Petroleum Consumption Million Barrels per Day Actual AEO Projections Reference Case Reference Case Reference Case Source : Energy Information Administration Annual Energy Outlook ( AEO ) and Figure 6-2b U.S. Consumption of Motor Gasoline Million Barrels per Day Actual AEO Projections Reference Case Reference Case Reference Case Source : Energy Information Administration Annual Energy Outlook ( AEO ) and | Chapter tightening of those standards. The projections further reflect the light-duty vehicle fuel economy and greenhouse gas emissions rate stan dards which apply to model years through The Administration s fuel economy and greenhouse gas standards for medium and heavy-duty trucks also contribute to the reduction in projected petroleum consumption between the and Outlooks The recent increase in U.S. petroleum production was equally unforeseen. As Figure shows domestic petroleum production peaked in at million barrels per day ( bpd ) Production plateaued through the mid-1980s and then declined steadily through the late 2000s as producers depleted conventional domestic deposits. Since then however entrepre neurs adapted horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing technology that had previously been more widely used for natural gas. The newer technology enables the extraction of oil from within rocky formations once considered uneconomic like the Eagle Ford in Texas and development of new regions such as the Bakken in North Dakota. This chapter uses the term uncon ventional oil to describe oil produced from shale and other relatively impermeable formations and produced using new drilling methods. These unforeseen technological developments are recent : most of the revision to EIA s earlier projections has occurred since and now EIA projects Figure U.S. Petroleum Production Million Barrels per Day Actual AEO Projections Reference Case Reference Case Reference Case Source : Energy Information Administration Annual Energy Outlook ( AEO ) and The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future production to surpass its earlier peak this year. The EIA Reference case which includes the baseline assumptions projects production to decline slowly after But because extraction technology is still advancing there is considerable uncertainty about the United States economically recover able resource potential The decline in demand for petroleum and increase in production have triggered a sharp turnaround in net petroleum imports ( Figure ) U.S. net petroleum imports fell from a peak of million bpd in to million bpd in representing a decrease of million bpd compared to EIA s projection of imports. Comparing actual imports and the projection of imports roughly million bpd or percent of the reduction stem from the fall in consumption ; and million bpd or percent are due to the unforeseen increase in production The Administration has supported oil production on Federal and Indian lands. In fiscal year onshore oil production on Federal and Indian lands increased percent compared with In the U.S Interior Department held onshore lease sales generating about $ million in revenue for States Tribes and the American taxpayer. The Administration has also promoted the environmentally responsible devel opment of offshore resources through the Interior Department s Five-Year Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Program. In early the Figure U.S. Petroleum Net Imports Million Barrels per Day Actual AEO Projections Reference Case Reference Case Reference Case Source : Energy Information Administration Annual Energy Outlook ( AEO ) and | Chapter Interior Department announced a Draft Proposed Program for to that includes potential lease sales in the Gulf of Mexico off the Alaska coast and in the Atlantic. Following the Deepwater Horizon incident in the Interior Department has implemented new safety standards for new wells In the Interior Department issued new deep water well permits The rise in unconventional natural gas production preceded the rise in unconventional oil production ( unconventional gas is defined similarly to unconventional oil as gas produced from impermeable formations using new drilling methods ) Figure which presents domestic natural gas production and historical EIA projections shows that the EIA s projec tions indicate an upswing in natural gas production through Already well over one-half of natural gas production is from unconventional forma tions ( tight gas and shale gas ) a fraction that is projected to increase as the conventional resource base becomes less productive and competitive. The resulting benefits of these innovations to natural gas producers and consum ers are discussed in a subsequent subsection Domestic use of renewable energy sources has also increased substan tially since Figure shows that the use of liquid biofuels primarily ethanol from corn and biodiesel from various sources including waste oil and soy oil grew sharply in the mid-2000s. Several factors contributed to this growth including the Renewable Fuel Standard which mandates Trillion Cubic Feet Figure U.S. Natural Gas Production Actual AEO Projections Reference Case Reference Case Reference Case Source : Energy Information Administration Annual Energy Outlook ( AEO ) and The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future Figure U.S. Fuel Ethanol and Biodiesel Consumption Billion Gallons Fuel Ethanol Biodiesel Source : Energy Information Administration Monthly Energy Review ( Dec ) ethanol volumes under the Energy Policy Act and was modified by the Energy Independence and Security Act. The combined effect of increased production of natural gas oil and liquid biofuels has positioned the United States as the leading petroleum natural gas and biofuels pro ducer in the world ( Figure ) The U.S. energy revolution also encompasses a dramatic rise in the use of renewables for electricity generation. At the end of wind gen eration capacity totaled gigawatts which was more than double its level.1 Wind generator construction has occurred throughout the Midwest Southwest West Coast and New England ( Figure ) and a record gigawatts of new wind power capacity was installed in alone roughly double the amount of newly installed capacity in This new wind capac ity represented the largest share of addition by a single fuel source to total U.S. electric generation capacity in As a result wind-powered electric ity generation nearly tripled from a monthly rate of thousand gigawatt hours at the beginning of to thousand gigawatt hours at the begin ning of ( Figure ) Similarly solar-powered electricity generation nearly quadrupled from a monthly rate of just above two thousand gigawatt hours to more than eight thousand gigawatt hours over the same period One gigawatt is equal to billion watts and is a common unit of generation capacity ; the entire U.S. power system contains roughly gigawatts of installed capacity | Chapter Figure Petroleum Biofuels and Natural Gas Production Quadrillion Btu U.S Russia NG Petroleum and biofuels Saudi Arabia Russia U.S Saudi Arabia Note : Petroleum production includes crude oil natural gas liquids condensates refinery processing gains and other liquids including biofuels Source : Energy Information Administration International Energy Statistics The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future Figure Total Monthly Wind and Solar Energy Production Thousand Gigawatt Hours Sep-2014 Wind Solar Source : Energy Information Administration Monthly Energy Review ( Dec ) In wind accounted for percent of non-hydro renewable electricity generation biomass for percent solar for percent and geothermal for percent ; between and wind and solar had the fastest growth rates among non-hydro renewables The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of played a significant role in the rising use of renewables for electricity generation Since the early 1990s the Federal Government has helped spur most wind and solar investments by offering tax credits. Investors in wind projects that began construction before the end of received a tax credit of $ for each megawatt-hour of electricity generation ; solar projects are currently eligible for a tax credit of percent of the up-front investment cost. The Recovery Act provided eligible wind solar and other low-carbon projects the option of a grant from the U.S. Treasury equal to percent of the project s cost rather than a tax credit. Since the program has provided almost $ billion in grants for gigawatts of wind capacity and gigawatts of solar capacity. The President s approach to business tax reform includes proposals to make permanent and more effective tax incentives for renew able energy ( see further discussion in Chapter ) | Chapter GDP Jobs and the Trade Deficit The U.S. energy revolution has contributed to economic growth both in terms of net economic output as measured by GDP and overall employ ment. It has also contributed to a declining trade deficit as the Nation has recovered from the Great Recession. CEA estimates that the oil and natural gas sectors alone contributed more than percentage point to real GDP growth between and in contrast to a slight negative contribution on average from to ( Figure ) The contribution between and which does not count all economic spillovers added substantially to the percent average annualized rate of U.S. economic growth over these three years Growth in oil and gas production has directly and indirectly created jobs over the past several years. As Figure shows total employment in the oil and natural gas industries which includes extraction and support activities increased by jobs between and and continued to grow through ( not shown ) ; coal employment has also edged up only slightly over this period. Much oil and gas job growth has been concentrated in a handful of states like Texas Pennsylvania and North Dakota that are at the forefront of developing new energy resources ( Cruz Smith and Stanley ) The oil and gas employment increase in Figure understates the Percent Figure Contributions of Oil and Natural Gas Production to GDP Growth '95-'05 Note : CEA calculations use physical quantity data for oil and natural gas production and implicitly include contributions from the sectors that service and sell equipment to the oil and gas drilling industry. contribution is estimated based on partial data for the year as a whole Source : Energy Information Administration Spot Prices for Crude Oil and Petroleum Products and Short-Term Energy Outlook ( Jan ) ; CEA calculations The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future Figure Coal Oil and Natural Gas Employment Thousand Jobs Oil and Natural Gas Coal Note : Both series include extraction/mining as well as support activities for the industry Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Employment Statistics and National Industry Specific Occupational Employment and Wage Estimates full short-run effect of oil and gas development on U.S. employment for two reasons. First jobs have also been created in companies that provide goods and services to the oil and gas industries including manufacturing transportation and leisure and hospitality. Second workers in all of these industries create additional jobs when they spend their incomes as do State and local governments that spend additional tax revenue. As a result new oil and gas regions have seen employment growth in schools retail health care and other sectors. Because of labor market slack reflected in elevated unemployment rates during the recovery the number of additional jobs created by spending tax revenue and income could be quite large perhaps equal to one-half the increase in the oil and gas industries or about additional jobs in compared to ( CEA 2014c ) Expansion of renewable energy capacity has similarly contributed to economic growth. Employment in the renewable sector spans several categories in Federal data collection systems which complicates direct esti mation of job growth and output in the sector. However trade association data suggest that in addition to rapid expansion in wind and solar electricity generation there has also been a sharp rise in employment. As Figure shows from to employment in the solar energy industry grew by more than percent. Moreover employment in the solar industry is CEA ( 2014c ) provides estimates of the fiscal multiplier for the Recovery Act | Chapter Thousand Jobs Figure Solar-Related Employment Source : The Solar Foundation National Solar Jobs Census projected to increase by another percent in Wind industry employ ment totaled roughly workers in The solar and wind employ ment levels are not directly comparable to the oil gas and coal employment levels shown in Figure ; the solar and wind employment figures include a broader range of related activities The increase in domestic oil production combined with reduced demand for oil has also led to a sharp drop in net petroleum imports and as a result a decline in the Nation s trade deficit. In the total trade deficit was percent of GDP the highest ever recorded for the United States. By the end of the trade deficit had fallen to percent of GDP which excluding the crisis-affected year of was the lowest since ( Figure ) While the U.S. trade balance is subject to a number of influences and depends in large part on domestic and global macroeconomic conditions the rise in domestic energy production has been a substantial factor in the recent improvement. Of the percentage-point decline in the trade deficit Estimates of employment related to the solar energy industry are from the Solar Foundation s National Solar Jobs Census. The National Solar Jobs Census uses a statistical survey methodology broadly comparable to the Bureau of Labor Statistics Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages and Current Employment Statistics surveys Estimates of national employment related to the wind power sector come from the American Wind Energy Association s U.S. Wind Industry Annual Market Report The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future Percent of GDP Figure Total and Petroleum Trade Deficits Total Petroleum Source : Census Bureau U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services ; Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts since about percentage point ( or just over one-fifth ) is accounted for by a shrinking trade deficit in petroleum products Energy Prices Households and Businesses Since natural gas prices have fallen well below crude oil prices on an energy-equivalent basis providing a cheaper source of energy to con sumers and businesses in the United States ( Figure ) This price decrease has created widespread benefits and opportunities for the U.S. economy The decrease in U.S. natural gas prices has opened a gap between U.S and international prices presenting an export opportunity for domestic nat ural gas producers ( see Box ) The gap reflects the undeveloped nature of international gas markets combined with the expense of international trade Liquefaction transportation from the United States to Europe and regasifi cation have been estimated to add $ to $ per million British Thermal Unit ( Btu ) which would roughly double the price of U.S. gas entering the pipeline in Europe relative to the Henry Hub price.5 Under the Natural Gas Act of as amended the Department of Energy ( DOE ) must authorize any natural gas exports. As of November the DOE has conditionally approved approximately billion cubic feet per day of liquefied natural gas The Henry Hub price is a benchmark price for natural gas and it measures the price at a pipeline distribution point in Louisiana | Chapter Figure Annual Crude Oil and Natural Gas Spot Prices Dollars per Million Btu Projected Brent WTI Henry Hub Source : Energy Information Administration Short-Term Energy Outlook ( Jan ) ( LNG ) export capacity though the enormous capital expenditure required for LNG facilities raises the possibility that some of this capacity might not actually be built. Because of high transport costs even if a global market for LNG were to develop domestic natural gas prices are likely to remain well below prices in the rest of the world for an extended period of time Low wholesale natural gas prices broadly benefit the U.S. economy in several direct and indirect ways. Residential natural gas prices have followed the decline in wholesale natural gas prices and the 12-month average price has declined by percent from its high ( Figure 6-15a ) Households which accounted for about one-fifth of U.S. natural gas consumption in pay lower gas bills and can either spend or save the difference Commercial and industrial businesses which accounted for about per cent of domestic consumption in also benefit from lower gas prices which raise business profits. Lower gas prices benefit consumers indirectly to the extent that businesses pass on lower energy prices to consumers in the form of lower product prices. Finally low wholesale natural gas prices have supported a switch in fuels in the electric power sector from coal to natural gas. With natural gas prices falling from to retail electricity prices have increased at a slower rate than they had during the previous years ( Figure 6-15b ) In other words electricity consumers businesses and The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future Figure 6-15a Wholesale and Residential Natural Gas Prices Dollars per Thousand Cubic Feet Residential Wholesale Note : Prices illustrated are twelve-month moving averages Source : Energy Information Administration Short-Term Energy Outlook ( Jan ) Figure 6-15b Retail Electricity Prices and Fuel Costs Dollars per Million Btu Dollars per Million Btu Retail Electricity ( left axis ) Natural Gas ( right axis ) Coal ( right axis ) Note : Prices illustrated are twelve-month moving averages Source : Energy Information Administration Short-Term Energy Outlook ( Jan ) | Chapter Box : Natural Gas Exports Over the last decade U.S. natural gas production increased by roughly percent. This sharp increase in domestic production has widened the gap between domestic natural gas prices and natural gas prices in other countries ( Figure 6-i ) creating potential profitable export opportunities for domestic natural gas producers. In the United States surpassed Qatar to become the world s largest exporter of Liquefied Petroleum Gas ( LPG ) for which there is already export capacity in the Gulf region for thousand barrels per day ( bpd ) with another thousand bpd expected by The Energy Information Administration ( EIA ) projects that the United States will become a net exporter of liquefied natural gas ( LNG ) by ( Figure 6-ii ) However expansion of U.S. natural gas exports requires both governmental action and the construction of additional exporting infrastructure Figure 6-i Natural Gas Prices in the United States United Kingdom and Japan Dollars per Million Btu Japan LNG Dec- UK ( NBP ) US ( Henry Hub ) Note : UK 's prices do not include natural gas imported from Russia which is predominately indexed to oil prices. Japanese prices are monthly averages. All series are represented as 30-day moving averages Source : Bloomberg Both transportation costs and government-imposed barriers to trade have caused prices among countries to differ. The gap between U.S natural gas prices and prices in other countries reflects two main trade impediments. First transportation costs liquefaction transportation abroad and regasification roughly double the price of gas entering Europe relative to the price at its origin in the United States. Transport charges must cover substantial infrastructure investments and capital A group of hydrocarbon gases derived from crude oil refining or natural gas processing The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future expenditure for example the cost of building a liquefaction terminal that can export up to billion cubic feet ( bcf ) per day for years can be around $ billion.2 The second impediment is the Natural Gas Act of ( NGA ) and subsequent amendments which restrict natural gas exports. Under the NGA natural gas exports require approval from the U.S. Department of Energy ( DOE ) As of November DOE has approved applications for the export of about bcf per day of LNG although some of the approvals are contingent on approval by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission. Because the recent techno logical developments have given the United States a natural comparative advantage in gas production over importing regions both trade impedi ments natural and government mandated depress U.S. gas prices relative to those paid abroad What will happen as more export infrastructure comes on line and DOE approves higher volumes of gas exports ? When barriers to trade are reduced between a low-cost country ( the United States ) and Figure 6-ii U.S. Natural Gas Production and Net Exports Trillion Cubic Feet Actual Projected Production LNG Net Exports Total Net Exports Source : Energy Information Administration Annual Energy Outlook ( ) Over bcf per day of export capacity is under construction or has been proposed though cost considerations make it unlikely that all proposed projects will be completed. By comparison the United States produces almost bcf per day Approval is even required for exports to countries with which the U.S. has a free trade agreement though an amendment to the NGA in required that applications to authorize exports to free trade partners be granted without modification or delay. As a result conclusion of the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership would vastly increase the range of countries to which U.S. producers could export without administrative barriers ( see Chapter ) | Chapter high-cost countries ( importers in the rest of the world ) basic economic theory predicts a convergence of prices. As U.S. natural gas enters the global market it will increase global supply and push global prices down Meanwhile domestic prices will rise as natural gas leaves the domestic market reducing supply in the United States. A recent study by EIA estimates that an increase in exports of bcf per day by would raise U.S. residential retail prices by percent between and although the EIA considers such a large exports increase by to be almost impossible. An increase in U.S. exports of natural gas and the resulting price changes would have a number of mostly beneficial effects on natural gas producers employment U.S. geopolitical security and the environment Higher prices for domestic producers increase domestic production. Increased production in turn spurs investment increasing U.S. GDP. EIA ( ) estimates that the increase in GDP could range from percent to percent in different export scenarios ranging from to bcf per year phased in at different rates beginning in An increase in exports can create jobs in the short run Estimates suggest that natural gas exports of six bcf per year could sup port as many as jobs ( Levi ) These jobs would arise both in gas production and along the supply chain ( for example in manufactur ing machines and parts used as downstream inputs ) Lower natural gas prices around the world have a positive geopolitical impact for the United States. Increased U.S. supply builds liquidity in the global natural gas market and reduces European depen dence on the current primary suppliers Russia and Iran More U.S. exports could help promote the use of cleaner energy abroad including in developing countries that now rely heavily on coal. Lower foreign emissions would help to counteract global warm ing and therefore are a direct benefit for the United States. As natural gas becomes cheaper for the rest of the world countries overseas will replace dirtier coal-fired power with natural gas. Cheaper natural gas could also replace low-carbon sources and increase electricity consumption abroad ; the net global impact is ambiguous. The effects of the natural gas price increase in the United States are also complex. Higher gas prices tend to curb overall emissions by reducing total energy consumption and induc ing substitution toward renewable sources of power. However higher prices might also cause some U.S. substitution toward coal raising our emissions U.S. manufacturers would still have a competitive cost advantage in natural gas albeit smaller than what they would otherwise have. Because of transportation costs in equilibrium U.S. natural The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future gas prices would still be expected to be persistently lower than prices overseas. The cost advantage however would be smaller than it would otherwise be but any potential impact on manufacturing is likely to be small because in on average the cost of natural gas represented less than percent of the value of manufacturing shipments. This suggests that a percent increase in the price of natural gas would raise average production costs by only about percent. For the most intensive users such as producers of flat glass or nitrogen fertilizers the increase in costs will be higher. But these gas-intensive industries represent only a small share of total manufacturing employment and output. In par ticular the top gas-intensive industries account for only percent of total manufacturing employment and percent of manufacturing value added. Businesses with very thin profit margins may also be adversely affected. In contrast expanded natural gas exports will create new jobs in a range of sectors including natural gas extraction infrastructure invest ment and transportation households have also benefited from the slower growth of electricity prices caused by lower wholesale natural gas prices Oil prices decreased dramatically in the second half of Box shows the drop in crude prices and notes the range of global factors behind the drop including the boom in U.S. oil production. Retail gasoline prices are closely linked to global crude oil prices so households now pay less for gasoline. Seasonally adjusted gasoline prices decreased by roughly $ per gallon between June and December EIA estimates that lower gasoline prices in compared to will save the average household about $ Oil-consuming businesses would also enjoy huge gains in the tens of billions of dollars. In addition the fact that lower oil prices are expected to boost the global economy will create additional spillovers for U.S. economic activity by creating higher demand for the products and services we export On the other hand these gains are partially offset by the fact that lower crude oil prices reduce the profits and investments of oil producers. On net how ever the recent oil price decrease benefits the U.S. economy ( see Chapter for further discussion of the macroeconomic effects of oil prices ) Infrastructure Implications of the Energy Revolution Expanding domestic energy supply has challenged the U.S. energy infrastructure in different ways. Since some of the best wind and solar resources are located far from population and economic hubs adding sub stantially more wind and central-station solar generation usually requires | Chapter Box : U.S. Oil Production in a Global Perspective and Implications for U.S. GDP U.S. crude oil production has expanded dramatically since Technological innovations in horizontal drilling hydraulic fracturing and seismic imaging have led to a surge in domestic production from an average of about million barrels per day in to more than million barrels per day in Figure 6-iii shows that this growth is largely a U.S. phenomenon. Excluding the United States the top oil-producing countries experienced an average increase of million barrels per day between and compared to the million barrel per day increase experienced in the United States Figure 6-iii Global Crude Oil Production Growth Change in Production Million Barrels per Day Top Crude Oil Producing Countries Note : Production includes crude oil and lease condensates Source : Energy Information Administration International Energy Statistics Crude oil prices decreased dramatically in the second half of Between and the third quarter of prices were typically between $ and $ per barrel ( see Figure 6-iv ) Crude prices as measured by the Brent price index which is a standard global price index dropped percent between August and the end of December to about $ per barrel. Explanations for this price decline include : the major gains in U.S oil production over the last several years ; recent decreases in forecasted global oil demand ; and sustained high levels of production from the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) that has in fact produced above its official target in each month from April to October and decided in November not to reduce this target Lower crude oil prices have translated into lower prices for petro leum products like gasoline diesel heating oil propane and jet fuel The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future Dollars per Barrel Figure 6-iv Brent Crude Weekly Spot Prices Week-Ended Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Source : Energy Information Administration Spot Prices for Crude Oil and Petroleum Products ( Figure 6-v ) In the United States gasoline accounts for about one-half of crude oil consumption distillates ( diesel and heating oil ) for about percent and propane and jet fuel for about and percent. Lower petroleum product prices increase households real income and boost businesses profits which translate into higher GDP. Prices fell roughly $ per barrel between August and the end of Chapter provides an estimate that if this price decrease is sustained for the next year GDP will be percentage point higher in that it would be if oil prices were to remain at their mid-2014 levels Figure 6-v Petroleum Product Weekly Prices Dollars per Gallon Excluding Taxes Retail Gasoline Diesel Jet Fuel Heating Oil Week-Ended Dec Propane Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Note : Retail gasoline price excluding taxes calculated using the state average for local state and federal gasoline taxes from the American Petroleum Institute Source : Energy Information Administration Spot Prices for Crude Oil and Petroleum Products ; American Petroleum Institute | Chapter new construction or upgrades of existing transmission lines. For example installed wind generator capacity in Texas grew between and from gigawatts to gigawatts but most of the new generators were installed in West Texas. Little existing transmission capacity connected the wind generators to electricity demand centers in East Texas. During certain times such as at night or during the spring available wind generation in the West exceeded local electricity demand. If there had been sufficient trans mission capacity the excess wind generation could have been transported to East Texas relieving fossil fuel-fired generators there. But because transmis sion capacity did not keep pace with wind generation electricity costs and emissions were higher than they needed to be. Texas recently completed a major transmission project that alleviates these problems providing an important example of infrastructure investments that can support the energy revolution Another reason for insufficient infrastructure is that much of the recent growth in natural gas and oil production has occurred in regions with little recent history of energy production. Oil production in North Dakota increased from million bpd in January to million bpd in October However transportation bottlenecks have contributed to crude oil prices particularly in the U.S. interior falling below international benchmarks. Responding to these bottlenecks according to EIA estimates shipments of crude oil by rail increased from nearly zero to about thou sand bpd during roughly the same time period. Recent high-profile rail acci dents involving crude oil shipments have raised concerns about the safety and environmental consequences of increasing reliance on rail for shipping crude. Recognizing these concerns the Department of Transportation recently proposed strengthened safety regulations for rail cars transporting crude oil and other flammable materials The Administration launched the first Quadrennial Energy Review in January in part to support long-term planning of energy infrastruc ture. The first phase of the Review to be completed by early focuses on infrastructure for energy transport storage and distribution. Subsequent phases will address other dimensions of U.S. energy security and sustain ability thereby providing a multiyear roadmap for Federal energy policy The Energy Revolution and Energy Security : A Macroeconomic Perspective The term energy security is used to mean different things in dif ferent contexts and broadly covers energy supply availability reliability The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future affordability and geopolitical considerations.6 This section focuses on macroeconomic energy security which means the extent to which a coun try s economy is exposed to energy supply risks specifically international energy supply disruptions that lead to product unavailability price shocks or both. The concept of macroeconomic energy security encompasses domestic risks as well as international supply risks such as disruptions to foreign oil production. In the United States domestic energy security considerations are important and domestic supply breakdowns can have large costs. For example CEA and DOE and other Federal agencies have estimated substantial costs of electricity-grid outages associated with storms ( CEA/DOE ) Historically however energy supply disruptions of for eign origin have had the greatest overall macroeconomic impact. Foreign oil supply disruptions played a role in the recessions of the 1970s as well as the recession though disagreement remains about the magnitude of that role. For this reason this section focuses on the vulnerability of the U.S economy to international energy supply disruptions rather than to domestic ones Because most U.S. energy import dollars are spent on petroleum the main threats to U.S. macroeconomic energy security come from interna tional oil supply disruptions. During the OPEC oil embargo price controls and lack of product led to gasoline rationing and long lines at service stations. But in today s global oil market with many producers and domestically deregulated petroleum prices petroleum products will still be available in the event of a foreign supply disruption just at a higher price Today macroeconomic energy security concerns the resilience of the U.S economy to temporary unexpected price hikes price shocks of foreign origin Historically temporary oil price shocks arising from foreign supply disruptions have cut GDP growth and reduced employment. These events have been studied and debated in depth in the economics literature ( see Hamilton and Kilian 2008b for surveys ) Table presents a list of the major oil supply disruptions from to identified in Kilian In a joint statement released May the G-7 energy ministers stated : We believe that the path to energy security is built on a number of core principles : Development of flexible transparent and competitive energy markets including gas markets ; Diversification of energy fuels sources and routes and encouragement of indigenous sources of energy supply ; Reducing our greenhouse gas emissions and accelerating the transition to a low carbon economy as a key contribution to enduring energy security ; Enhancing energy efficiency in demand and supply and demand response management ; Promoting deployment of clean and sustainable energy technologies and continued investment in research and innovation ; Improving energy systems resilience by promoting infrastructure modernization and supply and demand policies that help withstand systemic shocks ; [ and ] Putting in place emergency response systems including reserves and fuel substitution for importing countries in case of major energy disruptions. | Chapter Table Major Oil Disruptions Event Name Date Duration ( months ) Gross Peak Global Supply Loss ( millions of barrels per day ) Arab Oil Embargo & Arab-Israeli War Oct-73 to Mar-74 % Iranian Revolution Nov-78 to Apr-79 % Iran-Iraq War Oct-80 to Jan-81 % Persian Gulf War Aug-90 to Jan-91 % Civil Unrest in Venezuela Dec-02 to Mar-03 % Iraq War Mar-03 to Dec-03 % Percent Change in Oil Prices Source : Events as identified in Kilian ( 2008a ) and Hamilton ( ) Dates and gross peak supply loss figures as identified in IEA ( ) Price changes for events over select windows as specified in Hamilton ( ) and price changes before measured using crude petroleum PPI as in Hamilton ( ) ( 2008a ) and Hamilton ( ) the estimated gross peak global supply loss and the percentage change in oil prices in the aftermath of the disruption For example in the months following the Iranian Revolution in November oil prices increased by percent. This link is not perfect and not every oil price shock has led to an economic slowdown but as is discussed below in more detail the empirical evidence points to a negative link between oil price spikes and economic activity Trends in Oil Import Prices and Shares The price of oil plays a central role in macroeconomic energy security Figure shows the price of oil in nominal ( current ) dollars and in dollars ( deflated by the price index for consumer spending ) Jumps in the price of oil are visible around the disruptions described in Table as well as during more gradual increases such as in to Oil prices in November of roughly $ per barrel are comparable in real terms The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future Figure WTI Spot Price : Nominal and Real Dollars per Barrel Nov-2014 Real Dollars Nominal Note : Nominal prices deflated using overall PCE price index Source : Energy Information Administration Spot Prices for Crude Oil and Petroleum Products ; Bureau of Economic Analysis Personal Consumption Expenditures with those in the early 1980s but are roughly twice the real prices of the 1990s The expenditure share of net petroleum imports measures the frac tion of GDP that is spent on net imports of petroleum. Ignoring compo sitional differences this share is the product of net barrels of petroleum imports times the price per barrel divided by GDP. Figure presents two measures of the expenditure share of GDP that is net imports. The first uses a narrow definition of net imports of crude gasoline distillates and fuel oil. The second which is only available starting in uses a broader definition that includes other refined products such as jet fuel The alternative definition slightly increases the share relative to the narrow measure but does not materially change the overall time series pattern. In order to observe longer-term movements the Figure also presents smoothed trends of the two measures which reduce the influence of high frequency fluctuations in these series due to short-term price volatility. During the 1990s the price of oil was low even though physical imports were higher than in previous years which kept the expenditure share relatively low. In contrast between early and mid-2014 high oil prices have produced a relatively high expenditure share though this share has declined noticeably over the past few years as domestic demand has declined and domestic oil production has increased. The high correlation of the net import share with | Chapter Figure Net Import Shares of Petroleum Products Percent of GDP Broader Definition : Q4 Narrow Definition Source : Energy Information Administration Monthly Energy Review ( Apr ) ; CEA calculations price indicates that the short-term price elasticity of demand for petroleum products is quite low meaning that consumers do not reduce their demand very much when the price rises Macroeconomic Channels of Oil Price Shocks Oil price shocks can affect GDP through several channels including demand for goods and services supply ( production ) and physical product rationing. As Kilian ( ) and Blinder ( ) point out these channels are conceptually distinct and can have different macroeconomic effects Via the demand channel an increase in the price of oil reduces spend ing on other goods and services reducing GDP. Because as noted above the short-run demand for petroleum products is quite price-inelastic the share of expenditures by consumers and firms on petroleum rises when the oil price increases.7 Because the United States is a net importer of oil expenditures on net imports also rise when the oil price increases. If the oil shock is known to be temporary the life-cycle theory of consumption sug For example Kilian and Murphy ( ) estimate the short-run price elasticity of demand for oil to be approximately meaning that a one percent oil price increase reduces consumption by percent. Earlier estimates show short-run elasticities of even smaller magnitudes. If demand for energy-intensive imported products is similarly insensitive to price changes an oil price increase would strongly raise U.S. spending on those imported products and therefore strongly diminish the income available to spend on other goods The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future gests that consumers would make minimal adjustments to the rest of their consumption and would temporarily finance the additional oil expenditure by drawing down savings. However in practice consumers do not know the duration of a price hike and many or most would instead reduce their consumption of other goods and services to pay for the more expensive fuel needed for daily life. Because expenditures on oil imports go abroad and not to the domestic economy the additional spending on fuel does not count toward GDP. As a result the immediate effect of a price increase on an imported good like oil which has price-inelastic demand is to decrease consumption of domestic goods and services and as a result to decrease GDP. This demand-reducing effect works just as if consumers wealth had been reduced so this channel is sometimes referred to as the wealth channel The wealth channel can be large ; for instance if net oil imports are percent of GDP as they were in the late 1970s and late 2000s a 10-percent jump in the price of oil causes a corresponding reduction in spending on everything else and reduces GDP by about percent. The wealth channel can be offset by other factors however depending on the source of the oil price increase For example an increase in overall world economic activity that drives up the demand for and the price of oil would also expand U.S. exports at least partially offsetting the macroeconomic effects of the increased price of oil imports There are two other ways besides the wealth effect by which an oil price increase can affect demand. First an oil price increase like a change in the relative price of any other good also changes the composition of demand as consumers shift spending from items that are indirectly affected by the price increase ( like air travel and cars with low fuel economy ) to goods and services that are less energy-intensive. Thus products of energy-intensive sectors become relatively more expensive and those sectors will see a reduc tion in demand. Even within sectors demand can shift across products such as to cars with greater fuel economy. Moreover to the extent that shifting from energy-intensive goods reduces purchases of durables such as automo biles or refrigerators spending today is shifted into the future depressing aggregate demand. Although this temporal shift increases demand in less energy-intensive sectors it takes time for displaced workers to find alterna tive employment in those sectors so incomes decline and unemployment rises ( see for example Hamilton ) Second an oil price increase can depress domestic demand if it raises uncertainty. Concerns about the economic future can lead consumers to postpone major purchases and convince firms to postpone investment and hiring which slows the economy ( for example Bernanke Dixit and Pindyck Bloom ; and for oil investment specifically Kellogg | Chapter ) Oil price volatility can be causal ( the volatility creates uncertainty that postpones investment hiring or durables consumption ) or the volatil ity can simply reflect broader market uncertainty about future economic or geopolitical events. Another potential demand-side channel is a fall in aggre gate consumption because an oil price rise is regressive and transfers income from individuals with a high marginal propensity to consume to individuals with a lower marginal propensity to consume ( for example Nordhaus ) Oil price increases can also reduce economic activity through the supply side of the economy. To the extent that energy prices more broadly move with oil prices an increase in oil prices makes energy a more expensive factor of production and increases costs to businesses and households who will strive to reduce energy consumption and expenditures. Although high energy prices could cause firms and households to shift toward less energyintensive technology in the long run ; in the short run with fixed technol ogy higher energy costs can result in layoffs in energy-intensive firms and industries ( Linn and ) Because it takes time for displaced workers to find jobs incomes decline and unemployment rises. This supply-side channel matters most if price increases are long lasting. Because capital and labor are being used less efficiently this channel also could harm productiv ity growth. However because of economy-wide improvements in energy efficiency over the last several decades as shown in Figure below this supply-side channel is less important today than it has been in the past The channels discussed above concern changes in the relative price of oil and assume that oil is available. If however prices are not flexible and instead oil or petroleum products are rationed the effect on GDP can be severe. On the production side because technology is fixed in the short run many workers can not do their jobs without oil. Time spent waiting in line for gasoline is time not spent productively. In such cases output falls and even relatively small dollar volumes of unavailable supply can have an outsized influence on the economy. Fortunately the development of global crude oil markets and deregulated domestic retail markets have made wide spread petroleum product rationing a thing of the past outside of occasional temporary regional events stemming from weather-related supply chain dis ruptions. Such events can have significant even life-threatening impacts on the individuals involved and minimizing those impacts through improving supply chain resilience is an important goal ( and indeed is a central topic of the Quadrennial Energy Review ) But the temporary nature of these events and regional scope means that the macroeconomic impact of the resulting petroleum product unavailability is limited CEA ( 2014a ) presents reduced-form empirical evidence on the relative importance of the different effects of energy supply shocks on the The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future U.S. economy and on the changing correlations among energy prices. The results of this analysis suggest that a lower share of net oil imports in GDP enhances the resilience of the economy to oil price shocks. Specifically the same oil-price increase reduces GDP much less in than it did in and will reduce GDP even less at the lower import level that EIA projects for This analysis suggests that the unconventional oil boom and lower oil demand have significantly improved U.S. energy security A Path to a Low-Carbon Future Most anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases are energy-related particularly from the combustion of fossil fuels ( EPA ) A central chal lenge of energy and environmental policy is to find a responsible path that balances the economic benefits of low-cost energy with the social and envi ronmental costs to future generations associated with conventional energy production. Addressing these challenges is a central part of the President s All-of-the-Above Energy Strategy which several recent policy achievements demonstrate. As part of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Copenhagen the United States pledged to cut its CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions in the range of percent below levels by Under the President s Climate Action Plan the United States is expected to meet this target Moreover in November President Obama and President Xi Jinping of China jointly announced historic post-2020 climate targets. Specifically China committed to peak its emissions by around and to double the share of non-fossil ( nuclear and renewable ) energy in its overall economy from about percent today to around percent by At the same time the United States announced a new goal to reduce emissions to percent below levels by The United States and China also agreed to work together on energy innovation and toward a successful global agreement as part of the continuing United Nations climate negotiations A Case for Climate Action From an economist s perspective greenhouse gas emissions generate a negative externality. A negative externality occurs when the production or consumption of a good imposes harm on individuals not involved in the production or consumption of that good. For example a business burning oil to run a generator or a person driving a gasoline-powered car emits greenhouse gasses which negatively affect other people including future generations. Economically efficient policies to address this negative externality would require those responsible the business burning the oil or | Chapter the person driving the car to pay the true cost of their additional or mar ginal emissions which takes into account the harm they caused to third parties. Compelling businesses and individuals to pay the true incremental costs encourages them to produce and consume less of the fuels and also encourages technological solutions that reduce the externality such as cars with higher fuel economy. On a larger scale greenhouse gas emissions from the United States affect residents in other countries and vice versa. In fact U.S. emissions have the same effect on the global climate as emissions from any other country. Putting a price on emissions that is equal to the global cost of an additional ton of emissions would cause those responsible for the emissions to pay the incremental costs of their actions A recent CEA report ( 2014b ) examines the economic consequences of delaying implementing such policies and reaches two main conclusions both of which point to the benefits of swiftly implementing mitigation poli cies and to the high costs of delaying such actions. First although delaying action can reduce costs in the short run on net delaying action to limit the effects of climate change is costly. Because CO2 accumulates in the atmo sphere delay allows CO2 concentrations to increase more quickly. Thus if a policy delay ultimately leads to higher future CO2 concentrations that delay produces persistent economic damages due to the higher temperatures and CO2 concentrations that result. Alternatively if a delayed policy still aims to achieve a given climate target such as limiting CO2 concentration to a given level then a delay means that when implemented the policy must be more stringent and thus more costly in subsequent years. In either case delay is costly Costs of delay will take the form of either greater damages from climate change or higher costs associated with implementing more rapid reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. In practice both forms are pos sible and potentially large. Based on a leading aggregate damage estimate in the climate economics literature a delay that results in warming of Celsius above preindustrial levels instead of could increase economic damages by approximately percent of global output ( CEA 2014b based on Nordhaus ) To put this percentage in perspective percent of estimated U.S. GDP is approximately $ billion. The incremental cost of an additional degree of warming beyond Celsius would be even greater. Moreover these costs are not one-time but instead are incurred year after year because of the recurring damage caused by permanently increased climate warning resulting from the delay An analysis of research on the effect of delay on the cost of achieving a specified climate target ( typically a given concentration of greenhouse gases ) suggests that net mitigation costs increase on average by approximately The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future percent for each decade of delay ( CEA 2014b ) These costs are higher for more aggressive climate goals : since each year of delay means more CO2 emissions it becomes increasingly difficult or even infeasible to hit a cli mate target that would result in only moderate temperature increases The second conclusion explained in the CEA report ( 2014b ) is that climate policy can be thought of as climate insurance taken out against the most severe and irreversible potential consequences of climate change Events such as the rapid melting of ice sheets and the consequent swell in global sea levels or temperature rises on the higher end of the range of scientific uncertainty could pose such severe economic consequences that they could reasonably be thought of as climate catastrophes. Reducing the possibility of such climate catastrophes will require taking prudent steps now to reduce the future chances of the most severe consequences of climate change. The longer that action is postponed the greater the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere will be and the greater the risk of severe climate events. Just as businesses and individuals guard against severe financial risks by purchasing various forms of insurance policymakers can take actions now that reduce expected climate damages. And unlike conventional insur ance policies climate policy that serves as climate insurance is an investment that also leads to cleaner air ( Parry et al. ) energy security and benefits that are difficult to monetize such as biological diversity Two other recent reports underscore these conclusions about the cost of delaying climate action. As part of the Fifth Assessment Report the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) recently released its Synthesis Report which integrates the Fifth Assessment s separate reports on physical science impacts and mitigation ( released over the past two years ) The Synthesis Report summarizes the literature quantifying the impacts of projected climate change by sector. Impacts include : decreased agricultural production ; coastal flooding erosion and submergence ; increases in heatrelated illness and other stresses due to extreme weather events ; reduction in water availability and quality ; displacement of people and increased risk of violent conflict ; and species extinction and biodiversity loss. Although effects vary by region and some are not well-understood evidence of these impacts has grown in recent years. The IPCC also cites simulation studies showing that delay is costly both when all countries delay action and when there is partial delay with some countries delaying action while awaiting a more coordinated international effort ; CEA ( 2014b ) expands on that analy sis by including additional studies Combining climate projections with empirically based estimates of the links between climate and the U.S. economy the Risky Business report ( Risky Business Project ) echoes many of the IPCC s conclusions. The | Chapter Risky Business report predicts that in the coming decades climate change will likely impose significant costs on many regions and facets of the U.S economy. The report describes the effects of rising sea levels storms and flooding and droughts and extreme heat waves. The report s authors esti mate that $ billion to $ billion of existing coastal property will likely be below sea level by Within just the next years the average costs of coastal storms on the East Coast and Gulf of Mexico will likely increase by $ billion to $ billion a year. By the average American likely will annually experience two to three times more days that reach F to the detriment of human health and labor productivity. Higher temperatures and different weather patterns likely will affect agricultural productivity with gains for Northern farmers and losses for Midwestern and Southern farmers Overall the report emphasizes the considerable risk that climate change is imposing on the U.S. economy The Climate Action Plan Recognizing the case for immediate and strong climate action the President called on Congress in his State of the Union address to pass legislation that would provide a market-based mechanism for reducing emissions. Thus far Congress has failed to act but the President has taken other actions including direct regulation of greenhouse gas emissions under the Clean Air Act.8 To address the broad challenges associated with climate change the President s Climate Action Plan has three central goals : a ) reduce domestic emissions b ) prepare for the impacts of climate change and c ) provide international leadership to address climate change. The remainder of this Regulations have costs and benefits and computing the monetary benefits of reducing CO2 emissions requires an estimate of the net present value of the economic cost of an additional or marginal ton of CO2 emissions. This cost which covers health property damage agricultural impacts the value of ecosystem services and other costs of climate change is often referred to as the social cost of carbon ( SCC ) In a Federal interagency working group led by the CEA and the Office of Management and Budget produced a Technical Support Document that outlined a methodology for estimating the SCC and provided numeric estimates ( White House ) Since then the SCC has been used at various stages of rulemaking by the Department of Transportation the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Energy. The SCC estimate is updated as the science and models underlying the SCC progress and in November public comments were invited on the most recent update of the SCC which produced an estimate of $ per metric ton CO2 in ( dollars ) The SCC increases over time as the economy grows and emissions cause greater damage and reaches $ per metric ton CO2 in Reducing greenhouse gas emissions is likely to yield additional benefits besides the climate benefits which are often referred to as co-benefits ( Parry et al. ) For example policies that reduce fuel consumption at coal-fired electricity generators cause lower emissions of particulates and other pollutants that harm human health The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future section describes the initiatives under the first goal reducing domestic emis sions. As explained below the first part of the Climate Action Plan includes a broad range of actions from providing research demonstration and deployment funding for new energy technologies to the direct regulation of carbon emissions under the Clean Air Act. For example in the Clean Power Plan the Environmental Protection Agency has proposed regulations to reduce electricity-sector CO2 emissions. The proposal is projected to reduce CO2 emissions by about percent from levels and the total benefits of emissions reductions are expected easily to outweigh the costs. Box provides a list of selected initiatives under the Climate Action Plan To date the United States has made important progress in reducing greenhouse gas emissions but more work remains. As Figure shows U.S. energy-related CO2 emissions have fallen percent from their peak in Given a counterfactual or baseline path for CO2 emissions one can attribute the reduction in CO2 emissions to changes in the carbon content of energy energy efficiency and in the level of GDP relative to the baseline path.9 The baseline path is computed using a combination of historical trends and published forecasts as of Relative to this baseline the decline in post-2013 projected emissions is due to policy-driven improvements mar ket-driven shifts to cleaner energy and slower growth than was initially pro jected in ; that is because of the decline in economic activity as a result of the Great Recession. Importantly the post-2013 projected emissions exclude the portions of the Climate Action Plan yet to be finalized notably the Clean Power Plan and new actions to address methane pollution. Policy and market-driven shifts to cleaner energy make a large contribution to the decline in post-2013 projected emissions. These shifts include the reduction in electricity generated by coal and the increase in cleaner natural gas and zero-emissions wind and solar generation. Improvements in energy effi ciency partly due to vehicle equipment and appliance standards also made a contribution. The recent reduction in emissions shows that while progress has been made given the magnitude of the climate challenges policies cur rently in progress and under development will be important to reaching our and post-2020 climate targets but more remains to be done Specifically CO2 emissions are the product of ( CO2/Btu ) ( Btu/GDP ) GDP where CO2 represents U.S. CO2 emissions in a given year Btu represents energy consumption in that year and GDP is that year s GDP. Taking logarithms of this expression and then subtracting the actual values from the baseline gives a decomposition of the CO2 reduction into contributions from clean energy energy efficiency and the recent recession | Chapter Box : Selected Administration Initiatives under the Climate Action Plan A broad range of Administration initiatives promote the develop ment and adoption of technologies that reduce greenhouse gas emis sions. The Administration has : Electricity Proposed the Clean Power Plan which will help cut CO2 pol lution from the electricity sector by percent from levels. The proposal sets rates of CO2 emissions for each State and provides States flexibility to meet those standards by Issued about $ billion in loan guarantees to kick-start utilityscale solar ; supported first mover advanced nuclear reactors with enhanced safety features in Georgia ; and enabled the auto industry to retool for very efficient and electric vehicles In partnership with industry invested in commercial-scale and industrial-scale coal projects that will store more than million metric tons of CO2 per year Under the Recovery Act supported more than projects by leveraging nearly $ billion in private regional and state dollars to deploy enough renewable electricity to power million homes annu ally As part of a commitment to improvements in permitting and transmission for renewables approved utility-scale renewable energy proposals and associated transmission including solar wind and geothermal projects since enough to power million homes Thirteen of the projects are already in operation Transportation In finalized national standards to double the fuel economy of light-duty cars and trucks by and slash greenhouse gas emissions by billion metric tons over the lifetime of the vehicles sold during this period Building on the first-ever medium- and heavy-duty truck fuel economy and greenhouse gas standards released in began collabo rating with industry to develop standards for trucks beyond model year which will yield large savings in fuel lower CO2 emissions and health benefits from reduced particulate matter and ozone Energy Efficiency In the second term alone finalized energy conservation stan dards for products. These standards when taken together with the final rules already issued under this Administration mean that more than percent of the President s goal of reducing cumulative carbon pollution by billion metric tons by through appliance efficiency The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future standards will be achieved over which time Americans will save hun dreds of billions of dollars in energy costs Launched the Better Buildings Challenge in to help American buildings become at least percent more energy efficient by More than diverse organizations representing over billion square feet manufacturing plants and close to $ billion in energy efficiency financing stepped up to the President s Challenge. Participation has grown rapidly and participating organizations include states cities school districts multifamily housing organizations retailers food and hospitality service providers and manufacturing organizations Beginning in created weatherization programs that helped low-income households save $ to $ per year on their energy bills and provided energy efficiency improvements to nearly million homes The President as part of his FY Budget is also proposing new initiatives to : Invest $ billion in funding for clean energy technology activi ties at the Department of Energy including $ million for programs and infrastructure that support nuclear energy technologies $ mil lion to increase affordability and convenience of advanced vehicles and renewable fuels and $ million in cleaner energy from fossil fuels Put $ billion toward advancing the goals of the Global Climate Change Initiative ( GCCI ) and the President s Climate Action Plan by supporting bilateral and multilateral engagement with major and emerg ing economies Reducing Emissions through Improved Efficiency The amount of energy used to produce a dollar of real GDP has declined steadily over the past four decades and today stands at less than one-half of what it was in ( Figure ) This improvement in overall energy efficiency which has averaged percent a year since is due both to more efficient use of energy resources to complete the same or similar tasks and to shifts in the types of tasks undertaken. The first con tribution is reflected in the Economy-Wide Energy Intensity Index ( also shown in Figure ) developed by DOE which estimates the amount of energy needed to produce a given basket of goods in one year compared to the amount required the year before. Between and the Energy Intensity Index fell by percent. The second contribution to the decrease in the energy-to-GDP ratio arises from such factors as shifts in production from more to less energy-intensive sectors of the economy as well as shifts to imports rather than production of energy-intensive goods. These latter | Chapter Figure Energy Related Carbon Dioxide Emissions Billion Metric Tons Actual AEO Projections Reference Case Reference Case Reference Case Source : Energy Information Administration Annual Energy Outlook ( AEO ) and Figure U.S. Energy Intensity Index = GDP Energy-to-GDP Ratio DOE Energy Intensity Index Energy Note : The DOE Energy Intensity Index illustrates the amount of energy needed to produce a set basket of goods over time. The Energy-to-GDP ratio shows energy use per dollar of overall output Source : Department of Energy Energy Information Administration and Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future factors and the efficiency increases together produced a drop of percent in the ratio of energy to GDP between and Both market forces and government programs spur energy efficiency improvements. For example as Figure 6-20a shows gasoline consumption per capita rose through the early 2000s and plateaued in the mid-2000s before dropping substantially during the Great Recession. As the economy recovered however gasoline consumption per capita continued to fall Some of this continued decline stems from the relatively high real gasoline prices shown in Figure 6-20a but only in part. Increasing fuel economy brought about by Federal fuel economy standards also played a role. In the Administration finalized fuel economy standards that together with the Administration s first round of standards will roughly double the fuel economy of light-duty vehicles from levels to the equivalent of miles per gallon by the model year ( Figure 6-20b ) Further beginning in model year medium- and heavy-duty trucks have had to meet their own fuel economy and greenhouse gas standards which are projected to increase their fuel economy by to percent by Finally the Accelerate Energy Productivity initiative ( being undertaken by the Department of Energy with two private-sector partners : the Council on Competitiveness and the Alliance to Save Energy ) is supporting the President s goal of doubling energy productivity ( GDP per unit of energy use ) from its level by The Role of Natural Gas in Lowering CO2 Emissions Natural gas is already playing a central role in the transition to a clean energy future. According to the decomposition mentioned in Footnote nearly one-half of the CO2 emissions reductions from through stem from fuel switching primarily switching from the use of coal to natural gas wind and solar for the purpose of generating electricity Unconventional natural gas development has opened a vast resource and as shown in Figure the EIA Reference case ( which includes the base line assumptions for economic growth oil prices and technology ) projects increasing quantities of natural gas production and steady price growth over the coming two decades Price is the leading reason for the increased use of natural gas in elec tricity generation. As Figure shows steep declines in natural gas prices in through and in induced substitution of natural gas for coal in electricity generation. Confirming the link between natural gas prices and fuel substitution is the fact that rising natural gas prices have the oppo site effect. In the benchmark natural gas price increased from $ per million Btu in January to $ per million Btu in December ; | Chapter Figure 6-20a U.S. Per Capita Consumption of Gasoline and Real Gasoline Prices Dollars per Gallon Gallons per Person per Day Nov-2014 Consumption 12-month moving average ( left axis ) Retail Gasoline Price ( right-axis ) Note : Retail gasoline prices deflated using consumer price index ( = ) Source : Energy Information Administration ; Department of Commerce Census Bureau ; CEA calculations Figure 6-20b Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standard Miles per Gallon Passenger ( P ) Passenger ( Std ) Light Trucks ( Std ) Light Trucks ( P ) Total Fleet ( P ) Note : Dotted lines represent actual performance ( P ) and solid lines represent the relevant fuel economy standard ( Std ) Source : Energy Information Administration Annual Energy Outlook The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future Trillion Cubic Feet Figure U.S. Natural Gas Production and Wholesale Prices Dollars per Million Btu Tight and Shale Gas ( left axis ) Conventional Gas ( left axis ) Henry Hub Spot Price ( right axis ) Source : Energy Information Administration Annual Energy Outlook Figure Change in Monthly Electricity Generation and Prices Percent Change Year-Over-Year Natural Gas Prices Natural Gas Generation Dec-2014 Coal Generation Source : Energy Information Administration Short-Term Energy Outlook ( Jan ) | Chapter and as natural gas prices rose relative to coal the use of coal for electricity generation increased while the use of natural gas decreased. Looking ahead the price of natural gas will make it an economically attractive alternative fuel as market forces as well as state and federal policies further reduce coalfired electricity generation The Administration is taking steps to ensure that the expansion of natural gas and oil production be done responsibly and with environmental safeguards. Environmental concerns include both climate impacts of fugi tive methane emissions and flaring as well as local environmental issues associated with water and land use for hydraulic fracturing operations.10 The Climate Action Plan includes a strategy both to reduce methane emis sions and to address gaps in current methane emissions data. The regulatory structure for addressing local environmental concerns especially around land and water use exists primarily at the State and local level. Research that is actively under way will inform prudent local environmental regulation of hydraulic fracturing Looking further ahead the current development of natural gas gener ation infrastructure prepares the Nation for future widespread deployment of wind and solar generation. Wind and solar are non-dispatchable mean ing that electricity generation depends on how strongly the wind is blowing or the sun is shining in contrast to fossil fuel-fired generators whose power output can be largely adjusted as needed. Consequently high market pen etration of both wind and solar would benefit from either storage or backup generation capacity. Developing natural gas infrastructure today facilitates its use tomorrow for peak demand and renewable backup generation Supporting Renewables Nuclear Cleaner Coal and Cleaner Transportation Low- and zero-carbon renewable and nuclear technologies as well as cleaner coal and transportation technologies have a central role to play in a clean energy future. Consequently the President s All-of-the-Above Energy Strategy makes a strong commitment to supporting these low-carbon technologies Natural gas is composed primarily of methane which is a potent greenhouse gas. Fugitive methane refers to methane that leaks from wells pipelines or other parts of the natural gas delivery system. Flaring refers to burning excess gas. Because flared gas emits CO2 rather than methane the greenhouse gas footprint is smaller when the gas is flared rather than emitted directly to the atmosphere. However both fugitive emissions and flaring increase the total greenhouse gas footprint of natural gas. Fugitive methane emissions and flaring are relevant to both natural gas and oil production because many oil wells contain significant amounts of natural gas The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future Electricity from Wind and Solar Energy. Historically tax incentives for wind and solar energy have been based on the avoided-pollutionemissions and infant-industry arguments. Wind and solar generation are zero-emission sources of energy and thus do not create a negative climate externality The market demand for these alternative sources is sub-optimally low from society s point of view since emitters do not bear the incremental cost of their emissions-related damages and therefore have little incentive to switch away from more carbon-intensive energy sources. The potential market profits of wind and solar projects therefore do not reflect the broad benefits to society of their zero emissions so policies such as tax incentives are justified. Moreover offering tax incentives to immature technologies could spur innovation that reduces the costs of renewables in the long run In a wide range of contexts both inside and outside of the energy sector new technologies experience periods of rapid learning. If firms can profit from their own learning say by improving their products or reducing manufacturing costs then firms have every incentive to spend resources on learning and improving technology. But with new technologies socalled infant industries a market failure could cause too little investment in their research development and demonstration. Specifically a business that learns and improves its technology may see its competitors take those improvements and reduce their own costs or improve their own products ( for example without violating any patents ) If the first business anticipates that its competitors will benefit from its own learning then that business is less likely to spend the resources needed to learn and potential improve ments in technology will suffer. In such cases where learning spills over across firms private markets create less innovation than is socially optimal Accordingly the Administration supports research and early deployment projects aimed at bringing down the ultimate market price of immature renewable energy technologies Increasing competitiveness of wind and photovoltaic electricity pro duction renewable portfolio standards that many states have adopted and other government policies have together increased the share of electricity generated by non-hydro renewables from roughly percent in to percent in ( Figure ) The total installed costs of new photovoltaic systems have dropped sharply since around with the total installed cost of a new system falling by almost percent for residential and commercialscale systems and by percent for utility-scale systems ( Barbose et al. ) The Administration has also supported solar deployment. Five years ago no significant wind or solar energy projects existed on public lands Today the Interior Department is on track to permit enough solar and wind | Chapter Figure Monthly Share of Non-Hydro Renewables in Net Power Generation Percent Oct-14 Note : Solid line shows actual data and dotted line is a smoothed trend shown to dampen the strong seasonal patterns ( the share of non-hydro renewables drops during the winter and summer-both seasons of high power generation demand ) Source : Energy Information Administration Net Generation for All Sectors projects on public lands by to power more than million homes ; the Defense Department has set a goal to deploy three gigawatts of renewable energy including solar wind biomass and geothermal on Army Navy and Air Force installations by ; and as part of the Climate Action Plan the Federal Government has committed to sourcing percent of the energy consumed in Federal buildings from renewable sources by Nuclear and Cleaner Coal. Nuclear energy provides zero-carbon base load electricity and through DOE the Administration is supporting nuclear research and deployment. A high priority of DOE has been to help accelerate the timelines for the commercialization and deployment of small modular reactor ( SMR ) technologies through the SMR Licensing Technical Support program. Small modular reactors offer the advantage of lower initial capital investment scalability and siting flexibility at locations unable to accom modate more traditional larger reactors. They also have the potential for enhanced safety and security ; for example through built-in passive safety systems. DOE is committing $ million to support first-of-a-kind SMR activities through cost-sharing arrangements with industry partners DOE is also supporting deployment of advanced large-scale reactors In February the Department issued $ billion in loan guarantees to support the construction of the nation s next generation of advanced nuclear reactors. The two new megawatt reactors which will be located in The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future Georgia feature advanced safety components and could provide a standard ized design for the U.S. utilities market The Administration is also advancing lower GHG emission coal tech nology. DOE s R&D program is focused on improving advanced power gen eration and carbon capture utilization and storage technologies by increas ing overall system efficiencies and reducing capital costs. In the near-term advanced technologies are being developed that both increase the power generation efficiency for new plants and incorporate new technologies to capture CO2. The longer-term goals are to increase coal plant efficiencies and reduce both the energy and capital costs of CO2 capture and storage from coal plants. As part of its $ billion commitment to coal technology the Administration partnered with industry is investing in commercialscale carbon capture and storage projects at power plants and industrial sites and in research and development on new technologies. In addition the Department of Energy has made available $ billion in loan guarantees for advanced fossil energy products that avoid reduce or sequester greenhouse gas emissions Meeting the Challenge of the Transportation Sector. Low-carbon vehicle technologies and fuels must play an important role in the transpor tation sector. Promising low-emission alternatives include hybrids electric vehicles hydrogen natural gas and biofuels. The effective emissions from an electric vehicle depend on the source of electricity and they will fall as the electric power sector reduces its CO2 emissions. Different fuels are likely to be relatively better suited for different needs ; for example natural gas for busses and heavy-duty fleet vehicles and electricity for private vehicles in urban settings. But the transformation of the transportation sector is in its infancy and the Administration is supporting research and development of a wide range of advanced transportation fuel options The convenience of high-energy content liquid fuels means that their role in the transportation sector could persist for decades. If so renewable liquid fuels with a low greenhouse gas footprint would prove important for reducing the climate impact of the transportation sector. Already the U.S transportation sector uses ethanol biodiesel renewable diesel and lesser quantities of other renewable fuels. Ethanol boosts octane and is blended into nearly all of the U.S. gasoline supply to produce E10 which is percent ethanol by volume. Demand for renewable transportation fuels is further supported by the Renewable Fuel Standard ( RFS ) To qualify under the RFS as conventional renewable fuel the fuel must achieve a percent life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions reduction relative to petroleum gasoline. The legislation authorizing the RFS which was expanded under the Energy Independence and Security Act of mandated increasing amounts of | Chapter renewable fuels over time. As Figure shows blending of ethanol into E10 has already reduced the amount of petroleum in gasoline substantially The legislation envisioned conventional renewable fuels such as corn ethanol to be transitional and that their market share would decrease as the market share of advanced renewable fuels would increase. The long-term environmental goal of the RFS is to support the development of advanced biofuels which have life cycle greenhouse gas emissions reductions of at least percent and especially to support cellulosic biofuels which have life cycle greenhouse gas emissions reductions of at least percent ( cellulosic biofuels use feedstocks such as corn stover which includes parts of the corn plant besides the kernels ; conventional ethanol production does not use stover ) International Leadership Actions taken to reduce domestic emissions the first goal of the Climate Action Plan provide the foundation for meeting the Plan s third objective : providing international leadership to address climate change From to ( the last year of data available from the EIA ) the United States reduced its total carbon pollution ( measured in tons of CO2equivalent ) more than any other nation on Earth. And as noted above the Figure U.S. Motor Gasoline and Diesel Fuel Consumption Million Barrels per Day Actual Projected Motor Gasoline Petroleum Content Diesel Petroleum Content Source : Energy Information Administration Annual Energy Outlook ( ) The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future United States is further reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by : improv ing energy efficiency ; taking advantage of unconventional natural gas as a transitional fuel ; supporting renewable nuclear and clean coal energy sources ; and regulating emissions under the Clean Air Act. But curbing greenhouse gas emissions is ultimately an international challenge as is cli mate change. The United States produces approximately percent of global energy-related CO2 emissions second only to China ( Figure ) As the economies in the developing world expand however their energy needs will increase. Business-as-usual projections indicate that an increasing share of greenhouse gas emissions will come from outside the United States and from the developing world in particular. Fully solving the problem of excessive emissions will therefore require a broad global response U.S. leadership is vital to the success of international negotiations to set meaningful reduction goals. This leadership is multifaceted. Through low-carbon technologies developed and demonstrated in the United States ( including unconventional natural gas production technology ) this Nation can help the rest of the world reduce its dependence on high-carbon fuels The President s initiative under the Climate Action Plan to lead efforts to eliminate international public financing for new conventional coal plants except in the poorest countries without economically feasible alterna tives will further help the world move toward cleaner fuels for electric power. Investing in research in new technologies such as carbon capture and storage for cleaner coal and natural gas as well as biomass co-firing and advanced renewable liquid fuels pushes forward these frontiers and supports U.S. technology leadership in clean energy. More broadly clean energy technologies developed here as well as domestically manufactured clean energy products provide global benefits when they are used abroad to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. And by taking strong steps to reduce emissions at home the Administration is in a strong position to secure simi lar commitments from other nations both in discussions with individual countries and at the United Nations climate negotiations to be held in Paris in The domestic steps include new initiatives such as the second round of medium and heavy-duty truck greenhouse gas standards programs to reduce methane emissions and other non-CO2 gases outside the energy sector and regulation of CO2 emissions from the electric power sector combined with the large and growing effects of enacted policies such as fuel economy standards for passenger vehicles. This strength is demonstrated by the recent historic joint announcement of post-2020 climate targets with China. In combination the Administration s efforts lay the founda tion for a cleaner energy future that is economically efficient upholds our | Chapter Figure World Carbon Dioxide Emissions Billion Metric Tons Rest of Asia India United States Rest of Europe Rest of South America Rest of Africa Rest of Eurasia Rest of the Middle East Saudi Arabia China Japan Rest of North America Germany Brazil South Africa Russia Iran Source : Energy Information Administration International Energy Statistics responsibility to future generations and provides positive net economic benefits both directly and through the example we set for other countries Conclusion The U.S. energy sector has changed profoundly over the past decade Technological innovations and government policies have reversed the decline in oil and gas production and have caused an explosion in renewable energy production. Building on these developments the Administration s All-of-the-Above Energy Strategy supports job creation and economic growth while improving the Nation s energy security. The energy revolu tion has benefited not only domestic energy sectors but also the energyconsuming businesses and households that enjoy lower energy prices Recognizing the need to address climate change domestically and to provide international climate leadership the President s Climate Action Plan includes a broad range of initiatives to reduce domestic emissions aggressively. These efforts lay the foundation for leadership in securing international agreements to reduce emissions and prepare for climate change. The Administration s energy strategy has built the framework for a sustainable energy future The Energy Revolution : Economic Benefits and the Foundation | for a Low-Carbon Energy Future C H A P T E R THE UNITED STATES IN A GLOBAL ECONOMY T he world s economies are more intertwined than ever before. Since the middle of the last century declining policy barriers transportation costs and communication costs have driven a swift rise in world exports and foreign investment far outpacing the growth in world output. Even so the potential economic gains from trade for the United States are far from exhausted as U.S. businesses must overcome an average tariff hurdle of percent and countless non-tariff measures to serve the roughly three-quar ters of world purchasing power and almost percent of world consumers that are outside America s borders Expanding trade allows production inputs such as labor and capital to be used more efficiently which raises overall productivity. U.S. busi nesses that grow in response to increased market access abroad create new jobs. These firms are more productive and rely more on capital and skilled workers on average than similar non-exporting firms. Partly because of this the wages paid by exporting firms tend to be higher than wages paid by non-exporters in the same industry. In particular evidence for the United States suggests that in manufacturing average wages in exporting firms and industries are up to percent higher than average wages in non-exporting firms and industries In addition international trade helps U.S. households budgets go fur ther. Because our trading partners also specialize in the goods and services for which they are relatively more productive the prices for those goods and services in the United States are lower than if we could only consume what we produce. Trade also offers a much greater diversity of consumption opportunities from year-round fresh fruit to affordable clothing By increasing global production and consumption opportunities international trade can promote world economic growth and development Trade among nations offers a mechanism potentially to reduce global pov erty which may decrease child labor and pull developing country workers into jobs with improved working conditions. Trade can be a force toward the empowerment of traditionally marginalized groups ; for example some empirical evidence suggests that decreased discrimination against women is related to the effects of global competition brought about by trade. Research also shows that bilateral trade agreements can reduce the likelihood of bilateral conflict as economic cooperation promotes political cooperation though the relationship is less clear in a multilateral setting perhaps because multilateral trade reduces the dependence of any one country on another Trade can also facilitate the spread of new green technologies throughout the world which decreases emissions potentially outweighing any additional emissions associated with an increased scale of production consumption and transportation However because the process of globalization spurs the shifting of resources within national economies it can also create challenges in areas like income inequality. For this reason it is critical that globalization is managed in terms of both the types of trade agreements the United States enters into and the domestic policies that are in place in a way that ensures that more Americans can take advantage of the opportunities afforded by trade while being better insulated from any challenges trade creates Therefore President Obama s values-driven trade policy seeks to do what s best for U.S. businesses and workers by enforcing international agree ments that improve labor and environmental standards around the world combat corruption and strengthen the rule of law abroad. Encouraging such trade agreements maximizes globalization s benefits while minimizing glo balization s unwanted side effects. For example new U.S. trade agreements promote and enforce the rights of workers abroad leveling up rather than leveling down and risking workers rights in the United States. The Administration s domestic policies such as skills training infrastructure investment and business tax reform allow workers and firms to take better advantage of the opportunities trade offers. At the same time policies like Trade Adjustment Assistance and the Affordable Care Act help protect workers from some of the challenges associated with broader less-mindful globalization An additional aspect of the global economy beyond trade in goods and services is international financial markets which also offer mutual benefits to trading economies. International financial transactions through which countries diversify risks globally and undertake international bor rowing and lending can promote higher and more stable consumption levels throughout the world economy. But they can also pose major risks to national and global stability as was starkly manifested in a series of global financial crises in recent decades. To maximize benefits increased financial | Chapter integration must be accompanied by sustained and coordinated monitoring and regulation of financial institutions and markets This chapter starts by reviewing data on the growth in world exports and the role of trade agreements in facilitating this growth. In particular the chapter reviews the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership ( TPP ) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership ( T-TIP ) which embody the President s values-driven approach to trade policy by seeking to level the playing field for American workers and businesses including by promoting enforceable standards for workers and strengthening environmental protec tions. The chapter next looks at the considerable benefits of trade especially for workers in export-intensive industries and the challenges faced by workers displaced as a result of trade. The chapter concludes by surveying the rapid growth of international financial markets. This last section of the chapter outlines the benefits and risks from international financial integra tion and the steps global policymakers have taken to contain those risks while preserving the benefits Multilateral Trade Multilateral efforts to promote trade liberalization for goods and services date back to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) signed by the United States and other countries in October As a complement to the Bretton Woods financial system established in GATT was inspired by the belief that trade liberalization would promote international prosperity peace and security and thus contribute to the U.S.-led effort to rebuild after World War II and avert another sequel Average tariffs in advanced economies have fallen dramatically from about percent when GATT began in to about percent in Including developing countries the decline is even more substantial. Non-tariff bar riers ( NTBs ) for instance on items related to government procurement arbitrary product standards local content requirements and other regula tory barriers have also been eased As of the end of the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) estab lished in has members. Currently the United States is engaged in discussions at the WTO on a wide range of topics. Among them are formalizing the Trade Facilitation Agreement which seeks to reduce costs associated with customs-related and other cross-border procedures and provide support to developing countries in this capacity. In addition the United States is negotiating to expand the Information Technology Agreement which will eliminate tariffs on a wider range of information and communications technology ( ICT ) products as well as the Environmental The United States in a Global Economy | Figure Global GDP and Exports of Goods and Services Index = Exports GDP Note : All values in real dollars deflated using the U.S. GDP deflator Source : World Bank World Development Indicators Goods Agreement and the Trade in Services Agreement to reduce barriers to trade in respectively green technologies and services such as telecom munications insurance and distribution systems. The United States is also participating in efforts to evaluate prospects for a conclusion of the Doha Development Agenda round of multilateral trade negotiations The Growth of U.S. and World Trade Worldwide flows of goods and services as a share of the global econ omy are at an all-time high thanks in no small part to the solid foundations put in place by the WTO to govern countries policies toward trade flows Figure illustrates the progress of worldwide goods and services trade integration since Over this period real global exports of goods and services have increased by a factor of almost triple the pace of real world output growth.1 The increase in trade volumes is partly a function of broader trends in globalization including reductions in transportation costs improved inven tory management the entry of major new economies into the global trading system and increased dispersion of production. Declining trade policy barriers around the world have also played an important role in increasing A large contraction in world trade followed the Great Recession but it has since rebounded albeit at a slower pace of growth in the last few years than prior to the recession | Chapter Percent Figure Ratio of U.S. Duties Collected to Total Imports Note : Total imports measured as the customs value of imports for consumption Source : U.S. International Trade Commission Office of Analysis and Research Services the global volume of trade. The U.S. International Trade Commission has recorded U.S. duties collected as a share of total imports since ( see Figure ) The U.S. average ad valorem equivalent tariff has been below percent since the mid-1970s below percent since and currently stands at percent As advanced nations generally have low tariff barriers the most recent global tariff reductions have come as historically protectionist emerging and developing economies entered the global trading system recognizing the benefits of open markets. Figure shows the relative pace of tariff declines across three broad world income groups as defined by the World Bank since the early 1990s. High-income countries with already low tariff levels decreased tariffs from percent on average in to percent on aver age in By contrast middle-income economies decreased tariff levels by a sharp percentage points ( from percent on average in to percent on average in ) and low-income countries decreased tariffs by an even greater percentage points over the same time ( from percent Tariff rates were high prior to World War I in part because they were a primary revenue source for the Federal government. The Revenue Act of which passed following ratification of the Sixteenth Amendment lowered tariffs sharply while replacing the lost revenue with a Federal income tax. Tariff rates in the 1920s and 1930s were relatively high as a result of the Fordney-McCumber Tariff Act of and the Smoot-Hawley Act of U.S unilateral tariff reductions began even before GATT once the Reciprocal Trade Act of authorized President Franklin Roosevelt to negotiate tariff reductions with trade partners The United States in a Global Economy | Percent Figure Global Tariff Rates by Income Group Low-Income Middle-Income High-Income Note : Tariffs are calculated as the simple average of the applied tariff rate across all products within country groups Source : World Bank World Development Indicators on average in to percent on average in then to percent on average in ) The Rise of Services Trade. Services industries comprise percent of the U.S. economy and employ percent of American workers. Despite the prevalence of services in the economy there is a dearth of research investigating the impact of international trade in services. The cross-border flow of physical goods is easy to measure as goods pass through customs authorities. Services trade on the other hand is less straightforward to docu ment as many services are delivered digitally and thus have no single point of crossing.3 Apart from limited data the lack of research on services trade also reflects that services which require interaction between producers and cus tomers were long thought to be non-tradable the classic example of the The General Agreement on Trade in Services a WTO agreement that came into force in defines four modes of services trade. First services trade occurs when a service produced in one country is consumed in another country ; for instance when Hollywood movies show in theaters abroad. Second services trade occurs when consumers from abroad purchase local services such as when foreigners travel to the United States for vacation for an education or for health care services. The third mode of services trade occurs through foreign direct investment ; for instance when a U.S. bank opens a branch abroad to offer financial services in other countries. Finally the fourth mode of services trade occurs when individual service providers from one country travel to supply services in another country. An example would be an American academic giving an educational seminar abroad for an honorarium | Chapter Billions of Dollars Figure U.S. Trade in Services Imports Exports Surplus Note : All values in real dollars deflated using the U.S. GDP deflator. Data post-1998 are based on BEA 's restructured U.S. Trade in Services series Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis International Economic Accounts ; Haver Analytics non-tradable service being the haircut. While haircuts are still unlikely to be traded the growth in information technology and declining transporta tion costs have facilitated a strong rise in trade in services like education health care tourism as well as the many business and professional services associated with trade in goods ( telecommunications finance distribution insurance and more ) The spread of multinational firms and the worldwide subdivision of production processes have also contributed to this rise In U.S. services exports measured approximately $ billion or percent of total U.S. exports while imports of services were about $ billion or percent of total U.S. imports. Together services trade accounted for almost percent of U.S. gross domestic product ( GDP ) in As depicted in Figure these levels reflect rapid growth since ; real U.S. services exports grew by percent over the 34-year period to or at a 5.6-percent average annual rate. Despite an overall trade deficit the United States maintains a strong and growing surplus in services Free Trade Agreements U.S. free trade agreements ( FTAs ) play a central role in continu ing progress toward more open markets. Table lists the current U.S bilateral and regional FTAs beginning with the first FTA to enter into force with Israel in Canada signed an FTA with the United States The United States in a Global Economy | Box : Trade in Ideas In U.S. companies paid $ billion in royalties and licens ing fees to foreign companies and were paid $ billion by foreign companies seeking access to intellectual property held in the United States. While this trade in ideas represents just percent of all U.S trade in services it generates percent of our $ billion services trade surplus. Figure 7-i shows the level of imports and exports in for each of the four major categories of trade in intellectual property Roughly two-thirds of this trade is intra-firm with a greater share of this intra-company trade occurring in the trademark and franchise fees category ( percent ) than for industrial processes ( percent ) software ( percent ) or audio-visual materials ( percent ) Trade in ideas is partly influenced by differences in countries intellectual property laws ; as such harmonizing the international treatment of intellectual property rights has become an important and sometimes controversial aspect of international trade negotiations. For example the WTO Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights established minimum standards for various forms of intellectual property protection. Several economic studies such as papers by Branstetter Fisman and Foley ( ) and Cockburn Lanjouw and Schankerman ( ) suggest that stronger patent protection in destina Figure 7-i Charge for the Use of Intellectual Property Billions of Dollars Exports Imports Industrial Processes Computer Software Trademarks and Franchise Fees Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis International Transactions | Chapter Audio-Visual and Related Products tion countries does promote outbound technology transfer both within and between firms One reason that trade in intellectual property can be controversial is that ideas are non-rival goods that can be used by many parties at the same time with little or no incremental cost per user. This feature of intellectual property also creates challenges for measuring international technology transfer because it implies that the location of an idea which determines the direction of trade flows is somewhat arbitrary To compound that problem there is no obvious market price for many intra-company transactions so both the magnitude and direction of intra-company trade in ideas may reflect corporate tax and legal strate gies as much as they do business or economic realities All of these complications can produce some unusual outcomes in the trade statistics. For example U.S. intellectual property exports to Bermuda were $ billion in with percent of that trade occurring between affiliated companies a trade that largely occurs for tax reasons rather than economic reasons as discussed in Chapter of this Report These intellectual property exports are about two-thirds the size of Bermuda s $ billion GDP. In the same year U.S. intellectual property exports to France whose GDP is times larger than Bermuda s totaled $ billion with only percent transpiring between related companies Lipsey ( ) shows that foreign affiliates of U.S. multinationals located in a variety of low-tax countries report unusually high levels of intangible assets relative to both employees and physical capital While it is difficult to estimate the size of any measurement bias created by geographic reallocation of intellectual property within mul tinational firms it is possible to say something about the likely impact on trade statistics. In particular transfers of intellectual capital abroad at below-market rates and intra-company pricing that shifts income outside the United States will lead the official statistics to underestimate the true size of the U.S. services trade surplus that is what would be observed under competitive market prices or in a tax neutral environ ment. For example the true value of intellectual property exports in Figure 7-i may be higher and the value of imports lower particularly for trade in ideas related to trademark and franchise fees where the share of intra-company transactions is highest. This type of bias would also make U.S. companies that trade in intellectual property appear less productive by artificially lowering their revenues and inflating their costs. The con tinued growth of intra-company cross-border trade within large multi nationals suggests that these measurement challenges will only grow in importance for both tax authorities and government statisticians The United States in a Global Economy | Table U.S. Free Trade Agreements Agreement Date of Entry Into Force Bilateral Goods Trade ( in Billions ) Israel Aug-85 As Percent of Total U.S. Goods Trade ( ) Canada Jan-89 NAFTA Jan-94 Jordan Dec-01 Chile Jan-04 Singapore Jan-04 Australia Jan-05 Bahrain Jan-06 Morocco Jan-06 CAFTA-DR Mar-06 Oman Jan-09 Peru Feb-09 Korea Mar-12 Colombia May-12 Panama Oct-12 TPP TBD T-TIP TBD Total in Force Total Note : Individual rows do not sum to the total since individual countries may be represented in multiple agreements ( e.g. Canada in NAFTA ) Source : U.S. Census Bureau Foreign Trade Statistics ; World Trade Organization Regional Trade Agreements Information System in and together these parties joined with Mexico in to form the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) Since then the United States has also signed agreements with countries in the Middle East ( Jordan Morocco Bahrain and Oman ) in Asia ( Singapore and Korea ) in Oceania ( Australia ) in South America ( Chile Peru and Colombia ) and in Central America ( the Dominican Republic-Central American Free Trade Agreement or CAFTA-DR4 and Panama ) In total current U.S. FTAs cover percent of total U.S. goods trade With a few minor exceptions all of this452.9382duty-free. Therefore trade is it is little surprise that the United States has experienced a large increase in trade activity with these partners in the years following entry into force of the agreements. Notably however higher trade with FTA partners is not CAFTA-DR includes five Central American countries ( Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras and Nicaragua ) and the Dominican Republic | Chapter accompanied by reduced trade with non-FTA countries. Figure sum marizes the growth in U.S. goods trade with our free trade partners before and after the enactment of all FTAs. For comparison the analysis also presents the growth in U.S. trade with non-FTA partners before and after the FTAs entered into force. By construction time zero is the date of entry into force. Looking at GDP-weighted averages of trade across all FTA part ners and non-partners suggests that on average trade with both country groups was growing around percent a year before the enactment of the agreements. After entry into force of the agreements trade grew at about percent a year with FTA partners and also grew at about percent a year with non-partners. Research by Baier and Bergstrand ( ) on free trade agreements for different countries supports these findings. The authors report that on average an FTA approximately doubles two members bilat eral trade flows after years. Our estimates based on the GDP-weighted average of trade with FTA partners suggests a percent increase in trade flows after years ( see Figure ) Current Trade Negotiations In recent years the United States has been focusing on negotiations toward two major multi-continental FTAs : TPP would encompass Pacific nations across the Asia-Pacific and T-TIP is a proposed free trade agree ment between the United States and the member states of the European Union. A key goal of U.S. free trade agreements is to secure tariff reductions abroad. As discussed earlier the average tariff in the United States is a low percent while many of our trading partners maintain relatively high tariffs. At the same time tariffs are just one of many policy instruments available to governments. Trade agreements bring about reductions in nontariff measures while also liberalizing investment regimes and services trade ( where NTBs are especially severe ) Bringing down our trading partners tariff and non-tariff barriers is essential for American firms to be able to compete on a level playing field in the global economy The Administration s policy is to encourage trade agreements to pro mote a values-driven trade regime that maximizes globalization s benefits while addressing globalization s problematic side-effects. Environmental and labor commitments included as a core part of our agreements can help to level the playing field for U.S. businesses and workers while also contributing to safer and greener policies worldwide. In addition our trade agreements ensure that American businesses remain competitive in a global market in which our trading partners are also gaining preferential access The estimates rely on incomplete data as a full years has not yet passed for some U.S FTAs The United States in a Global Economy | Figure Growth in Real U.S. Goods Trade Around Free Trade Agreements Real U.S. Trade as Percent of Trade at FTA Enforcement GDP-Weighted Average Across All FTA Partners GDP-Weighted Average Across All Countries Except FTA Partner Years From Free Trade Agreement Enforcement Note : Trade is defined as the sum of goods imports and exports. All values in real dollars deflated using the U.S. GDP deflator Source : U.S. Census Bureau Foreign Trade Statistics ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; International Monetary Fund World Economic Outlook ; CEA calculations to foreign markets through negotiations of their own bilateral and regional agreements. The Administration s efforts will also pave the way for future high-standard agreements around the world and trade pacts with TPP and T-TIP countries will help advance U.S. strategic and geopolitical interests Finally it is important to understand that these agreements are not meant to represent the end of the process. TPP is designed to allow others to join in the future and both TPP and T-TIP are intended to spur further multilateral trade liberalization Trans-Pacific Partnership. The TPP is a proposed regional FTA that the United States is negotiating with other countries : Australia Brunei Darussalam Canada Chile Japan Malaysia Mexico New Zealand Peru Singapore and Vietnam. Based on the most recent data TPP partners account for percent of world GDP percent of the world s popula tion and percent of world exports of goods and services. In TPP countries received $ billion in U.S. merchandise exports and $ bil lion in U.S. services exports making the region as a whole the top export destination for the United States. In addition included among the partners are some of the fastest-growing economies in the world ; according to some measures the number of middle-class consumers in Asia is expected to grow to billion by an enormous increase in the potential export market for U.S. goods and services. The region is already an important location for | Chapter U.S. investment ; in U.S. companies invested $ billion in the AsiaPacific area TPP Leaders have expressed their intent to achieve a comprehensive and high-standard FTA that will broadly liberalize regional trade and investment strengthening economic ties between the parties. In addition to addressing tariff barriers the TPP countries are seeking to address a range of outstanding non-tariff barriers such as import licensing restrictions as well as to open services and government procurement markets in the region The United States and its partners are seeking to negotiate rules that will provide transparent protections for investors and citizens support the digi tal economy promote innovation through strong supervision of intellectual property rights and offer guidance on competitive practices associated with state-owned enterprises In addition when concluded TPP will place strong labor commit ments at the core of the agreement making them enforceable and subject to dispute settlement as with other commercial provisions. TPP will constitute the largest expansion of enforceable labor rights in history more than qua drupling the number of people around the world covered by enforceable labor standards. TPP will also contain strong commitments on the environ ment including commitments to protect our oceans combat wildlife traf ficking and eliminate illegal logging. As with the labor provisions of TPP these commitments will be enforceable through dispute settlement allowing for trade sanctions against countries that fail to abide by the commitments Failing to secure a TPP agreement would place U.S. workers and businesses at a distinct disadvantage by allowing other countries to set the rules of the global trading system rules that would likely be adverse to U.S interests. Comprehensive trade agreements like TPP offer the United States a way to shape globalization s rules in the best interest of American workers and firms and to ensure that global standards include important issues like worker and environmental protections Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership. The United States and the European Union already maintain the world s largest bilateral trade relationship. In together both regions account for nearly one-half of world GDP and about percent of global exports of goods and services Based on the most recent data U.S. companies have approximately $ trillion invested in the European Union while European companies have $ trillion invested in the United States. These already strong economic relationships would be strengthened through the formalization of T-TIP Despite their large size and close ties the European Union and the United States have not achieved the full potential of their economic rela tionship. Negotiations toward the ambitious T-TIP began in earnest in June The United States in a Global Economy | Since tariff barriers between the two partners are already very low the agreement strives to increase market access by also addressing NTBs Importantly both sides seek agreement on cross-cutting disciplines on regu latory coherence and transparency including early consultation on major regulations and use of regulatory impact assessment for the development and implementation of efficient cost-effective and more-compatible regu lations for goods and services. Adoption and use of good regulatory prac tices will ultimately raise the standards and promote trade beyond just the United States and the European Union. In addition the governments intend to commit to liberalize services trade promote foreign direct investment and cooperate on the development of rules and policies on global issues of common concern The Implications of Trade The process of globalization offers many new economic opportuni ties but it also has created challenges. Globalization is a result of both worldwide economic developments and specific policy changes. Analyzing globalization s general impact is different from analyzing any particular trade agreement. Understanding the impact of any particular agreement requires both historical research as well as an analysis of the relative tariffs of trading partners NTBs and the relevant standards ( for instance labor environment and intellectual property ) Nevertheless historical experience does underscore the potentially large gains from trade. In the past half-century as trade barriers around the world have diminished these gains have multiplied and are increasingly shared across different countries and different industries. Among these clas sic gains from trade are lower prices for consumers and producers greater variety of goods and services available for purchase enhanced productivity and increased innovative activity Classic Gains from Trade Enhanced Productivity. Long-established theories of international trade suggest that trade liberalization will improve a nation s economic productivity through several different channels.6 First trade can improve economy-wide productivity by allowing each country to focus on its com parative advantage. This follows from the classic trade theory expounded by economist David Ricardo in the early 1800s. Productivity gains can also Productivity is defined as the amount of output that can be generated with a given level of inputs so a more productive firm can produce more than a less productive firm with the same resources | Chapter occur within an industry if there is some heterogeneity between firms in that industry ( Melitz ) as labor and resources shift in response to lower trade costs to the most efficient firms those best able to take advantage of the opportunity to export thereby improving productivity in that sector Several studies find evidence of this phenomenon in U.S. manufacturing One study which compares high- and low-productivity plants during a time of falling tariffs and transportation costs finds that industry productiv ity rises when trade costs fall ( Bernard et al. ) Ebenstein et al. ( ) find that industries where employment growth is highest in China tend to be the industries in the United States that have declining unit labor costs and increased productivity growth in the United States. This suggests that Chinese import competition in the United States could be driving improve ments in productivity A separate line of research considers that increases in export activity offer firms opportunities to learn about foreign markets perhaps even gain ing technical expertise from foreign buyers leading to increased productiv ity. Productivity gains through exporting may also occur through increased competition from foreign producers. This learning-by-exporting theory has support in a literature spanning many countries and time periods. By contrast Clerides Lach and Tybout ( ) argue that the well-established relationship between exporting and productivity is explained by the selec tion of more productive firms into global markets Lower Prices. Perhaps the most broadly shared benefit of increased trade is lower prices for consumers and producers in the domestic market By allowing our trading partners to produce the goods in which they are relatively more efficient the United States can import at lower prices than would prevail if we were to produce the goods ourselves. This specialize in what you do best trade for the rest philosophy makes everyday goods and services more affordable and enhances the real earning power of American workers. In addition recent estimates suggest that over one-half of all U.S imports are intermediate inputs into the production process ; that interna tional trade lowers prices on such inputs allows U.S. businesses to expand by reducing input costs Greater Variety. Another underappreciated benefit of trade liberaliza tion is increased variety for domestic consumers and producers. With new importers come new products. This expanded selection increases the welfare of consumers who appreciate having more choice. Broda and Weinstein ( ) examine historical trade statistics and determine that the variety of imported goods increased approximately three-fold between and Conventional import price indices have trouble incorporating the value of increased choice so this finding suggests that import prices have effectively The United States in a Global Economy | fallen even further than the conventional import price index would suggest The researchers estimate that this increased variety has provided U.S. con sumers with value equivalent to percent of GDP or approximately $ billion in Mostashari ( ) updates the calculations in Broda and Weinstein ( ) and reports that the number of varieties of goods imported into the United States increased percent between and More Innovation. A related strand of literature shows that when trade barriers fall domestic industries often respond through innovation and selfimprovement. Blundell et al. ( ) find that British firms in industries with higher import penetration spent more on innovation. Bloom et al. ( ) study how industries in European countries fared after the elimination of import quotas as part of the WTO Agreement on Textiles and Clothing They find that the increased trade catalyzed growth for high-tech highinnovation firms. For these firms spending on research and development increased use of ICT intensified and total factor productivity improved The Labor Market Implications of Trade Trade also has notable impacts on labor markets many of them a direct result of the classic gains from trade in terms of increased productiv ity and innovation. U.S. businesses that expand in response to the increased foreign market access due to U.S. trade agreements support and may even create new jobs. The importance of such export-led job growth for the Nation s income is reinforced by the fact that wages in export-intensive manufacturing industries tend to be higher than wages in non-exportintensive industries. Of course while the aggregate benefits of trade may be large trade can also have adverse effects for some workers. Domestic policies the Administration supports such as investment in infrastructure worker training and education can help our labor force take advantage of the considerable opportunities that trade opens up. For displaced workers and their families effective policies can help smooth the adjustment into new potentially higher-paying jobs Wages. Expanding U.S. market access abroad has important implica tions for the workforce at home. A very long literature spanning decades and many different countries highlights that exporting firms are systematically different from non-exporting firms even within the same industrial category Bernard and Jensen ( ) were the first to document this fact for the United States. They note that exporting plants are larger in terms of employment more productive in terms of value added per worker more capital-intensive and pay higher wages. These differences persist even within detailed indus trial categories and controlling for firms regional locations | Chapter Figure Characteristics of Export-Intensive and Non-Export-Intensive Industries Deviation from the Industry Average Export-Intensive Non-Export-Intensive Total Factor Productivity Growth Average Wages Labor Productivity Value Added Capital Intensity per Worker Note : The deviation from the industry average is calculated as follows. Each industry s characteristic is measured relative to the industry average within the year and then averaged over the period and across export-intensive and non-export-intensive industry groups Source : National Bureau of Economic Research-Center for Economic Studies Manufacturing Industry Database ; U.S. Cenusu Bureau Foreign Trade Statistics Figure offers descriptive evidence relying on data from the U.S Census Bureau s Foreign Trade Statistics matched to the National Bureau of Economic Research s ( NBER ) Manufacturing Industry Database ( Becker Gray and Marvakov ) Export-intensive industries are defined as those industries with above-average values of exports as a fraction of total ship ments ( the export share ) in and non-export-intensive industries are those industries with below-average values of the export share in For ease of illustration in order to report the various characteristics in comparable units the Figure shows deviations from the industry average calculated as described in the Figure note. On average over the to period of data availability relative to non-export-intensive industries export-intensive industries report percent higher total factor productiv ity growth percent higher average wages ( total wage bill per worker ) percent higher levels of labor productivity ( total shipments per worker ) percent higher value added per worker and percent higher capital inten sity ( total real capital stock per worker ) consistent with the findings in the academic research The average export share across the 6-digit NAICS ( North American Industrial Classification System ) industries was percent in The United States in a Global Economy | Box : Employment Impacts of Trade with China The seismic event of the last three decades in the global economy has been the emergence of China. Until the People s Republic of China was as a matter of policy essentially closed off from the global economy. Over the subsequent two decades over million Chinese workers integrated into the global labor force. Estimates of the direct impact of these dynamics vary widely. Using variation in regional expo sure to Chinese imports across U.S. labor markets to control for broad economy-wide changes in employment Autor Dorn and Hanson ( ) estimate that Chinese import competition can explain percent of the aggregate decline in U.S. domestic manufacturing employment over this period. In a more recent expansion of this work Acemoglu et al ( forthcoming ) find that increased Chinese exports to the United States were directly responsible for roughly percent of the manufacturing jobs lost between and These studies however do not capture the full story because they do not incorporate how expanded U.S. exports boost employment and the economy. To provide a rough sense of the relative magnitudes of these effects but without the same degree of causal certainty CEA performed an analysis of six-digit NAICS manufacturing industries from to using a specification similar to that of Autor Dorn and Hanson ( ) The analysis confirms the view that increased import penetration over the 1990s and 2000s is associated with decreas ing U.S. manufacturing employment. The analysis also finds however that a percentage-point rise in an industry s export share is associated with about a percent increase in industry employment. As the average industry experienced about a percentage-point increase in the export share over this time period exports are associated with more than a percent increase in manufacturing employment for the average industry Taken together the results suggest that though increases in import penetration were related to declines in manufacturing employment in recent decades increases in exports can in many cases offer some offsetting effects. Future research into the relationship between exports and employment can help to refine the estimates That exporters pay higher wages than similar non-exporters is a wellestablished feature of the data across many countries and over decades. For the United States estimates for the exporter wage premium ( the amount by which exporting industries and firms pay higher wages than non-exporting industries and firms ) range between percent and percent. Riker ( ) estimates that workers employed in exporting manufacturing industries earned approximately percent more than similar workers employed in | Chapter domestically-oriented manufacturing industries between and Controlling for industry differences Bernard Jensen Redding and Schott ( ) document a 6-percent exporter wage premium in : the average annual wage at exporting manufacturing firms is percent higher than the average annual wage at domestically-oriented manufacturing firms In a simple analysis using data on individual-level annual earnings from the Current Population Survey for the years to the Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) confirms an exporter wage premium. Controlling for time-invariant industry state and year factors CEA s analysis suggests that the strong increase in exports over the 1990s and 2000s translates into an additional $ in annual earnings for workers in today s dollars Inequality. Inequality has increased substantially since the 1970s Many countries including China began integrating into the global econ omy beginning in the 1980s. The resulting increase of about billion in the globally integrated population led many to question the relationship between increased globalization and inequality. Classic economic theory specifically the Stolper-Samuelson effect ( Stolper and Samuelson ) predicts that globalization will lead to an increase in wages for low-skilled labor relative to high-skilled labor in countries where low-skilled labor is abundant. The reverse is predicted to occur in high-skilled labor abundant countries. Driving this effect according to the theory is that changes in production patterns across countries change the relative demand for work ers of different skill levels. But this effect was not seen in the data over the 1980s and 1990s. Instead the education skill premium increased in a wide range of countries during this time including many relatively poor countries ( Goldberg and Pavcnik ) Researchers therefore began to explore alternative explanations. If classic trade theory is correct the data should show reallocations of work ers toward skill-intensive industries in the United States. Instead Berman Bound and Griliches ( ) documented that between-industry shifts in employment were smaller than within-industry shifts in employment in the United States and the United Kingdom over this time period. Based on this evidence they hypothesized that technological change played a more important role than other factors in rising wage inequality in both the devel oped and developing world as those workers trained to use more advanced information technology were increasingly in demand Alternative explanations subsequently surfaced including differences in factor intensity across firms even within narrowly defined industrial categories. As described earlier exporting firms tend to be larger more In follow-up work Riker and Thurner ( ) demonstrate that the relationship holds in services industries as well The United States in a Global Economy | productive more capital intensive and they generally pay higher wages than domestically oriented firms in the same industry. Bernard and Jensen ( ) document shifts of employment and wages within an industry suggesting gains in the more productive higher-wage exporting firms. There may also be factor intensity differences across different stages of the produc tion process. As illustrated in Feenstra and Hanson ( ) crossborder movements of capital can increase the skill intensity of production increasing the demand for skilled labor in both rich and poor countries a Stolper-Samuelson effect for trade in intermediate inputs. Finally the nature of international trade has changed dramatically in recent decades including reductions in ICT costs and the increased importance of emerging econo mies in the global market Another question relates to the impact of trade agreements. In mak ing an assessment of any particular trade agreement it is important to dif ferentiate between the overall effects of globalization and the specific effects of that agreement. A review of the evidence suggests that the largest factors behind the rise in inequality are likely technological change the slowing trend in educational attainment and changes in labor market institutions ( such as the erosion of the real minimum wage and reduced unionization ) For most of our work force the dominant influences on wages originate in the domestic labor market ( for example see Blinder and Krueger ) But the process of globalization while creating generally higher-paying jobs can also be a contributor to wage inequality. This globalization which has been driven by massive demographic and technological changes that brought billions more people into an increasingly connected global economy would occur regardless of whether any particular trade agreement enters into force or not. Any particular agreement must be assessed based on an analysis of its tariff provisions its reduction of NTBs to exports and its provisions that promote higher standards. This can lead to a quite different outcome than globalization more broadly. Labor and environmental protections in trade agreements in particular would likely push in the opposite direction of globalization-driven increases in inequality Development Benefits of Trade The United States engages in international trade and free trade agree ments to increase market-access opportunities for U.S. businesses and work ers and to lower prices and increase options for U.S. consumers. In addition to these benefits it is important to recognize the impact trade has on global growth and security. U.S. trade policy also has implications for labor rights in our trading partners gender equality and environmental sustainability | Chapter Global Growth When countries specialize in the goods and services for which they are relatively efficient and trade for the rest world production and con sumption increase as existing resources are more efficiently utilized. Simple international trade theory therefore suggests that increased international trade can boost incomes. However straightforward this may seem it is actu ally quite difficult to discern empirically a causal relationship between trade and income.9 Frankel and Romer ( ) were among the first to report a positive causal effect of trade on income. More recently Feyrer ( ) relies on a unique event in world history to identify changes in distance between country-pairs the closure and re-opening of the Suez Canal between and The closure of the canal increased the effective distance between several country-pairs and in some cases trade between affected countrypairs decreased substantially. Since some country-pairs were not affected by the closing this event offers a unique experiment to test how trade impacts income. The author concludes that every dollar of increased trade raises income by about cents Poverty. As developing countries entered the world trading system concerns mounted about the impacts of trade on the well-being of the poor The literature on the impact of trade on GDP suggests a potential for poverty to fall with increased international commerce. Unfortunately if most of the benefits accrue to the wealthy when a country s income rises the least well-off citizens may not benefit enough to escape poverty. A large amount of evidence suggests otherwise however. Though within-country inequality generally increased in the aftermath of globalization ( see the earlier discus sion ) across-country global income inequality witnessed the first decline since the Industrial Revolution according to Milanovic ( ) Hanson ( ) investigates the case of Mexico in the decade sur rounding the implementation of NAFTA. Using state-level variation the author documents that individuals born in states with high-exposure to glo balization have relatively higher wages than individuals born in states with low-exposure to globalization. McCaig ( ) uses the U.S.-Vietnam Bilateral Trade Agreement ( BTA ) to study the effects of increased market access to rich countries on poverty in developing countries and finds that a one standard deviation decrease in provincial tariffs is associated with a twoyear rate of poverty reduction of between and percent. By contrast work by Topalova ( ) on India s trade liberalization provides For instance perhaps countries trade more because they are richer. Richer countries have better trading infrastructure such as ports and better access to information about opportunities abroad. The fundamental challenge for statistical inference then is that trade may affect income but income also affects trade The United States in a Global Economy | a different view. Although the incidence of poverty in rural India fell percentage points around the liberalization from percent in to percent in areas of that country more exposed to trade experienced progress toward poverty reduction that was not as rapid as other areas Working Conditions. A common argument against trade integration with countries in the developing world is the poor labor standards of those countries. However research finds that expanding access to U.S. markets promotes higher-quality employment in less-developed countries as work ers shift from informal to formal employment with little empirical evidence that local tariff reductions have an offsetting effect meaning that the forces unleashed by trade itself complement the effort to include enforceable labor standards in free trade agreements.10 A recent paper by McCaig and Pavcnik ( ) finds that employment shifts from the household business ( informal ) sector to the formal enterprise sector in Vietnam in the aftermath of large U.S. tariff reductions as part of the U.S.-Vietnam BTA. Similarly Paz ( ) reports that decreases in foreign market tariffs decrease domestic informal employment in Brazil while early work by Goldberg and Pavcnik ( ) supported in Menezes-Filho and Muendler ( ) finds no evidence of a link between declining import tariffs in Brazil and informal employment More importantly work by Edmonds and Pavcnik ( ) documents a decrease in child labor associated with increased international trade in Vietnam Therefore trade agreements that expand U.S. market access for coun tries at a lower level of development can provide a market-based approach to improving labor conditions in the developing world. High standard U.S trade agreements also contain commitments to promote and enforce work ers rights. A recent study by the U.S. Department of Labor ( DOL ) docu ments the improvement in labor conditions in countries engaged in trade agreements with the United States ( DOL ) Gender Equality Promoting gender equality is a key development goal in both the developing world and in the United States. Importantly since trade pro motes international competition it may also reduce firms leeway to dis criminate against women. The classic Becker ( ) model of discrimination predicts that costly discrimination can not persist with increased market Jobs in the informal sector are associated with lower wages lower employee benefits worse working conditions and lower job quality ( Chapter of this Report considers measures of job quality in the United States ) For example seven Latin American countries significantly advanced in terms of DOL s assessment of labor policies and practice related to child labor in from Five of the seven countries have free trade agreements with the United States | Chapter competition. Therefore as trade liberalization results in increased competi tion in the domestic market the gender wage gap should narrow. In line with the theory by investigating trade-affected manufacturing industries in the United States between and Black and Brainerd ( ) find that the residual gender wage gap narrowed more rapidly in initially more concentrated industries that experienced larger increases in competition with trade reform than in initially more competitive industries Political Cooperation Strong economic ties between countries tend to coincide with strong political cooperation. This notion was one of the foundational beliefs behind the GATT texts in the aftermath of World War II as well as a motivation for the European Coal and Steel Community ( known today as the European Union ) and the Southern Cone Common Market ( Mercosur ) between Argentina Brazil Paraguay and Uruguay. Basic intuition about the benefits of trade match these assertions ; that is two countries with a robust trading partnership would be loath to make war on one another and would be eager to cooperate on a variety of fronts lest the substantial benefits of trade are in any way adversely affected. In addition international trade in goods and services brings countries into contact with one another reducing initial prejudices Relying on data across countries and years Blomberg and Hess ( ) estimate that the presence of conflict acts as a tariff barrier as much as a 30-percent tariff on trade larger than traditional policy barriers Martin Mayer and Thoenig ( ) find that countries with high barriers to trade are more likely to make war because the opportunity cost of the forgone trading relationship is low but only for pairs of countries. The rela tionship disappears in the multilateral setting perhaps reflecting how mul tilateral trade reduces the dependence of any one country on another thus lessening the trade-based costs of war for any given pair. Martin Mayer and Thoenig ( ) therefore suggest that international trade has changed the nature of conflict. However as with trade and income identifying a causal relationship between trade and conflict is complex and as such remains one of the important open questions in international economics Environmental Protection Trade agreements can raise environmental standards in countries that otherwise would not be motivated to raise standards on their own. In fact the United States has a long history of pursuing mutually supportive trade and environmental policies and has found that strong enforceable environmental provisions pursued as part of our bilateral and regional trade The United States in a Global Economy | agreements can help raise environmental standards in our trading partners leveling the playing field for workers and businesses in America In addition to this values-driven approach to trade policy there are two broad channels through which trade can impact the environment : by changing the level of economic activity within trading countries and by changing the composition of economic activity among trading countries. In each channel there are ways in which trade can help encourage sustainable development and promote environmental protection It is well-established that increases in trade activity among coun tries go hand in hand with increases in their overall economic activity Environmentalists often point to this increase known as the scale effect as a cause for worry. A greater scale of economic activity likely means increases in transportation shipping production and consumption all pollutionemitting activities. Note however that much of this concern would apply to any policy that increases productivity growth including expanded research and education Higher productivity is associated with higher real incomes. Greater prosperity in turn can benefit the environment in multiple ways. Higher real incomes create opportunities for investment in research and develop ment in clean technology allowing countries to clean-up production tech niques. Higher real incomes can also generate greater ability and willingness to adopt enforce and pay for higher standards of environmental quality For example with more disposable income families might be willing to pay a little extra to buy a hybrid car or install solar panels for home-electricity generation Ultimately increased economic activity both generates and curbs pol lution ; the overall effect on the environment depends on the relative magni tudes of each change. Empirical studies have produced relatively consistent results showing that trade does increase pollution but also that accompany ing emissions reductions from cleaner technology are enough to offset that increase. For instance Antweiler Copeland and Taylor ( ) remark that if trade liberalization raises GDP per capita by percent then pollution concentrations fall by about percent. The authors decompose this effect as follows : a percent increase in the scale of economic activity raises pol lution by around percent but the increase in income associated with international trade drives down pollution by around percent. Similarly Copeland and Taylor ( ) estimate the technique elasticity of pollution reduction with respect to income to be negative and greater than ; that is a given increase in real income is associated with an even greater reduction in pollution in percentage terms. Grether Mathys and de Melo ( ) analyze data on countries and manufacturing sectors and show that increases | Chapter in worldwide trade flows between and are associated with a to percent decrease in global sulfur dioxide emissions. Further they show that manufacturing industries have become much cleaner over time while globally industry s employment and output levels rose to percent between and manufacturing emissions decreased by percent In other words the evidence suggests that likely due to a global shift toward cleaner technology the net effect of increased trade on pollution is less than or equal to zero Compositional changes that occur in the economies of trading partners as trade promotes production specialization are a second mecha nism behind trade s environmental impacts. A popular assumption is that specialization will send the most heavily polluting industries from rich countries with stricter environmental regulation to poor countries which have relatively lax regulation. Theoretically this migration would lead to an increase in world pollution levels and the creation of pollution havens in developing countries that as exporters of the dirtiest goods would bear a disproportionate amount of global pollution burdens. In a worst-case scenario environmentalists say a race to the bottom in environmental regulation could ensue if developed countries saw an incentive to slow down efforts to raise environmental protection in an effort to forestall the dirty industries emigration. True not all parties in a trade relationship can spe cialize in the cleanest industries but concerns about pollution havens and races to the bottom are belied by the empirical evidence. In fact there is reason to believe that compositional changes could actually yield net envi ronmental benefits Developed countries tend to be the best equipped for production of high-polluting goods since the most-polluting industries which include manufacture of chemicals metals and paper and oil refining are capital intensive. The basic economic theory of comparative advantage suggests that those industries belong in countries with abundant capital the richer developed countries. Poorer countries with less capital on hand are more likely to specialize in industries that are more service-oriented and laborintensive and less polluting. If this is true the compositional effects of trade could actually lead to reductions in global emissions as pollution-intensive production would occur in countries with stricter standards Of course the issue is slightly more complicated as environmental regulation can increase the marginal cost of production in polluting indus tries driving them to less regulated countries. According to a WTO report however the increased marginal cost of pollution abatement in developed countries is no more than percent of production costs for the average polluter ( a maximum of percent for the worst polluters ) Such The United States in a Global Economy | small costs are likely not powerful enough to deter production and send it elsewhere and according to the WTO the developed-country share of global production in polluting industries has remained relatively constant at around to percent over the past few decades ( Nordstrom and Vaughan ) Regardless of environmental regulation standard non-environmental comparative advantage considerations seem to dominate location decisions Financial Flows Financial flows are motivated by opportunities for mutual gain analogous to those driving trade in goods and services. In a world with uncertainty cross-border flows of financial assets broaden the scope for diversifying risk. The gains from international risk sharing are largest when the sources of risk are country-specific ; in that case for example a fall in the returns to investment in one country can be offset by increases in returns in other countries. Global financial markets also facilitate international borrowing and lending. If such activity across borders were prohibited domestic investment would be limited by the supply of national saving With integrated capital markets however the global supply of saving can be invested in the locations where it is most productive and therefore yields the highest returns. When markets function without distortions the ability to diversify across countries and to allocate investment to its most produc tive use results in a globally efficient allocation of capital higher returns to investment and reduced wealth volatility all shared by people around the world. In particular net export deficits which require foreign financing do not necessarily imply lower economic growth and may well be associated with higher growth ( see Box ) Along with the benefits of financial market integration come substan tial risks as was amply demonstrated by the waves of crises that have swept through global financial markets since the 1980s. The increasingly tight interconnections among financial systems mean that disturbances in one market have the potential to reverberate around the globe. As discussed in this chapter given the interdependence among national financial systems it is not enough for national regulators to keep one s own house in order but governments must work together to develop and implement policies to safeguard global stability Figure illustrates the expansion of global financial flows relative to the growth in world trade in goods and services and world GDP since In this Figure trade is measured as the average of global exports and imports and gross global asset flows are the average of inflows and outflows. Both global trade and GDP have grown since the 1980s trade faster than GDP | Chapter Figure Growth of Global GDP Trade in Goods and Services and Financial Flows Index = Gross Financial Flows Trade GDP Note : All data are in nominal U.S. dollars. Global trade is defined as the average of global exports and imports of goods and services. Gross global financial flows are defined as the sum of direct investment portfolio investment and foreign exchange reserves. Values are obtained by averaging inflows and outflows to account for measurement error Source : UNCTAD ; IMF International Financial Statistics But even the pace of trade growth pales in comparison with that of interna tional financial flows in the early to mid-2000s. Some of the increased asset trade can be attributed to the removal of capital controls and other barriers to cross-border investment. The advanced economies were the first to lower barriers to capital flow as countries moved from fixed to flexible exchange rates in the early 1970s. Emerging markets followed suit in the 1990s as they became more integrated into global markets. But the pace of globalization in financial markets exploded in the 2000s reaching its zenith on the eve of the global financial crisis in driven primarily by cross-border bank loans A notable retrenchment of cross-border asset trade occurred in ; and in and the volume of global financial flows has hovered around $ trillion or roughly percent of world GDP The expansion of financial flows coincided with increased financial ization within countries and the expansion of banking services across coun tries. Between and the share of the financial sector in the United States doubled from to percent of GDP ( Philippon and Reshef ) Up until the 1990s international banking expanded in line with the growth in international trade and foreign direct investment as banks provided services supporting the international operations of business firms. There was a sharp liftoff in global banking activity in the 2000s as both the volume of crossborder banking and the number of international subsidiaries and branches The United States in a Global Economy | expanded. At its peak in international claims of banks ( cross-border claims and local claims in foreign currency ) accounted for over percent of global GDP ( Goldberg ) Composition of International Capital Flows International financial markets offer genuine opportunities for invest ment and risk sharing but they also serve as conduits for the cross-border transmission of economic shocks as well as for arbitrage between national regulatory and tax systems. From a stability perspective the composition of international financial flows matters as does the economic motivation underlying these transactions. Table shows the breakdown of total global financial flows into foreign direct investment equity transactions and debt and loans. Each of these flows is discussed in turn Foreign direct investment involves the acquisition of an ownership stake of percent or more in a foreign firm. Economic studies suggest that FDI is associated with the transfer of technology and that foreignowned firms tend to be more productive than domestic firms.12 Alquist Mukherjee and Tesar ( ) find that FDI also serves as a source of liquidity in emerging markets where borrowing conditions are tight. This is especially beneficial during periods of financial stress in the local market when the firm might otherwise be forced to liquidate assets but instead can borrow from its parent. FDI has become an increasingly important form of crossborder capital investment. Its share of total financial inflows has increased in both advanced countries and emerging markets. In FDI accounted for almost one-half of international financial flows though the increase in the share is in part driven by the fall off in portfolio debt and loans. One reason for the growth of FDI is the desire of multinational firms to establish more finely articulated global supply chains that better exploit the scope for international specialization of production tasks Not all capital flows through multinationals are benign however International differences in tax rates can provide incentives for firms to engage in transactions that shift income from high-tax to low-tax jurisdic tions in order to minimize their global tax liability. In one example of earn ings stripping a U.S. firm with a parent in a low-tax jurisdiction outside the United States simply borrows from its foreign parent. The interest pay ments on that loan are deductible in the United States and are taxed abroad reducing the firm s overall global tax liability. While this shifting of profits For evidence on technology transfer and productivity gains from FDI in the U.S. see Keller and Yeaple ( ) and Haskel Perreira and Slaughter ( ) for evidence from the UK See Poole ( ) on wage and productivity spillovers from FDI in Brazil and Kee ( ) on evidence from Bangladesh | Chapter Table Gross Global Financial Flows Gross Global Financial Flows Levels ( Billions of U.S. Dollars ) Total Direct Investment Portfolio Equity Portfolio Debt and Loans Of which : FX Reserves Shares Direct Investment Portfolio Equity Portfolio Debt and Loans % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % Note : Levels represented in nominal dollars. FX reserves are foreign exchange reserves Source : International Monetary Fund Balance of Payments Statistics % % % % % % is achieved without changing the consolidated balance sheet of the firm the transaction does artificially inflate global gross financial flows by generating two offsetting international debt transactions the only purpose of which is tax avoidance.13 Transactions can be much more complicated than this simple example and can be very difficult to track. And to be sure not all such transactions are for tax avoidance purposes. The full amount of revenue lost to the U.S. Treasury through tax avoidance is difficult to estimate but the Treasury Department estimates that a single proposal to limit interest deductions for U.S. firms with much more debt than their foreign parent and its affiliates abroad would raise $ billion over the period to See Chapter for a detailed discussion of the international ramifications of the President s approach to business tax reform Portfolio equity investment involves the purchase of shares in foreign companies. Share prices tend to be volatile and when markets in different countries fall together as happened in the crisis even a globally diversified portfolio of equity does not provide much insurance. An advan tage of equities however is that the international distribution of payoffs happens automatically through changing share values and dividend pay ments without the risk of default which can adversely affect financial market stability when debtors problems impair the perceived creditworthiness of their creditors Suppose the foreign parent lends a $ bank deposit in London to its U.S. affiliate which moves the $ to its own London account. Then there is a financial inflow to the United States ( the foreign borrowing by the U.S. affiliate ) and an offsetting financial outflow from the U.S ( the U.S. affiliate acquires a $ deposit in London ) Corporate debt interest rates generally exceed bank deposit rates however so profits are indeed shifted out of the U.S. In the process the global level of gross international financial flows rises by $ The United States in a Global Economy | Box : Have U.S. Trade Deficits Reduced Output and Employment ? Countries that engage in free international trade rarely have bal anced trade the state in which exports and imports are equal in value Instead they may lend to other countries when exports exceed imports or borrow from them in the opposite case. The U.S. economy has run trade deficits in every year since borrowing from abroad in inter national financial markets to make up the difference between spending and income Economic commentators sometimes argue that these trade deficits have been a drag on the Nation s economic growth and employment and that reducing trade deficits ( perhaps by restricting international trade ) would have resulted in more U.S. output and jobs. On the surface their argument seems straightforward : demand for imports if somehow re-directed to U.S. goods would raise domestic demand presumably generating more production by U.S. businesses and more employment to support that production. The truth however is substantially more complicated The factors that give rise to higher imports often raise demand for domestic goods at the same time. Eliminating those sources of higher import demand would therefore reduce not raise output and jobs Moreover measures a government might take to reduce imports can have effects elsewhere in the economy that counteract any anticipated improvement in the trade deficit. For example a protective tariff may in the first instance make imports more expensive but by moving the balance of payments toward a surplus the tariff will also lead the home currency to appreciate against foreign currencies making imports cheaper again and exports less competitive. That change is likely to neutralize most or all of the trade-balance effect of the tariff but at the cost of a more distorted allocation of resources ( which lowers output below potential ) Another way to see the fallacy is to realize that a trade deficit which requires funding from foreign lenders also means that our own saving is insufficient to finance domestic investment ; whereas a trade surplus means that our saving is more than sufficient with the excess of saving over domestic investment being lent to foreigners ( who themselves must be running a trade deficit in this case ) Trade balance improvement therefore requires some combination of a rise in saving or a fall in invest ment neither of which generally causes higher output or job growth Because of this relationship the U.S. trade balance is highly countercyclical tending to register bigger deficits when the economy is stronger not weaker ( as Figure 7-ii shows ) Not surprisingly this same pattern holds across most industrial economies. For advanced econo | Chapter mies in general bigger trade deficits are associated with stronger not weaker growth because they tend to reflect higher overall demand that raises imports at the same time as it raises output. True if imports were lower and nothing else in the economy changed output would have to be higher to balance domestic supply with demand. In reality however it is impossible for policies to change imports without affecting a range of other macroeconomic variables in ways that will not necessarily help economic growth and may well hurt it The preceding discussion of the short-term relation between trade deficits and economic performance is only part of the story of course. On the one hand countries that have trade deficits because their higher investment levels are financing productive ventures will also see faster growth over the medium to long terms. But countries with poor investment allocation will eventually see their national income reduced meaning that the short-run demand boost from higher investment will result in a long-run cost for the economy. In addition large current account deficits can lead to financial instability especially for emerging economies The bottom line is that the relationship between the trade balance and growth depends on circumstances and can vary according to the fac tors that cause the trade balance to change. Understanding those factors is essential however before we can decide if policies to alter the trade balance are desirable and if so what the proper policy choice would be Figure 7-ii U.S. Trade Deficits and Economic Activity Percent of GDP Percent Unemployed Trade Deficit ( left axis ) Percent Unemployed ( right axis ) Negative Output Gap ( left axis ) Note : Trade deficit illustrated is the deficit on goods and services. The negative output gap is calculated by subtracting potential GDP from actual GDP Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; International Monetary Fund The United States in a Global Economy | Viewed through the lens of optimal portfolio diversification holdings of cross-border equity are still low even in advanced economies. Figure shows the degree of home equity bias in the U.S. equity portfolio. Home equity bias measures the percent of their shares that U.S. stock owners invest in the U.S. market adjusted for the size of the U.S. stock market in the world market. If U.S. investors maximized their diversification by investing in home equities exactly in proportion to the size of the U.S. stock market in the world stock market the degree of their home bias would be zero.14 But if they invested nothing abroad their home bias would be percent As shown in Figure home bias has been declining since but still remains above percent. Of course setting portfolio weights equal to mar ket shares is just one benchmark from which to judge the extent of home bias. Other benchmarks would emerge from a portfolio allocation strategy based on an assumption about how investors trade off risk and return. The advantage of the market-share benchmark is that it is simple to interpret and the implied shares are stable over time Far from being just a U.S. phenomenon home bias is a fairly universal description of national portfolio choice. Using data from other countries Coeurdacier and Rey ( ) report home bias ratios in ranging from percent for individual euro area countries to percent in Brazil and China In emerging markets extensive home bias is still likely to reflect barriers to international capital flows. In advanced economies however other factors such as limited information about foreign markets institutional frictions and perceptions about the riskiness of foreign markets continue to affect portfolio decisions. The chief takeaway here is that as globalized as financial markets seem to be there remains scope for further diversification gains through trade in equity shares. It is remarkable that home equity bias persists despite the high volumes of activity in international financial markets and the very large gross external asset and liability positions sometimes mul tiples of GDP that many ( especially industrial ) countries have developed A major weakness in the current financial system is the strong bias toward debt finance and flows of debt finance through banks. Though debt flows have declined as a share of total flows and home bias in debt portfolios has declined debt transactions remain central to international finance. And as was learned in the recent financial crisis debt contracts have features that can be extremely damaging in some ( and not altogether rare ) circumstances Unlike equities payoffs on debt contracts are fixed and do not take account of unexpected economic shocks that may make full repayment If s is the share of their stocks that U.S. residents invest in the U.S. stock market and s * is the share of the U.S. stock market in the global stock market then the degree of U.S. investors home bias is defined as | Chapter Figure U.S. Equity Home Bias Percent Source : Federal Reserve Board World Federation of Exchanges difficult or impossible. If the borrower hits hard times the options are to renegotiate with the lender or default. The advantage of debt contracts is that they are structurally and informationally quite simple payoffs on debt are not contingent on the performance of either party ( provided there is no default ) avoiding some types of moral hazard. Given this simple structure debt contracts can easily be priced securitized and re-sold to third parties under tranquil financial market conditions. The disadvantage as repeated debt crises have demonstrated is that in the event the borrower is unwilling or unable to pay the amount of the payoff is unknown and depends on the enforceability of the original contract. Further widespread borrower stress can lead to lender runs refusals to roll over maturing debts along with evaporation of market liquidity and a breakdown in the market s ability to fairly price some debt securities. The institutions supporting debt contracts vary from place to place and may change over time. International lenders learned the hard way that for example mortgages in the United States are non-recourse loans meaning that the loan is secured by a pledge of collat eral ( the house itself ) but the borrower is not personally liable for the loan In many other countries the lender can place a lien against the borrower s income or seize other assets in the event of default The international financial system is strongly biased toward debt for several reasons. One is deposit insurance and implicit bailout guarantees which effectively subsidize bank intermediation and in some countries The United States in a Global Economy | result in globally active banks that are too big to fail. Second tax laws tend to favor debt over equity tilting investment portfolios toward debt and away from equity as discussed in Chapter Third equity markets remain under-developed in some poorer developing countries where the returns to investment are arguably still high. Fourth national policies to promote home ownership effectively subsidize mortgage lending and the resulting securitized instruments An important caveat to the data in Table is that they may under state the degree of debt bias in international financial flows. Official statistics classify cross-border lending between affiliated nonfinancial companies as FDI even though these transactions take the form of debt. Thus some FDI actually has no equity component and instead is associated with some of the same risks as conventional lending flows ( see Avdjiev Chui and Shin ) And as described above some of these debt flows are motivated by tax avoidance. On the other hand the amount of debt in the system could be overstated if it is measured both when debt is issued by the foreign affiliate and when it flows back to the headquarter firm The widespread global bias toward debt was a key contributor to the severity of the recent financial crisis and its global transmission. As is now well understood the seeds of the crisis were sown in the U.S. mortgage mar ket. Securitization of subprime loans meant that exposure to delinquent U.S mortgages was spread throughout the financial system in the United States and abroad. The troubled mortgage problem was not confined to the United States however as real estate values and credit volumes rose rapidly in many countries during the 2000s. Lax regulation and asset booms occurred simul taneously and for somewhat different reasons in Iceland Ireland Spain the United Kingdom and many other countries. At the same time high lev els of global saving kept world interest rates low making debt cheap relative to other forms of finance. At a national level low borrowing costs allowed some governments to finance macro imbalances through easy foreign bor rowing and to postpone tough policy choices. Optimism about the euro project resulted in low sovereign debt spreads in the euro area s peripheral economies that did not reflect the actual risk of their national balance sheets especially given the sizes and vulnerabilities of their banks. Ultimately as housing prices started to fall and as different parts of the financial system suffered lender runs the close interconnections among highly levered finan cial institutions threatened to destabilize the entire system Challenges in Regulating Global Financial Markets The global crisis exposed regulatory gaps and inconsistencies across countries exacerbated by the free flow of capital across borders. With | Chapter hindsight the problems are easy to list : excessive leverage of banks and other financial institutions ; lack of transparency and regulation in derivatives markets ; increased importance of financial activity outside of the regulated banking sector ( the shadow banks ) ; and failure on the part of regulators to recognize the way in which risks were transferred across borders between different types of financial institutions and between the financial system and governments. The risks of new financial instruments were not well under stood and few connected the dots between global imbalances globally rapid credit expansion and asset price bubbles especially in housing markets In the United States the passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act in was an important step toward addressing problems at the core of the financial crisis. Wall Street Reform addressed difficult systemic problems by : appointing a new Financial Stability Oversight Council to monitor the stability of the U.S. financial sys tem as a whole not just the safety and soundness of individual institutions ; creating a process to resolve too big to fail firms without government bail outs ; increasing transparency into previously unreported and unregulated financial products and services to allow trading partners and investors to more accurately assess the risks associated with a contract or investment ; centralizing previously scattered consumer financial protection authority under a single new regulator ; and better aligning the incentives for financial firms and their executives with the long-term health of both the firm and the broader economy. Several of these measures are still being enacted but Wall Street Reform has already reined in many practices that led to the financial crisis. It is essential for domestic and global stability that Wall Street Reform be fully implemented However the tight interconnections between domestic and interna tional financial institutions mean that individual nations efforts to keep one s own house in order are insufficient fully to attain global financial stability. Particularly challenging in the international context is the pres ence of currency risk since internationally active banks do business in several major currencies and regulatory arbitrage that exploits gaps and inconsistencies among national regulatory frameworks. The Basel process of international regulatory coordination emerged as a response to these challenges. The United States has provided strong leadership in developing and implementing the resulting international guidelines for monitoring and regulating international banking The Basel process has developed under the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements ( BIS ) and has its roots in the financial market turmoil that followed the collapse of the Bretton Woods system of managed exchange rates in the 1970s ( BIS ) In central bank governors of The United States in a Global Economy | the G-10 countries established the Committee on Banking and Regulation and Supervisory Practices and agreed to a set of principles regarding minimal capital standards and rules for regulating and sharing information among national regulators ( the Concordat ) At the outset the concern was that international supervisory coverage be expanded so that no foreign banking establishment would be outside of the scope of supervision and that such supervision be consistent across member jurisdictions The outbreak of the debt crisis in Latin America in the early 1980s threatened the solvency of a number of large international banks and prompted revision of the Basel rulebook. The committee s attention shifted toward capital adequacy standards now referred to as Basel I. The Accord called for a minimum capital ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets and the need to include off-balance sheet transactions. Ultimately these capital provisions were adopted by all countries with active international banks. The Basel agreements were amended over time as banking activity expanded and broadened in scope. Basel II finalized in June included three pillars : minimal capital requirements ; supervisory review of a bank s capital adequacy and its internal assessment process ; and effective use of disclosure to strengthen market discipline The recent financial crisis has resulted in a third round of major revi sions which now involve the full G-20 membership with a target date of for full implementation. The Basel III package strengthens the Basel II standards and contains the additional components enumerated in Table Other international institutions play a supporting role in global financial regulation. The BIS is also known as the central bankers bank : it supports central banks in implementing the Basel III measures and also houses the global Financial Stability Board established in its present form by the G-20 in The International Monetary Fund is a central institution for policy analysis data reporting and the provision of a global safety net through its lending operation and conditionality. The World Bank provides policy advice and financial assistance particularly to low- to middle-income countries While the Basel process is a critical step forward in the global regula tion of the financial sector some important challenges remain. First the Basel rules formally apply only to internationally active banks and the mea sures are focused almost exclusively on building ex ante capital and liquidity buffers at banks to prevent a crisis and less on tools that governments might use in the event of a crisis. There is broad consensus that there is a need for more capital and less liquidity risk in the banking system especially for large systemically important institutions. There is less agreement that augmented bank capital and liquidity standards alone will be sufficient for preventing a | Chapter Table Additional Basel III Components Component Description Capital Protection A supplemental layer of common equity that when infringed upon prohibits the distribution of earnings to assist in protecting the minimum common equity requirement Countercyclical Capital Preservation A constraint placed on banks during credit booms with the intention of reducing their losses in the event of a credit bust Leverage Percentage A minimum amount of loss-absorbing capital relative to the bank s assets and off-balance sheet liabilities irrespective of risk-weighting Liquidity Reserves Additional Measures to Govern Vital Banks A minimum liquidity ratio to distribute enough cash to cover funding necessities over a month-long period of stress Such as requirements for additional capital fortified arrangements for cross-border management and resolution for banks that are large enough to destabilize the financial system Source : Bank for International Settlements future crisis particularly in light of the wide-ranging activities undertaken by non-bank financial institutions. The Federal Reserve has imposed stricter capital standards than Basel for U.S. banks is proposing an even larger capital requirement for systemically important U.S. banks and has required foreign banking organizations with U.S. non-branch assets over $ billion to set up holding companies subject to Federal Reserve regulation ( Tarullo ) A second challenge is the implementation of the Basel policies. Not all G-20 members have fully implemented the recommended policies and there remains the general problem that financial regulation and supervision remain largely at the national level but the externalities of weak financial institutions are potentially global. As Mervyn King former Governor of the Bank of England observed : Financial institutions are global in life but national in death. That is liquid financial institutions are everyone s bank in the good times but become the government s bank in the event of a liquidity shortage or insolvency. For many countries particularly in Europe the size of the banking sector ( indeed in some cases the size of individual banks ) remains larger than national GDP. Yet mechanisms are not in place to mobilize massive liquidity in multiple currencies in the event of a credi tor run. And if a bank is not just illiquid but also insolvent and needs to be resolved its size could overwhelm the resources of its home government Moreover processes for unwinding large globally active systemic institu tions especially when several governments are involved remain imperfect The United States in a Global Economy | Another challenge that is particular to global regulation is that countries are inherently different with different sizes and business mod els of financial institutions and differing degrees of dependence on those institutions. This creates a trade-off between rules that apply equally to all countries and the need for regulation that is sensitive to macroeconomic and financial conditions at different times and in different places. In other words there may be a tradeoff between the rules that create a level playing field where all financial actors are treated equally and the rules that create a safe playing field that recognizes asymmetries across players Deeper coordination does eventually seem to happen when minds become concentrated on the brink of disaster. But that is not enough and it has been harder to sustain cooperative momentum in periods of calm. Yet it is precisely in periods of calm when the investments and preparation for the next crisis need to occur. It is critical to maintain the pressure for financial reform while the memory of the last financial crisis is still fresh. Ultimately international financial markets are necessary for risk mitigation growth and innovation not just in the United States but in the global economy. For these markets to provide maximum benefits however governments must recognize potential risks and continue to collaborate in containing and managing them just as they have collaborated in creating institutions and rules for the international trading system Conclusion Through trade and financial linkages the world s economies are more interdependent than at any time in history. This interdependence has been supported not only by steep declines in the costs of international commu nication and shipping but also by a reduction in governmental barriers to the cross-border movement of goods services investment and portfolio assets. Increasingly economies are linked by production processes that cross international borders so as to minimize costs by better exploiting local comparative advantages The post-World War II process of globalization has delivered impor tant benefits for U.S. consumers workers and businesses by increasing economies productivity opening new markets for exports and expand ing the range of products available for purchase. Expanded trade has also improved peoples lives in other indirect ways for example raising living and working standards in other countries and locking in meaningful envi ronmental protections Since the benefits of trade are often unevenly distributed it is impor tant that globalization be accompanied by domestic and international | Chapter safeguards that prevent unfair trade practices. Such safeguards include poli cies that limit damage to the environment protect displaced workers and regulate risky financial practices that could cause financial instability Domestic U.S. policies are essential to help our economy take advan tage of the opportunities afforded by trade along with measures to counteract the potentially negative side effects of trade. But beyond these purely domes tic safeguards an evolving structure of multilateral and regional agreements has worked to lower international trade barriers while reining in predatory trade practices and negative side effects. The World Trade Organization is central to that effort. In addition the Administration is pursing compre hensive high-quality free trade agreements that provide U.S. exporters with enhanced market access while insisting that our trading partners do not compete on the basis of low worker- or environmental-protection standards In the financial sphere international governmental collaboration and a set of central organizations including the Basel Committee the Financial Stability Board and the International Monetary Fund are key components in constructing a global safety net for crisis prevention and management The United States in a Global Economy | REFERENCES Chapter Blau Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn. Female Labor Supply : Why is the US Falling Behind ? American Economic Review ( ) : Mishkin F. S. The Household Balance Sheet and the Great Depres sion. Journal of Economic History : Saez Emmanuel. United States Income Inequality Data http : //eml berkeley.edu/ ~ saez/TabFig2013prel.xls. Updating : Piketty Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. Income Inequality in the United States Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Chapter Abe Prime Minister Shinzo. Press Conference by Prime Minister Abe. Tokyo Japan November ( http : //japan.kantei.go.jp/96_ abe/statement/201411/1118kaiken.html ) Arezki Rabah and Olivier Blanchard. Seven Questions About the Recent Oil Price Slump ( blog ) iMFdirect. International Mone tary Fund. December http : //blog-imfdirect.imf.org/2014/12/22/ seven-questions-about-the-recent-oil-price-slump Bank of Japan ( BOJ ) 2014a. Statement on Monetary Policy : March https : //www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/release_2014/ k141031a.pdf ___. 2014b. Expansion of the Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing : October https : //www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/release_2014/k141031a.pdf ___. Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Devel opments : January http : //www.boj.or.jp/en/mopo/gp_2015/ gp1501b.pdf Bloomberg News. Xi says China Must Adapt to New Normal of Slower Growth. May. http : //www.bloomberg.com/news/201405-11/xi-says-china-must-adapt-to-new-normal-of-slower-growth html Blue Chip Economic Indicators. Top Analysts Forecasts of the U.S Economic Outlook for the Year Ahead. Blue Chip Economic Indicators no. ( October ) : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Press release : June http : //www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/ FOMCpresconf20130619.pdf Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. In the shadow of the Great Recession : Experiences and perspectives of young workers. http : //www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/2014-surveyyoung-workers-young-workers-outlook.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2015a. Press release : January http : //www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/ press/monetary/20150128a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2015b. The January Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices. http : //www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/snloansurvey/201502/ fullreport.pdf Cass David. Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital Accumulation. The Review of Economic Studies no. ( July ) : Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) 2013a. Macroeconomic Effects of Alternative Budgetary Paths. February. http : //www.cbo.gov/sites/ default/files/43769_AlternativePaths_2012-2-5_0.pdf Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) 2013b. The Economic Impact of S the Border Security Economic Opportunity and Immigra tion Modernization Act. June. https : //www.cbo.gov/sites/default/ files/44346-Immigration.pdf Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) The Economic Effects of the President s Budget. July. https : //www.cbo.gov/sites/default/ files/45540-Economic_APB.pdf | References Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) The Budget and Economic Outlook : to January. http : //www.cbo.gov/sites/default/ files/cbofiles/attachments/49892-Outlook2015.pdf Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) The Economic Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of : First Quarterly Report. September http : //www.whitehouse.gov/assets/documents/CEA_ARRA_ Report_Final.pdf Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) 2014a. The Economic Report of the President. March http : //www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/full_2014_ economic_report_of_the_president.pdf Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) 2014b. Economic Facts about Millennials. October. http : //www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/ files/docs/millennials_report.pdf Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) 2014c. The Economic Effects of Administrative Action on Immigration. November. http : // www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/cea_2014_economic_ effects_of_immigration_executive_action.pdf European Central Bank ( ECB ) 2012a. Press release : July http : // www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2012/html/sp120726.en.html European Central Bank ( ECB ) 2012b. Press release : August http : // www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2012/html/is120802.en.html European Central Bank ( ECB ) 2012c. Press release : September http : //www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2012/html/pr120906_1 en.html European Central Bank ( ECB ) Press release : November http : //www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2014/html/sp141121 en.html European Central Bank ( ECB ) Press release : January http : //www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2015/html/is150122 en.html European Commission. Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partner ship : The Economic Analysis Explained. September. http : //trade ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2013/september/tradoc_151787.pdf Fannie Mae. News Release. Americans Personal Finance Senti ment Strengthens Housing Optimism Follows Suit. http : //www References | fanniemae.com/portal/about-us/media/corporate-news/2014/6192 html Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Survey of Professional Fore casters Fourth Quarter http : //www.philadelphiafed.org/ research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-fore casters/2014/spfq414.pdf Fisher Irving. The Theory of Interest. New York : The McMillan Company Gallup. Americans Views of Job Market Hold Steady. http : //www gallup.com/poll/179483/americans-perceptions-job-market-holdsteady.aspx International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) World Economic Outlook April : Rebalancing Growth. https : //www.imf.org/external/ pubs/ft/weo/2010/01/pdf/text.pdf International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) World Economic Outlook April : Hopes Realities Risks. http : //www.imf.org/external/ pubs/ft/weo/2013/01/pdf/text.pdf International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) World Economic Outlook October : Legacies Clouds Uncertainties. http : //www.imf org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2014/02/pdf/text.pdf International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) World Economic Outlook Update January : Cross Currents. http : //www.imf.org/ external/pubs/ft/weo/2015/update/01/pdf/0115.pdf Koopmans Tjalling C. On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth. The Economic Approach to Development Planning Amsterdam : North-Holland Press Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) OMB Director Shaun Donovan on the Passage of H.R. Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act December. https : //www whitehouse.gov/blog/2014/12/17/omb-director-shaun-donovanpassage-hr-83-consolidated-and-further-continuing-appropr Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) The President s Budget for Fiscal Year February. http : //www.whitehouse.gov/omb/ budget/ Petri Peter A. and Michael G. Plummer. The Trans-Pacific Partner ship and Asia-Pacific Integration : Policy Implications. Peterson | References Institute for International Economics Policy Brief. Number PB1216. http : //www.iie.com/publications/pb/pb12-16.pdf Ramsey. F. P. A Mathematical Theory of Saving. The Economic Journal no. ( December ) : Saez Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. Wealth inequality in the United States since : Evidence from capitalized income tax data. Working Paper Cambridge Mass. : National Bureau of Economic Research ( October ) Shiller Robert. Online Data. http : //www.econ.yale.edu/ ~ shiller/ data.htm The World Bank Group. Global Economic Prospects January : Having Fiscal Space and Using It. http : //www.worldbank.org/ content/dam/Worldbank/GEP/GEP2015a/pdfs/GEP15a_web_full pdf The Urban Institute. Housing Finance at a Glance January : A Monthly Chartbook. http : //www.urban.org/ UploadedPDF/2000075-Housing-Finance-At-A-Glance.pdf The White House Office of the Press Secretary. FACT SHEET : Making Homeownership More Accessible and Sustainable. January. http : //www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/07/ fact-sheet-making-homeownership-more-accessible-and-sustai nable Chapter Aldy Joseph E. A Preliminary Assessment of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act s Clean Energy Package. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy ( ) : Alesina Alberto,and Silvia Ardagna. Large Changes in Fiscal Policy : Taxes versus Spending. Tax Policy and the Economy : Angrist Joshua D. and J rn-Steffen Pischke. The Credibility Revo lution in Empirical Economics : How Better Research Design Is Taking the Con out of Econometrics. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Auerbach Alan J. and Daniel Feenberg. The Significance of Federal Taxes as Automatic Stabilizers. Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : References | Auerbach Alan and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy ( ) : Barro Robert J. Are Government Bonds Net Wealth ? Journal of Political Economy ( ) : Ball Laurence M. Hysteresis in Unemployment : Old and New Evidence. Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Bastiat Fr d ric. Selected Essays on Political Economy. Seymour Cain trans. Library of Economics and Liberty. February Blanchard Olivier Giovanni Dell Ariccia and Paolo Mauro. Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy. IMF Staff Position Note Washington : International Monetary Fund Blanchard Olivier and Daniel Leigh. Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers. IMF Working Paper Blanchard Olivier and Roberto Perotti. An Empirical Characteriza tion of the Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output. Quarterly Journal of Economics Blanchard Olivier and Lawrence H. Summers. Hysteresis and the European Unemployment Problem. NBER Macroeconomics Annual Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Blinder Alan S. and Mark Zandi. How the Great Recession was Brought to an End. Princeton University and Moody s Analytics Card David and Phillip Levine. Extended Benefits and the Dura tion of UI Spells : Evidence from the New Jersey Extended Benefit Program. Journal of Public Economics : Chetty Raj. Moral Hazard vs Liquidity and Optimal Unemploy ment Insurance. Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Chodorow-Reich Gabriel Laura Feiveson Zachary Liscow and William Gui Woolston. Does State Fiscal Relief During Recessions Increase Employment ? Evidence from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : | References Christiano Lawrence Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo. When Is the Government Spending Multiplier Too Large ? Journal of Political Economy ( ) : Coenen Gunter et al. Effects of Fiscal Stimulus in Structural Models. American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics ( ) : Cogan John F. et al. New Keynesian versus old Keynesian govern ment spending multipliers. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control ( ) : Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) 2009a. Health Information Tech nology for Economic and Clinical Health Act. ___. 2009b. Cost Estimate : H.R. American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of ___. 2009c. Cost Estimate : H.R. Worker Homeownership and Busi ness Assistance Act of ___. 2010a. The Budget and Economic Outlook : Fiscal Years to ___. 2010b. The Budget and Economic Outlook : An Update. ___. 2010c. Cost Estimate : H.R. the Temporary Extension Act of As Introduced on February ___. 2010d. Cost Estimate : Budgetary Effects of Hiring Incentives to Restore Employment Act as Introduced by Senator Reid on February ___. 2010e. Cost Estimate : Amendment No. to H.R. the Continuing Extension Act as Proposed by Senator Baucus. ___. 2010f. Cost Estimate : Budgetary Effects of Senate Amendment the Unemployment Compensation Extension Act of ___. 2010g. Cost Estimate : CBO Estimate of Changes in Revenues and Direct Spending for Senate Amendment in the Nature of a Substitute to H.R. the Small Business Jobs and Credit Act of ___. 2010h. Cost Estimate : CBO Estimate of Changes in Revenues and Direct Spending for S.A. an amendment to H.R. the Tax Relief Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization and Job Creation Act of ___. 2010i. Cost Estimate : Budgetary Effects of Senate Amendment containing proposals related to education state fiscal relief the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program rescissions and revenue offsets. References | ___. 2011a. The Budget and Economic Outlook : Fiscal Years to ___. 2011b. Cost Estimate : Budgetary Effects of Senate Amendment to H.R. as proposed by Senator Reid for Senator Tester. ___. 2011c. Cost Estimate : H.R. the Small Business Jobs Act of ___. 2011d. Cost Estimate : Budgetary Effects of the Temporary Payroll Tax Cut Continuation Act of as Posted on the Website of the House Committee on Rules on December ___. 2012a. The Budget and Economic Outlook : Fiscal Years to ___. 2012b. Cost Estimate : Budgetary effects of the Conference Agreement for H.R. the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of as Posted on the Web Site of the House Committee on Rules on February ___. 2012c. Cost Estimate : Budgetary effects of the Conference Agreement for H.R. the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of as Posted on the Web Site of the House Committee on Rules on February ___. 2013a. Estimated Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic Output from October Through December ___. 2013b. Cost Estimate : Estimate of Budgetary Effects of H.R. the American Taxpayer Relief Act of as passed by the Senate on January ___. The budget and Economic Outlook : to Conley Timothy and Bill Dupor. The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act : Public Sector Jobs Saved Private Sector Jobs Forestalled. Journal of Monetary Economics Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) 2009a. Estimates of Job Creation from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of ___. 2009b. The Economic Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvest ment Act of First Quarterly Report. September ___. 2010a. The Economic Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvest ment Act of Second Quarterly Report. January ___. 2010b. The Economic Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvest ment Act of Third Quarterly Report. April ___. 2010c. The Economic Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvest ment Act of Fourth Quarterly Report. July | References ___. The Economic Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvest ment Act of Sixth Quarterly Report. March ___. 2013a. The Economic Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvest ment Act of Ninth Quarterly Report. February ___. 2013b. Economic Report of the President. March Council of Economic Advisers and the Department of Labor. The Economic Benefits of Extending Unemployment Insurance. January Delong J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers. Fiscal Policy in a Depressed Economy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring Department of Education. FY Department of Education Justi fications of Appropriation Estimates to the Congress : Student Financial Assistance in President s FY Budget Request for the U.S. Department of Education Department of the Treasury. 2010a. The Case for Temporary Percent Expensing : Encouraging Business to Expand now by Lowering the Cost of Investment. ___. 2010b. The American Opportunity Tax Credit. ___. Treasury Analysis of Build America Bonds Issuance and Savings. Department of the Treasury and Council of Economic Advisers. A New Economic Analysis of Infrastructure Investment. March Eggertson Gauti B. Real Government Spending in a Liquidity Trap. New York Federal Reserve Elmendorf Douglas W. and Jason Furman. If When How : A Primer on Fiscal Stimulus. Washington : Brookings Institution ( EPA ) Environmental Protection Agency. American Recovery and Reinvestment Act Quarterly Performance Report FY2013 Quarter Cumulative Results as of September Executive Office of the President and Office of the Vice President. The Recovery Act : Transforming the American Economy through Innovation The White House Farhi Emmanuel and Ivan Werning. Fiscal Multipliers : Liquidity Traps and Currency Unions. Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research References | Favero Carlo and Francesco Giavazzi. Measuring Tax Multi pliers : The Narrative Method in Fiscal VARs. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy ( ) : Fernald John G. Roads to Prosperity ? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and Productivity The American Economic Review Vol. No. : Feyrer James and Bruce Sacerdote. Did the Stimulus Stimulate ? Real Time Estimates of the Effects of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. Working Paper National Bureau of Economic Research Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission. The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report. New York : PublicAffairs Follette Glenn and Byron Lutz. Fiscal Policy in the United States : Automatic Stabilizers Discretionary Fiscal Policy Actions and the Economy. Finance and Economics Discussion Series. Washington : Federal Reserve Board Guajardo Jaime Daniel Leigh and Andrea Pescatori. Forthcoming. Expan sionary Austerity ? New International Evidence. Journal of the European Economic Association Hall Bronwyn H. Jacques Mairesse Pierre Mohnen. Measuring the Returns to R&D. Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research House Christopher L. and Matthew D. Shapiro. Temporary Investment Tax Incentives : Theory with Evidence from Bonus Depreciation. American Economic Review ( ) : Ilzetski Ethan Enrique G. Mendoza and Carlos A. Vegh. How Big ( Small ? ) are Fiscal Multipliers ? IMF Working Paper ( IMF ) International Monetary Fund. What s the Damage ? Medium Term Dynamics after Financial Crises. World Economic Outlook October : Sustaining the Recovery Chapter p. ___. World Economic Outlook April : Growth Resuming Dangers Remain. Johnson David S. Jonathan A. Parker and Nicholas S. Souleles. Household Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of American Economic Review ( ) : Joint Committee on Taxation. Estimated Budget Effects of the Revenue Provisions Contained in the Conference Agreement for | References H.R.1 The American Recovery and Reinvestment Tax Act of ___. 2010a. Estimated Budget Effects of the Revenue Provisions Contained in Senate Amendment # to H.R. The Small Business Jobs Act of Scheduled for Consideration by the United States Senate on September ___. 2010b. Estimated Revenue Effects of the House Amendment to the Senate Amendment to H.R. The Middle Class Tax Relief Act of Scheduled for Consideration by the House of Representa tives on December ___. Estimated Revenue Effects of H.R. The Job Protection and Recession Prevention Act of Katz Lawrence F. and Bruce D. Meyer. Unemployment Insurance Recall Expectations and Unemployment Outcomes. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Kroft Kory and Matthew Notowidigdo. Should Unemployment Insurance Vary with the Local Unemployment Rate ? Theory and Evidence. Working Paper Laeven Luc and Fabian Valencia. Systemic Banking Crises Database : An Update. Working Paper WP/12/163. Washington : International Monetary Fund Ljungqvist Lars and Thomas J. Sargent. The European Unemploy ment Dilemma. Journal of Political Economy ( ) : Mertens Karel and Morten O. Ravn. Empirical Evidence on the Aggregate Effects of Anticipated and Unanticipated US Tax Policy Shocks. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy ( ) : Mertens Karel and Morten Ravn. The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate Income Tax Changes in the United States. American Economic Review. June Meyer Bruce D. Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells. Econometrica no.4 : Munnell Alicia H Infrastructure Investment and Economic Growth Journal of Economic Perspectives vol. ( ) pages Fall. Pitts burg PA : American Economic Association References | Nakamura Emi and J n Steinsson. Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union : Evidence from U.S. Regions. Unpublished paper New York : Columbia University Office of Science and Technology Policy and The National Economic Council. Four Years of Broadband Growth. The White House Parker Jonathan A. On Measuring the Effects of Fiscal Policy in Recessions. Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Parker Jonathan A. Nicholas S. Souleles David S. Johnson and Robert McClelland. Consumer Spending and the Economic Stim ulus Payments of Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Perotti Roberto. The Austerity Myth : Gain Without Pain ? Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Phelps Edmund. Inflation policy and unemployment theory. New York : WW Norton and Company Poterba James M. State Responses to Fiscal Crises : The Effects of Budgetary Institutions and Politics. Journal of Political Economy ( ) : Ramey Valerie A. 2011a. Identifying Government Spending Shocks : It s All in the Timing Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : ___. 2011b. Can Government Purchases Stimulate the Economy ? Journal of Economic Literature no. : Ramey Valerie A and Matthew Shapiro. Costly Capital Realloca tion and the Effects of Government Spending. Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy : Reichling Felix and Charles Whalen. Assessing the Short-Term Effects on Output Changes in Federal Fiscal Policies. Working Paper Congressional Budget Office Reinhart Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff. This time is different : Eight Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton NJ : Princeton Univer sity Press ___. Forthcoming. Recovery from Financial Crises : Evidence from Episodes. American Economic Review | References Reifschneider Dave William L. Wascher and David Wilcox. Aggre gate Supply in the United States : Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy. 14th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference. Washington : International Monetary Fund Romer Christina D. Back from the Brink. In The International Financial Crisis : Have the Rules of Finance Changed ? Edited by Asli Demirg -Kunt Douglas D. Evanoff George G. Kaufman pp World Scientific Publishing Company ___. Fiscal Policy in the Crisis : Lessons and Policy Implications. University of California-Berkeley Department of Economics Romer Christina D. and David H. Romer. The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes : Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks. American Economic Review ( ) : Rothstein Jesse. Unemployment Insurance and Job Search in the Great Recession. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall Schmieder Johannes F. Till Von Wachter and Stefan Bender. The Long-term Effects of UI Extensions on Employment. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings Shoag Daniel. Using state pension shocks to estimate fiscal multi pliers since the Great Recession. American Economic Review ( ) : Sims Christopher A. But Economics Is Not an Experimental Science. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Smets Frank and Rafael Wouters. Shocks and Frictions in US Busi ness Cycles : a Bayesian DSGE Approach. American Economic Review ( ) : Sperling Gene. Ways to Get Economic Stimulus Right This Time. Bloomberg.com. December Stock James H. The Other Transformation in Econometric Practice : Robust Tools for Inference. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Stock James H. and Mark W. Watson. Disentangling the Channels of the Recession Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring Stock James H. and Mark W. Watson. Introduction to Econometrics 3rd ed. Boston MA : Addison-Wesley References | Suarez Serrato Juan Carlos and Philippe Wingender. Estimating the Incidence of Government Spending. Summers Lawrence H. The State of the US Economy. Presentation at Brookings Institution Forum on December 19th ___. Speech at the Wall Street Journal-CEO Council Conference Washington D.C. November Taylor John B. An Empirical analysis of the Revival of Fiscal Activism in the 2000s. Journal of Economic Literature ( ) : : ___. Forthcoming. The Role of Policy in the Great Recession and the Weak Recovery. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings Transportation Research Board of the National Academies. Trans portation Investments in Response to Economic Downturns Special Report Wilson Daniel J. Fiscal Spending Jobs Multipliers : Evidence from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy Wimer Christopher Liana Fox Irwin Garfinkel Neeraj Kaushal and Jane Waldfogel. Trends in Poverty with an Anchored Supplemental Poverty Measure. Working Paper New York : Columbia Population Research Center Woodford Michael. Simple Analytics of the Government Expendi ture Multiplier. American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics ( ) p. Chapter A Better Balance. The Business Case for Workplace Flexibility. March. New York NY Akyeampong E. Fact Sheet on Work Absences Perspectives on Labour and Income. Ottawa ON : Statistics Canada Almond Douglas and Janet Currie. Killing Me Softly : The Fetal Origins Hypothesis. Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : Appelbaum Eileen and Ruth Milkman. Paid Family Leave Pays Off in California. Harvard Business Review Blog Network Appelbaum Eileen. Paid Sick Days in Connecticut Not a Burden for Employers. Center for Economic and Policy Research | References Appelbaum Eileen Ruth Milkman Luke Elliott and Teresa Kroeger. Good for Business ? Connecticut s Paid Sick Leave Law. Center for Economic and Policy Research Akerlof George and Janet Yellen. Efficiency Wage Models of the Labor Market Cambridge : Cambridge University Press Arthur Michelle. Share Price Reactions to Work-Family Initiatives : An Institutional Perspective. Academy of Management Journal ( ) : Baughman Reagan Daniela DiNardi and Douglas Holtz-Eakin. Productivity and Wage Effects of Family-friendly Fringe Bene fits. International Journal of Manpower ( ) : Bauman Alvin. Measuring employee compensation in U.S. industry. Monthly Labor Review : Becker Gary S. Human Capital. Chicago IL : University of Chicago Press Bernard Tara Siegel. The Unspoken Stigma of Workplace Flexibility. New York Times. June Bewley Truman. Why Wages Don t Fall During a Recession. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press Bianchi S. M. J.P. Robinson and M. Milkie. Changing Rhythms of American Family Life. New York : Russell Sage Foundation Bloom Nick and John Van Reenen. Why Do Management Practices Differ across Firms and Countries ? Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : Bloom Nicholas James Liang John Roberts and Zhichun Jenny Ying Does Working from Home Work ? Evidence from a Chinese Experiment. NBER Working Paper Bloom Nick Tobias Krestchmer and John Van Reenen. WorkLife Balance Management Practices and Productivity. Centre for Economic Performance London School of Economics Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) Access to and Use of Leave : Data from the American Time Use Survey. U.S. Department of Labor ____. Unpaid Eldercare in the United States : Data from the American Time Use Survey. U.S. Department of Labor References | Bond James Ellen Galinsky and Kelly Sakai. National Study of Employers. New York NY : Families and Work Institute Boushey Heather and Sarah Glynn. There are Significant Business Costs to Replacing Employees. Center for American Progress California Governor s Office of Business and Economic Development. Employee Benefits. Accessed December https : //www business.ca.gov/StartaBusiness/AdministeringEmployees/Employ eeBenefits.aspx California Employment Development Department. Paid Family Leave Benefits. Accessed December http : //www.edd ca.gov/disability/PFL_Benefit_Amounts.htm California Employment Development Department State Disability Insurance ( SDI ) Tax Accessed December http : //www edd.ca.gov/payroll_taxes/State_Disability_Insurance_Tax.htm Cappelli Peter and Keith Chauvin. An Interplant Test of the Effi ciency Wage Hypothesis. Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Catalyst. The Bottom Line : Connecting Corporate Performance and Gender Diversity. http : //www.catalyst.org/knowledge/bottomline-connecting-corporate-performance-and-gender-diversity Carneiro Pedro Katrine V. Loken and Kjell G. Salvanes. A Flying Start ? Maternity Leave Benefits and Long Run Outcomes of Chil dren. Institute for the Study of Labor ( IZA ) Discussion Paper Cho Sungjin and John Rust. The Flat Rental Puzzle. The Review of Economic Studies : City and County of San Francisco. Family Friendly Workplace Ordi nance ( FFWO ) San Francisco Administrative Code Chapter Z Cohen Wesley and Daniel Levinthal. Absorptive Capacity : A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly : Comfort Derrick Karen Johnson and David Wallace. Part-time work and Family-Friendly Practices in Canadian Workplaces. The Evolving Workplace Series. Ottawa Canada : Statistics Canada and Human Resources Development Canada ( June ) Computer Economics. Telecommuting Policies Can Lower IT Employee Turnover. Irvine CA | References Connecticut Department of Labor An Overview of the Paid Sick Leave Law. Accessed December http : //www.ctdol.state ct.us/wgwkstnd/sickleave.htm Corporate Voices for Working Families. Business Impacts of Flex ibility : An Imperative for Expansion. July. Washington D.C Council of Economic Advisers. Work-Life Balance and the Economics of Workplace Flexibility. Dal Bo Ernesto ; Frederico Finan ; and Martin A. Rossi. Strengthening State Capabilities : The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service. Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Dalton Dan R. and Debra J. Mesch. The Impact of Flexible Sched uling on Employee Attendance and Turnover. Administrative Science Quarterly ( ) : DiNardo John Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux. Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution of Wages : A Semiparametric Approach. Econometrica ( ) : Dionne Georges and Benoit Dostie. New Evidence on the Deter minants of Absenteeism Using Linked Employer-Employee Data. Industrial and Labor Relations Review : District of Columbia Department of Employment Services. Accrued Sick and Safe Leave Act of District of Columbia Department of Employment Services. Earned Sick and Safe Leave Amendment Act of Drago Robert and Kevin Miller. Sick at Work : Infected Employees in the Workplace during the H1N1 Pandemic. Institute for Women s Policy Research Eberts Randall W. and Joe A. Stone. Wages Fringe Benefits and Working Conditions : An Analysis of Compensating Differentials. Southern Economic Journal : Elborgh-Woytek Katrin Monique Newiak Kalpana Kochhar Stefania Fabrizio Kangni Kpodar Philippe Wingender Benedict Clements and Gerd Schwartz. Women Work and the Economy : Macroeconomic Gains from Gender Equity. International Mone tary Fund ( IMF ) Staff Discussion Note Foster Nigel and Satish Sule. German Legal System and Laws New York : Oxford University Press : References | Galinsky Ellen Kerstin Aumann and James T. Bond. Times are Changing : Gender and Generation at Work and at Home. Fami lies and Work Institute : National Study of the Changing Workforce Gallup. In U.S. Poor Health Tied to Big Losses for All Job Types. Georgetown University Federal Legislation Clinic. The United Kingdom Flexible Working Act. Goldin Claudia. The Quiet Revolution That Transformed Women s Employment Education and Family. American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings : Goldin Claudia. A grand gender convergence : Its last chapter. American Economic Review ( ) : Goldin Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. The Power of the Pill : Oral Contraceptives and Women s Career and Marriage Decisions. Journal of Political Economy ( ) : Goldman Sachs. Gender Inequality Growth and Global Ageing. Goldman Sachs Economic Research Global Economics Paper Gov.UK Flexible Working. Greenhouse Steven. Part-Time Schedules Full-Time Headaches. New York Times. July Griliches Zvi. Hybrid corn : An Exploration in the Economics of Technological Change. Econometrica ( ) : Gruber Jonathan and Alan B. Krueger. The Incidence of Mandated Employer-Provided Insurance : Lessons From Workers Compen sation Insurance. In Tax Policy and the Economy ed. David Bradford. Cambridge MA : MIT Press : Harrington Brad Fred Van Deusen Jennifer Sabatini Fraone and Samantha Eddy. The New Dad : Take Your Leave. Center for Work & Family Carroll School of Management. Boston Harter James K and Sangeeta Agrawal. Engagement at Work : Working Hours Flextime Vacation Time and Wellbeing. Gallup Inc Hewlett Sylvia Ann Melinda Marshall and Laura Sherbin. Innova tion Diversity and Market Growth. Center for Talent Innovation International Labour Organization ( ILO ) Maternity and Paternity at Work : Law and Practice Across the World. | References Kalt Michael S. California Enacts Law Requiring Employers to Provide Paid Sick Leave. Society for Human Resource Manage ment. http : //www.shrm.org/legalissues/stateandlocalresources/ pages/calif.-enacts-paid-sick-leave.aspx Kantor Jodi. Working Anything but to New York Times. August Klerman Jacob Alex Kelly Daley and Alyssa Pozniak. Family and Medical Leave in : Technical Report. Cambridge MA : Abt Associates Inc. http : //www.dol.gov/asp/evaluation/fmla/FMLA2012-Technical-Report.pdf Lazear Edward P. Firm-Specific Human Capital : A Skill-Weights Approach. NBER Working Paper Levine David I. Just-Cause Employment Policies in the Presence of Worker Adverse Selection. Journal of Labor Economics ( ) : Levitt Barbara and James G. March. Organizational Learning. Annual Review of Sociology : Levitt Steven. An Economist Sells Bagels : A Case Study in Profit Maximization. NBER Working Paper Livingston Gretchen. Chapter : The Likelihood of Being a Stay-atHome Father. In Growing Number of Dads Home with the Kids Pew Research Center Matos Kenneth and Ellen Galinsky. National Study of Employers. Families and Work Institute : National Study of Employers Mincer Jacob. Schooling Experience and Earnings. New York : Columbia University Press National Advisory Council on the Employment of Women ( NACEW ) Flexible Work Arrangements : Literature Review. http : // womenatwork.org.nz/assets/Uploads/Files-PDFs-Docs/flexibleworking-literature-review.pdf National Center for Education Statistics. The Condition of Educa tion U.S. Department of Education. http : //nces.ed.gov/ pubs2012/2012045.pdf National Partnership for Women and Families. Advancing a Family Friendly America : How Family Friendly Is Your State ? Accessed References | January http : //www.nationalpartnership.org/issues/workfamily/family-friendly-america/family-friendly-america-map.html Nelson Richard R. and Sidney G. Winter. An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Harvard University Press Nepomnyaschy Lenna and Jane Waldfogel. Paternity Leave and Fathers Involvement With Their Young Children : Evidence from the American Ecls B. Community Work and Family ( ) : New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development. Family Leave Insurance : Cost to the Worker. Accessed December http : //lwd.state.nj.us/labor/fli/content/cost.html New Jersey Division of Temporary Disability Insurance. Your Guide to Family Leave Insurance in New Jersey. http : //lwd.state.nj.us/ labor/forms_pdfs/tdi/WPR-119.pdf Nielsen Holdings. Harris Poll : Vast Majority of Americans Favor Flexible Workplace Policies. Olson Craig. Do Workers Accept Lower Wages in Exchange for Health Benefits ? Journal of Labor Economics ( S2 ) : S91-S114 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) PF2.1 : Key Characteristics of parental leave systems. http : //www oecd.org/els/soc/PF2_1_Parental_leave_systems_1May2014.pdf Pencavel John H. Wages Specific Training and Labor Turnover in U.S. Manufacturing Industries. International Economic Review ( ) : Petro John. Paid Sick Leave Does Not Harm Business Growth or Job Growth. Drum Major Institution for Public Policy Pew Charitable Trusts. Paid Family Leave Hits a Snag in States. Stateline Pierce Brooks. Recent Trends in Compensation Inequality. In Labor in the New Economy : University of Chicago Press Potter Edward E. Telecommuting : The Future of Work Corporate Culture and American Society. Journal of Labor Research ( ) : PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP. US Human Capital Effectiveness Report. New York NY | References Rhode Island Department of Labor and Training. Temporary Disability Insurance/ Temporary Caregiver Insurance. Accessed December http : //www.dlt.ri.gov/tdi/ Romer David. Do Firms Maximize ? Evidence from Professional Football. Journal of Political Economy ( ) : Rossin-Slater Maya. The Effects of Maternity Leave on Children s Birth and Infant Health Outcomes in the United States. Journal of Health Economics ( ) : Rossin-Slater Maya Christopher J. Ruhm and Jane Waldfogel. The Effects of California s Paid Family Leave Program on Mothers Leave-Taking and Subsequent Labor Market Outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management ( ) : Ruhm Christopher J. Parental Leave and Child Health. Journal of Health Economics ( ) : Secretary of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Question : Law Proposed by Initiative Petition. Accessed February http : // www.sec.state.ma.us/ele/ele14/pip144.htm Sheiner Louise. Health Care Costs Wages and Aging. Federal Reserve Board of Governors Smith Mark. Ways to Equip Telecommuters. Connected Home Media ( May ) Summers Lawrence H. Some Simple Economics of Mandated Bene fits. American Economic Review ( ) : Ton Zeynep. Why good jobs are good for retailers. Harvard Business Review ( ) : Van Giezen Robert. Paid Leave in Private Industry Over the Past Years. Beyond the Numbers : Pay & Benefits ( ) Vermont State Legislature. No. An Act Relating to Equal Pay. Waldfogel Jane. The impact of the family and medical leave act. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management ( ) : Waldfogel Jane Yoshio Higuchi and Masahiro Abe. Family Leave Policies and Women s Retention After Childbirth : Evidence from the United States Britain and Japan. Journal of Population Economics ( ) : References | Wang Wendy Kim Parker and Paul Taylor. Breadwinner Moms. Pew Research Center. http : //www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/05/29/ breadwinner-moms/ Williams Joan. Unbending Gender : Why Work and Family Conflict and What to Do About It. Oxford University Press Woodbury Stephen A. Substitution Between Wage and Nonwage Benefits. American Economic Review ( ) : Work Family & Health Network. 2008a. A Behavioral Measure of Super visory Support. Portland OR 2008b. Flexible Work and Well-Being Center. Portland OR Yasbek Philippa. The Business Case for Firm-Level Work-Life Balance Policies : A Review of the Literature. Wellington UK : Department of Labour ( January ) Chapter Auerbach Alan J. and Kevin Hassett. Tax policy and business fixed invest ment in the United States. Journal of Public Economics no. ( ) : Bartelsman Eric J. and Roel MWJ Beetsma. Why pay more ? Corporate tax avoidance through transfer pricing in OECD coun tries. Journal of Public Economics no. : Chetty Raj John N. Friedman and Jonah Rockoff. New Evidence on the Long-Term Impacts of Tax Credits IRS Statis tics of Income Working Paper Series. http : //www.irs.gov/pub/ irs-soi/11rpchettyfriedmanrockoff.pdf Chirinko Robert S. Steven M. Fazzari and Andrew P. Meyer. How responsive is business capital formation to its user cost ? : An explo ration with micro data. Journal of Public Economics no. : Choi James J. David Laibson Brigitte C. Madrian and Andrew Metrick For Better or For Worse : Default Effects and ( k ) Savings Behavior. In Perspectives in the Economics of Aging edited by David A. Wise pp. Chicago : University of Chicago Press Clausing Kimberly A. Multinational Firm Tax Avoidance and Tax Policy. National Tax Journal no. : Clausing Kimberly A. The revenue effects of multinational firm income shifting. Tax Notes March | References Congressional Budget Office. Taxing Businesses Through the Indi vidual Income Tax. Congressional Budget Office. Taxing Capital Income : Effective Marginal Tax Rates Under Law and Selected Policy Options. Council of Economic Advisers. The Labor Force Participation Rate Since : Causes and Policy Implications. Cummins Jason G. et al. A reconsideration of investment behavior using tax reforms as natural experiments. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity : Cummins Jason and R. Glenn Hubbard. The tax sensitivity of foreign direct investment : evidence from firm-level panel data. In The Effects of Taxation on Multinational Corporations pp University of Chicago Press de Mooij Ruud A. The tax elasticity of corporate debt : A synthesis of size and variations. IMF Working Papers : Desai Mihir A. C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. A multina tional perspective on capital structure choice and internal capital markets. The Journal of Finance no. : Devereux Michael P. and Rachel Griffith. Taxes and the Location of Production : Evidence from a Panel of US Multinationals. Journal of Public Economics no. : Devereux Michael P. and Rachel Griffith. Evaluating tax policy for location decisions. International Tax and Public Finance no. : Dharmapala Dhammika. What Do We Know About Base Erosion and Profit Shifting ? A Review of the Empirical Literature. CESifo Working Paper No. Executive Office of the President and U.S. Department of the Treasury. The President s Framework for Business Tax Reform. Washington http : //www.treasury.gov/resource-center/tax-policy/Documents/ The-Presidents-Framework-for-Business-Tax-Reform-02-22-2012 pdf Executive Office of the President and U.S. Department of the Treasury The President s Proposal to Expand the Earned Income Tax Credit. Washington. http : //www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/ files/docs/eitc_report_0.pdf References | Fatica Serena. Do corporate taxes distort capital allocation ? Crosscountry evidence from industry-level data. No. Directorate General Economic and Monetary Affairs ( DG ECFIN ) European Commission Goolsbee Austan. Taxes Organizational Form and the Deadweight Loss of the Corporate Income Tax. Journal of Public Economics no. : Goolsbee Austan. The impact of the corporate income tax : evidence from state organizational form data. Journal of Public Economics no. : Gordon Roger H. and Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason. Tax distortions to the choice of organizational form. Journal of Public Economics no. : Gramlich Edward M. Infrastructure Investment : A Review Essay. Journal of Economic Literature ( September ) : Gravelle Jane G. Tax Havens : International Tax Avoidance and Evasion. Congressional Research Service. Report for Congress R40623 Greenstone Michael Richard Hornbeck and Enrico Moretti. Identi fying Agglomeration Spillovers : Evidence from Winners and Losers of Large Plant Openings. Journal of Political Economy no. : Grubert Harry and Rosanne Altshuler. Fixing the system : an analysis of alternative proposals for the reform of international tax. National Tax Journal ( September ) : Grubert Harry and John Mutti. Taxes tariffs and transfer pricing in multinational corporate decision making. The Review of Economics and Statistics : Grubert Harry and John Mutti. Do taxes influence where US corpo rations invest ? National Tax Journal : Hall Bronwyn H. Effectiveness of Research and Experimentation Tax Credits : Critical Literature Review and Research Design. Report for the Office of Technology Assessment Congress of the United States Hall Bronwyn H. Jacques Mairesse and Pierre Mohnen. Measuring the Returns to R&D. In Handbook of the Economics of Innovation edited by Bronwyn H. Hall and Nathan Rosenberg. Elsevier | References Hall Bronwyn H. and John Van Reenen. How effective are fiscal incentives for R&D ? A review of the evidence. Research Policy ( May ) : Hassett Kevin A. and R. Glenn Hubbard. Tax policy and business investment. Handbook of Public Economics : Hassett Kevin A. and Kathryn Newmark. Taxation and business behavior : A review of the recent literature. In Fundamental Tax Reform : Issues Choices and Implications. MIT Press : Hines Jr. James R. Tax policy and the activities of multinational corporations. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. w5589 Hines Jr. James R. Lessons from behavioral responses to interna tional taxation. National Tax Journal : Hoynes Hilary W. Douglas L. Miller and David Simon. Income The Earned Income Tax Credit and Infant Health. https : // gspp.berkeley.edu/assets/uploads/research/pdf/Hoynes-MillerSimon-10-3-13.pdf Huizinga Harry and Luc Laeven. International profit shifting within multinationals : A multi-country perspective. Journal of Public Economics no. : Kearney Melissa S. and Lesley Turner. Giving Secondary Earners a Tax Break : A Proposal to Help Low-and Middle-Income Families. The Hamilton Project Discussion Paper Washington : Brookings Institution Knittel Matthew et al. Methodology to Identify Small Businesses and Their Owners. Department of the Treasury Office of Tax Analysis Technical Paper Mackie Mason Jeffrey K. and Roger H. Gordon. How much do taxes discourage incorporation ? The Journal of Finance no. : Manoli Dayanand S. and Nicholas Turner Cash-on-Hand and College Enrollment : Evidence from Population Tax Data and Policy Nonlinearities National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. http : //www.nber.org/papers/w19836 Munnell Alicia H. Policy watch : infrastructure investment and economic growth. The Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : References | Noonan T.D. Minister Michael D. Financial Statement of the Minister for Finance. Dublin. http : //www.budget.gov.ie/Budgets/2015/ FinancialStatement.aspx Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Action Plan on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting. Paris : OECD Publishing Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Explana tory Statement : Deliverables. OECD/G20 Base Erosion and Profit Shifting Project OECD. www.oecd.org/tax/beps-2014-deliv erables-explanatory-statement.pdf PwC and Business Roundtable. Global Effective Tax Rates. http : // businessroundtable.org/sites/default/files/Effective_Tax_Rate_ Study.pdf Schrank David Bill Eisele and Tim Lomax. TTI s Urban Mobility Report Texas Transportation Institute Slemrod Joel. Lessons for tax policy in the Great Recession. National Tax Journal : Toder Eric J. and Alan D. Viard. Major Surgery Needed : A Call for Structural Reform of the US Corporate Income Tax. Washington : Urban Institute and American Enterprise Institute Tyson Laura and Greg Linden. The Corporate R&D Tax Credit and U.S. Innovation and Competitiveness : Gauging the Economic and Fiscal Effectiveness of the Credit. Washington : Center for Amer ican Progress U.S. Department of the Treasury. Treasury Conference on Busi ness Taxation and Global Competitiveness Background Paper Washington U.S. Government Accountability Office. Improved Tax Information Could Help Families Pay for College. GAO-12-560 Weichenrieder Alfons J. and Tina Klautke. Taxes and the efficiency costs of capital distortions. CESifo working paper No. White Karen and Lance R. Grenzeback. Understanding freight bottlenecks. Public Roads no. Zwick Eric and James Mahon. Do Financial Frictions Amplify Fiscal Policy ? Evidence from Business Investment Stimulus. Harvard University | References Chapter Barbose Galen Samantha Weaver and Naim Darghouth. Tracking the Sun VII : An Historical Summary of the Installed Price of Photo voltaics in the United States from Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Report LBNL-6808E Bernanke Ben S. Irreversibility Uncertainty and Cyclical Invest ment. Quarterly Journal of Economics vol. pp. Blinder Alan. Comment on Hamilton Causes and Consequences of the Oil Shock of Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : Bloom Nicholas. The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks. Econometrica : Cruz Jennifer Peter W. Smith and Sara Stanley. The Marcellus Shale Gas Boom in Pennsylvania : Employment and Wage Trends. Bureau of Labor Statistics Monthly Labor Review February at http : //www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2014/article/the-marcellus-shalegas-boom-in-pennsylvania.htm Council of Economic Advisers and Department of Energy. Economic Benefits of Increasing Grid Resilience to Weather Outages. Council of Economic Advisers. 2014a. The All-of-the-Above Energy Strategy as a Path to Sustainable Economic Growth. Council of Economic Advisers. 2014b. The Cost of Delaying Action to Stem Climate Change. Council of Economic Advisers. 2014c. The Economic Impact of the Amer ican Recovery and Reinvestment Act Five Years Later. Dixit Avinash K. and Robert S. Pindyck. Investment under Uncertainty Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press Edelstein Paul and Lutz Kilian. How Sensitive are Consumer Expenditures to Retail Energy ? Journal of Monetary Economics Energy Information Administration. Effect of Increased Levels of Liquefied Natural Gas Exports on U.S. Energy Markets. Environmental Protection Agency. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks : http : //www.epa.gov/climat echange/ghgemissions/usinventoryreport.html References | Hamilton James D. A Neoclassical Model of Unemployment and the Business Cycle. Journal of Political Economy no. : Hamilton James D. Causes and Consequences of the Oil Shock of Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon United States Government.2010. Technical Support Document : Social Cost of Carbon for Regulatory Impact Analysis Under Executive Order Kellogg Ryan. The Effect of Uncertainty on Investment : Evidence from Texas Oil Drilling. NBER Working Paper Kilian Lutz. 2008a. Exogenous Oil Supply Shocks : How Big Are They and How Much Do They Matter for the U.S. Economy ? Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Kilian Lutz. 2008b. The Economic Effect of Energy Price Shocks. Journal of Economic Literature no. : Kilian Lutz. Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike : Disentangling Demand and Supply Shocks in the Crude Oil Market. American Economic Review no. : Kilian Lutz and Daniel P. Murphy. The Role of Inventories and Speculative Trading in the Global Market for Crude Oil. Journal of Applied Economics vol. pp. Levi Michael. A Strategy for U.S. Natural Gas Exports. The Hamilton Project Discussion Paper Washington : Brook ings Institution ( June ) Linn Joshua. Energy Prices and the Adoption of Energy-Saving Tech nology. The Economic Journal vol. pp. Linn Joshua. Why Do Oil Shocks Matter ? The Role of Inter-Industry Linkages. Economic Inquiry vol. pp. Nordhaus William D. Who s Afraid of a Big Bad Oil Shock ? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : Parry Ian Chandara Veung and Dirk Heine. How Much Carbon Pricing is in Countries Own Interests ? The Critical Role of Co-Benefits. IMF Working Paper 14/174 The Risky Business Project. Risky Business : The Economic Risks of Climate Change in the United States | References Chapter Acemoglu et al. Forthcoming. Import Competition and the Great U.S Employment Sag of the 2000s. Journal of Labor Economics Alquist Ron Rahul Mukherjee and Linda Tesar. Liquidity-Driven FDI. Economics Section no. The Graduate Institute of Inter national Studies Antweiler Werner Brian R. Copeland and M. Scott Taylor. Is Free Trade Good for the Environment ? American Economic Review no. : Autor David H. David Dorn and Gordon H. Hanson. The China Syndrome : Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States. American Economic Review no. : Avdjiev Stefan Michael Chui and Hyun Song Shin. Non-Financial Corporations from Emerging Market Economies and Capital Flows. BIS Quarterly Review December : Baier Scott L. and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. Do Free Trade Agreements Actually Increase Members International Trade ? Journal of International Economics no. : Becker Gary S. The Economics of Discrimination. The University of Chicago Press 2nd edition Becker Randy Wayne Gray and Jordan Marvakov. NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. Cambridge Mass. : National Bureau of Economic Research Berman Eli John Bound and Zvi Griliches. Changes in Demand for Skilled Labor within U.S. Manufacturing Industries : Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing. The Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Bernard Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. Exporters Jobs and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing : Brookings Papers on Activity : Microeconomics : ____. Exceptional Exporter Performance : Cause Effect or Both ? Journal of International Economics no. : Bernard Andrew B. J. Bradford Jensen Stephen J. Redding and Peter K Schott. Firms in International Trade. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : References | Bernard Andrew B. J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott. Trade Costs Firms and Productivity. Journal of Monetary Economics no. : Black Sandra E. and Elizabeth Brainerd. Importing Equality ? The Impact of Globalization on Gender Discrimination. Industrial and Labor Review no. : Blinder Alan S. and Alan B. Krueger. Alternative Measures of Offshorability : A Survey Approach. Journal of Labor Economics no. pt. : S97-S128 Blomberg S. Brock and Gregory D. Hess. How Much Does Violence Tax Trade ? Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Bloom Nicholas Mirko Draca and John Van Reenen. Trade Induced Technical Change ? The Impact of Chinese Imports on Innovation IT and Productivity. Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper no. Blundell Richard Rachel Griffith and John Van Reenen. Market Share Market Value and Innovation in a Panel of British Manufac turing Firms. Review of Economic Studies no. : Branstetter Lee G. Raymond Fisman and C. Fritz Foley. Do Stronger Intellectual Property Rights Increase International Tech nology Transfer ? Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm-Level Panel Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Broda Christian and David E. Weinstein. Globalization and the Gains from Variety. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Clerides Sofronis K. Saul Lach and James R. Tybout. Is Learning by Exporting Important ? Micro-dynamic Evidence from Colombia Mexico and Morocco. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Cockburn Iain M. Jean O. Lanjouw and Mark Schankerman. Patents and the Global Diffusion of New Drugs. Working Paper Cambridge Mass. : National Bureau of Economic Research Coeurdacier Nicolas and H lene Rey. Home Bias in Open Economy Financial Macroeconomics. Journal of Economic Literature no : Copeland Brian R. and M. Scott Taylor. Trade and the Environ ment. Princeton University Press | References Ebenstein et al. Understanding the Role of China in the Decline of U.S. Manufacturing. Hebrew University of Jerusalem Edmonds Eric V. and Nina Pavcnik. The Effect of Trade Liberaliza tion on Child Labor. Journal of International Economics no. : Feenstra Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. Productivity Measure ment and the Impact of Trade and Technology on Wages : Estimates for the U.S. Working Paper Cambridge Mass. : National Bureau of Economic Research ____. The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology Capital on Wages : Estimates for the United States Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Feyrer James. Distance Trade and Income The to Closing of the Suez Canal as a Natural Experiment. Working Paper Cambridge Mass. : National Bureau of Economic Research Frankel Jeffrey A. and David Romer. Does Trade Cause Growth ? American Economic Review no. : Goldberg Linda S. Banking Globalization Transmission and Monetary Policy Autonomy. Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review : Goldberg Pinelopi K. and Nina Pavcnik. The Response of the Informal Sector to Trade Liberalization. Journal of Development Economics no. : ____. Distributional Effects of Globalization in Developing Coun tries. Journal of Economic Literature no. : Grether Jean-Marie Nicole A. Mathys and Jaime De Melo. Global Manufacturing SO2 Emissions : Does Trade Matter ? Review of World Economics no. : Hanson Gordon H. Globalization Labor Income and Poverty in Mexico. Globalization and Poverty pp. University of Chicago Press Haskel Jonathan E. Sonia C. Pereira and Matthew J. Slaughter. Does Inward Foreign Direct Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms ? Review of Economics and Statistics no. : References | Kee Hiau Looi. Local Intermediate Inputs and the Shared Supplier Spillovers of Foreign Direct Investment. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Keller Wolfgang and Stephen R. Yeaple. Multinational Enterprises International Trade and Productivity Growth : Firm-Level Evidence from the United States. Review of Economics and Statistics no : Lipsey Robert E. Measuring the Location of Production in a World of Intangible Productive Assets FDI and Intrafirm Trade. Review of Income and Wealth no. S1 : S99-S110 Martin Philippe Thierry Mayer and Mathias Thoenig. Make Trade not War ? Review of Economic Studies no. : ____. The Geography of Conflicts and Regional Trade Agreements. American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics no. : McCaig Brian. Exporting out of Poverty : Provincial Poverty in Vietnam and U.S. Market Access. Journal of International Economics no. : McCaig Brian and Nina Pavcnik. Export Markets and Labor Alloca tion in a Low-Income Country. Working Paper Cambridge Mass. : National Bureau of Economic Research Melitz Marc J. The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Realloca tions and Aggregate Industry Productivity. Econometrica no : Menezes-Filho Na rcio Aquino and Marc-Andreas Muendler. Labor Reallocation Response to Trade Reform. Working Paper Cambridge Mass. : National Bureau of Economic Research Milanovic Branko. Global Income Inequality in Numbers : In History and Now. Global Policy no. Washington D.C. : World Bank ( May ) Mostashari Shalah M. Expanding Variety of Goods Underscores Battle for Comparative Advantage. Economic Letter no. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Nordstr m H kan and Scott Vaughan. Trade and Environment. Special Studies The World Trade Organization Paz Louren o S. The Impacts of Trade Liberalization on Informal Labor Markets : A Theoretical and Empirical Evaluation of the Brazilian Case. Journal of International Economics no. : | References Philippon Thomas and Ariell Reshef. An International Look at the Growth of Modern Finance. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Poole Jennifer. Knowledge Transfers from Multinational to Domestic Firms : Evidence from Worker Mobility. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Riker David. Do Jobs in Export Industries Still Pay More ? And Why ? Manufacturing and Services Economics Brief no. Interna tional Trade Administration U.S. Department of Commerce Riker David and Brandon Thurner. Weekly Earnings in ExportIntensive U.S. Services Industries. Manufacturing and Services Economics Brief no. International Trade Administration U.S Department of Commerce Stolper Wolfgang F. and Paul A. Samuelson. Protection and Real Wages. Review of Economic Studies no. : Tarullo Daniel K. Regulating Large Foreign Banking Organiza tions. Speech at the Harvard Law School Symposium on Building the Financial System of the Twenty-first Century : An Agenda for Europe and the United States. Armonk NY March Topalova Petia. Trade Liberalization Poverty and Inequality : Evidence from Indian Districts. Globalization and Poverty pp University of Chicago Press ____. Factor Immobility and the Regional Impacts of Trade Liber alization : Evidence on Poverty from India. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : U.S. Department of Labor. Findings on the Worst Forms of Child Labor References | A P P E N D I X A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING letter of transmittal Council of Economic Advisers Washington D.C. December Mr. President : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely yours Jason Furman Chairman Betsey Stevenson Member Maurice Obstfeld Member Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L. Smith Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L. Seevers William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel Charles L. Schultze William D. Nordhaus Lyle E. Gramley George C. Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L. Weidenbaum William A. Niskanen Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June | Appendix A November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date Jerry L. Jordan Martin Feldstein William Poole Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore Michael L. Mussa Michael J. Boskin John B. Taylor Richard L. Schmalensee David F. Bradford Paul Wonnacott Laura D Andrea Tyson Alan S. Blinder Joseph E. Stiglitz Martin N. Baily Alicia H. Munnell Janet L. Yellen Jeffrey A. Frankel Rebecca M. Blank Martin N. Baily Robert Z. Lawrence Kathryn L. Shaw R. Glenn Hubbard Mark B. McClellan Randall S. Kroszner N. Gregory Mankiw Kristin J. Forbes Harvey S. Rosen Ben S. Bernanke Katherine Baicker Matthew J. Slaughter Edward P. Lazear Donald B. Marron Christina D. Romer Austan D. Goolsbee Cecilia Elena Rouse Katharine G. Abraham Carl Shapiro Alan B. Krueger James H. Stock Jason Furman Betsey Stevenson Maurice Obstfeld Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chair Member Member Chairman Member Member Chair Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Chair Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member July October December April July August February June October November November February July July June June January February April October August August May May July November May November November February June November November February July January March September March April April November February August August July July July January January May September January August June January January April June February August August August March July January January January February November July February June June January July March January January September August February April May August May Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to provide the President with objective economic analysis and advice on the development and implementation of a wide range of domestic and international economic policy issues. The Council is governed by a Chairman and two Members. The Chairman is appointed by the President and confirmed by the United States Senate. The Members are appointed by the President The Chairman of the Council Jason Furman was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on August Prior to this role Furman served as Assistant to the President for Economic Policy and the Principal Deputy Director of the National Economic Council From to Furman was a Senior Fellow in Economic Studies and Director of the Hamilton Project at the Brookings Institute. Previously he served as a Staff Economist at the Council of Economic Advisers a Special Assistant to the President for Economic Policy at the National Economic Council under President Clinton and Senior Adviser to the Chief Economist and Senior Vice President of the World Bank. Furman was the Economic Policy Director for Obama for America. Furman has also served as Visiting Scholar at NYU s Wagner Graduate School of Public Service a visiting lecturer at Yale and Columbia Universities and a Senior Fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities The Members of the Council Betsey Stevenson was appointed by the President on August She is on leave from the University of Michigan s Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy and the Economics Department where she is an Associate Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | Professor of Public Policy and Economics. She served as the Chief Economist of the US Department of Labor from to Maurice Obstfeld was appointed by the President on July He is on leave from the University of California Berkeley where he is the Class of Professor of Economics. He joined Berkeley In as a professor following appointments at Columbia ( ) and the University of Pennsylvania ( ) James H. Stock resigned as Member of the Council of May to return to Harvard University where he is the Harold Hitchings Burbank Professor of Political Economy and a member of the faculty at Harvard Kennedy School of Government Areas of Activities A central function of the Council is to advise the President on all economic issues and developments. In the past year as in the four previous years advising the President on policies to spur economic growth and job creation and evaluating the effects of the policies on the economy have been a priority The Council works closely with various government agencies including the National Economic Council the Office of Management and Budget White House senior staff and other officials and engages in discus sions on numerous policy matters. In the area of international economic policy the Council coordinates with other units of the White House the Treasury Department the State Department the Commerce Department and the Federal Reserve on matters related to the global financial system Among the specific economic policy areas that received attention in were : college affordability and ratings ; health care cost growth and the Affordable Care Act ; infrastructure investment ; regulatory measures ; trade policies ; poverty and income inequality ; unemployment insurance and the minimum wage ; labor force participation ; job training ; corporate taxation ; regional development ; the economic cost of carbon pollution ; renewable fuel standards ; energy policy ; intellectual property and innovation ; and foreign direct investment. The Council also worked on several issues related to the quality of the data available for assessing economic conditions The Council prepares for the President the Vice President and the White House senior staff a daily economic briefing memo analyzing current economic developments and almost-daily memos on key economic data releases. Chairman Furman also presents a monthly briefing on the state of the economy and the Council s energy analysis to senior White House officials | Appendix A The Council the Department of Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget the Administration s economic troika are responsible for producing the economic forecasts that underlie the Administration s budget proposals. The Council initiates the forecasting process twice each year consulting with a wide variety of outside sources including leading private sector forecasters and other government agencies The Council was an active participant in the trade policy process participating in the Trade Policy Staff Committee and the Trade Policy Review Group. The Council provided analysis and opinions on a range of trade-related issues involving the enforcement of existing trade agreements reviews of current U.S. trade policies and consideration of future poli cies. The Council also participated on the Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee helping to examine the ways in which exports may support economic growth in the years to come. In the area of investment and secu rity the Council participated on the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States ( CFIUS ) reviewing individual cases before the committee The Council is a leading participant in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) an important forum for economic cooperation among high-income industrial economies. The Council coor dinated and oversaw the OECD s review of the U.S. economy. Chairman Furman is chairman of the OECD s Economic Policy Committee and Council Members and staff participate actively in working-party meetings on macroeconomic policy and coordination and contribute to the OECD s research agenda The Council issued a wide range of reports in and early In March the Council released a report analyzing the effect of a minimum wage increase on the gender wage gap. In May the Council released a report exam ining the economic benefits of an all-of-the-above energy strategy. In June the Council worked with the Domestic Policy Council to study the impact of student loan debt and highlighted the benefits of the Administration s actions to make college more affordable. Also in June the Council released a report examining data on access to paid and unpaid leave in the workplace and emphasizing the importance of paid and unpaid leave options. In July the Council released a report quantifying several consequences of States decisions not to expand Medicaid. Also In July the Council released a report examining the economic consequences of delaying implementation of poli cies to stem climate change. The same month the Council released a report analyzing labor force participation rates since with a focus on the effects that the Great Recession and the retirement of the baby boomers had on labor force participation. The Council also worked with NEC on a report to highlight the economic benefits of infrastructure investment including Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | long-term competitiveness productivity lower prices and higher Incomes In October the Council released a report describing the economic returns to investments in childhood development and early education. All of the afore mentioned reports can be found on the Council s website and some of them are incorporated into this annual report as well. ( http : //www.whitehouse gov/administration/eop/cea/factsheets-reports. ) The Council continued its efforts to improve the public s under standing of economic developments and of the Administration s economic policies through briefings with the economic and financial press speeches discussions with outside economists and regular updates on major data releases and postings of CEA s Reports on the White House and CEA blogs The Chairman and Members also regularly met to exchange views on the economy with the Chairman and Members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Public Information The Council s annual Economic Report of the President is an impor tant vehicle for presenting the Administration s domestic and international economic policies. It is available for purchase through the Government Printing Office and is viewable on the Internet at www.gpo.gov/erp The Council frequently prepared reports and blog posts in and the Chairman and Members gave numerous public speeches. The reports posts and texts of speeches are available at the Council s website www whitehouse.gov/cea. Finally the Council published the monthly Economic Indicators which is available online at www.gpo.gov/economicindicators The Staff of the Council of Economic Advisers The staff of the Council consists of the senior staff senior economists economists staff economists research economists a research assistant and the administrative and support staff. The staff at the end of was : Senior Staff Jessica Schumer Chief of Staff & General Counsel Steven N. Braun Director of Macroeconomic Forecasting Anna Y. Lee Director of Finance and Administration Jordan D. Matsudaira Chief Economist Adrienne Pilot Director of Statistical Office | Appendix A Senior Economists Jane K. Dokko Housing Matthew Fiedler Health Gregory Leiserson Tax Retirement Joshua Linn Energy Environment Cynthia J. Nickerson Agriculture Environment Evaluation Jennifer P. Poole International Trade Timothy Simcoe Innovation Technology Industrial Organization Linda L. Tesar Macroeconomics Abigail Wozniak Labor Education Staff Economists and Policy Analysts Martha Gimbel Labor Timothy Hyde Macro Labor Energy Environment Noah Mann Education Gabriel Scheffler Health Labor Eric Van Nostrand Macroeconomics Research Economists Krista Ruffini Labor Research Assistants Lydia Cox Energy Trade Agriculture Harris R. Eppsteiner Labor Immigration Samuel F. Himel Housing Infrastructure Industrial Organization Brian David Moore Tax Retirement Emma Rackstraw Labor Education Susannah Scanlan Macroeconomics International Statistical Office The Statistical Office gathers administers and produces statis tical information for the Council. Duties include preparing the statistical appendix to the Economic Report of the President and the monthly publica tion Economic Indicators. The staff also creates background materials for Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | economic analysis and verifies statistical content in Presidential memoranda The Office serves as the Council s liaison to the statistical community Brian A. Amorosi Statistical Analyst Wenfan Chen Economic Statistician Office of the Chairman and Members Andrea Taverna Deputy Staff Director and Special Assistant to the Chairman Matthew Aks * Special Assistant to the Chairman and Research Economist Jeff Goldstein Special Assistant to the Members Katie Rodihan Special Assistant Administrative Office The Administrative Office provides general support for the Council s activities. This includes financial management human resource manage ment travel operations of facilities security information technology and telecommunications management support Doris T. Searles Administrative and Information Management Specialist * Matthew Aks received the Robert M. Solow Award for Distinguished Service in after serving CEA for more than two years Interns Student interns provide invaluable help with research projects day-today operations and fact-checking. Interns during the year were : Alexander Abramowitz Brian Bernard Emma Brody Carter Casady Maddy Dunn Laura Elmendorf Joshua Feinzig Lauren Iannolo Amelia Keyes Jin Han Kim Paige Kirby Audrey Lee James Lim Charles Matula David Mkrtchian Gabrielle Orfield Stephen Orians Nirav Patel Curtis Powell Austin Rochon Rahul Singh Hershil Shah Sara Sperling Kyle Sullivan Benjamin Summers Lacoya Theus Meiyao Tysinger Jayson Wang Veronica Weis Leigh West and Felix Zhang | Appendix A Departures in The senior economists who resigned in ( with the institutions to which they returned after leaving the Council in parentheses ) were : David J Balan ( Federal Trade Commission ) Marco Cagetti ( Federal Reserve ) Tracy M. Gordon ( Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center ) Douglas Kruse ( Rutgers University ) Ronald J. Shadbegian ( Environmental Protection Agency ) and Kenneth A. Swinnerton ( U.S. Department of Labor ) The staff economists who departed in were Zachary Y. Brown John Coglianese and Kevin Rinz The research economists who departed in were Philip K Lambrakos Cordaye T. Ogletree and Rudy Telles Jr and Katie Wright The Research Assistants who departed in were Brendan Mochoruk Jenny Shen and David Wasser Alexander G. Krulic resigned from his position as General Counsel Natasha Lawrence resigned from her position as Special Assistant to the Members Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | A P P E N D I X B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION C O N T E N T S Page GDP INCOME PRICES AND SELECTED INDICATORS B Percent changes in real gross domestic product  B Gross domestic product  B Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes  B Growth rates in real gross domestic product by area and country  B Real exports and imports of goods and services  B Corporate profits by industry  B Real farm income  B New private housing units started authorized and completed and houses sold  B Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and people by race  B Changes in consumer price indexes  LABOR MARKET INDICATORS B Civilian population and labor force  B Civilian unemployment rate  B Unemployment by duration and reason  B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry  B Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries  B Productivity and related data business and nonfarm business sectors  INTEREST RATES MONEY STOCK AND GOVERNMENT FINANCE B Bond yields and interest rates  B Money stock and debt measures  B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years  Contents | INTEREST RATES MONEY STOCK AND GOVERNMENT FINANCE Continued B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years  B Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years  B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years  B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA )  B State and local government revenues and expenditures fiscal years  B U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation  B Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities  | Appendix B General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals due to rounding Because of the formula used for calculating real gross domestic product ( GDP ) the chained ( ) dollar estimates for the detailed components do not add to the chained-dollar value of GDP or to any intermediate aggregate The Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) no longer publishes chained-dollar estimates prior to except for selected series Because of the method used for seasonal adjustment the sum or average of seasonally adjusted monthly values generally will not equal annual totals based on unadjusted values Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) Data in these tables reflect revisions made by source agencies through February unless otherwise noted Excel versions of these tables are available at www.gpo.gov/erp General Notes | GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators Table B Percent changes in real gross domestic product [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter                                                  p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product Fixed investment Nonresidential Total See next page for continuation of table | Appendix B Gross private domestic investment Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual Property Products Residential Change in private inventories                                                                   Table B Percent changes in real gross domestic product Continued [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter                                                  p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Net exports                                                                   Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Exports Imports Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local Final Gross Gross Gross sales of domestic domestic national domestic pur2 product income product chases     Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Gross domestic income is deflated by the implicit price deflator for GDP GDP plus net income receipts from rest of the world Note : Percent changes based on unrounded GDP quantity indexes Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Table B Gross domestic product [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual Property Products Residential Change in private inventories Billions of dollars               p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Billions of chained ( ) dollars               p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  See next page for continuation of table | Appendix B Table B Gross domestic product Continued [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local Final Gross Gross Gross sales of domestic domestic national domestic pur2 product income product chases Billions of dollars               p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p          Billions of chained ( ) dollars               p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services For chained dollar measures gross domestic income is deflated by the implicit price deflator for GDP GDP plus net income receipts from rest of the world Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Table B Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes [ Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted ] Percent change from preceding period Index numbers = Gross domestic product ( GDP ) Year or quarter                                                  p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Personal consumption expenditures ( PCE ) Real GDP ( chaintype quantity index ) GDP chaintype price index GDP implicit price deflator PCE chaintype price index Quarterly percent changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Gross domestic product ( GDP ) Gross domestic PCE purchases Real GDP less price ( chainfood and index type energy quantity price index ) index GDP chaintype price index GDP implicit price deflator Personal consumption expenditures ( PCE ) PCE chaintype price index Gross domestic PCE purchases less price food and index energy price index Table B Growth rates in real gross domestic product by area and country [ Percent change ] Area and country World  Advanced economies  Of which : United States  Euro area  Germany  France  Italy  Spain  Japan  United Kingdom  Canada  Other advanced economies  Emerging market and developing economies  Regional groups : Commonwealth of Independent States  Russia  Excluding Russia  Emerging and Developing Asia  China  India  ASEAN-5  Emerging and Developing Europe  Latin America and the Caribbean  Brazil  Mexico  Middle East North Africa Afghanistan and Pakistan  Saudi Arabia  Sub-Saharan Africa  Nigeria  South Africa  annual average All figures are forecasts as published by the International Monetary Fund. For the United States advance estimates by the Department of Commerce show that real GDP rose percent in For includes data for : Austria Belgium Cyprus Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Latvia Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Portugal Slovak Republic Slovenia and Spain Includes Georgia and Turkmenistan which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States but are included for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure Data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis and output growth is based on GDP at market prices Consists of Indonesia Malaysia Philippines Thailand and Vietnam Note : For details on data shown in this table see World Economic Outlook October and World Economic Outlook Update January published by the International Monetary Fund Sources : International Monetary Fund and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Table B Real exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Year or quarter                p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Imports of goods and services Goods Total Total Durable goods Goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services. Repairs and alterations of equipment are also included in services Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Table B Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Year or quarter SIC :                                     NAICS :                 : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  Total Financial Total Total Federal Reserve banks Nonfinancial Other Total Manufacturing TransWholeporta- Utilities sale tion trade Retail trade Information Other Rest of the world                                                                         Data on Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) basis include transportation and public utilities. Those on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) basis include transporation and warehousing. Utilities classified separately in NAICS ( as shown beginning ) SIC-based industry data use the SIC for data beginning in and the SIC for prior data. NAICS-based data use NAICS Note : Industry data on SIC basis and NAICS basis are not necessarily the same and are not strictly comparable Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Table B Real farm income [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ] Income of farm operators from farming Gross farm income Year Value of farm sector production Total                                                                 p  Total Crops Livestock Forestry and services Direct Government payments Production expenses Net farm income The GDP chain-type price index is used to convert the current-dollar statistics to = equivalents Value of production Government payments other farm-related cash income and nonmoney income produced by farms including imputed rent of farm dwellings Crop receipts include proceeds received from commodities placed under Commodity Credit Corporation loans The value of production equates to the sum of cash receipts home consumption and the value of the change in inventories Note : Data for are forecasts Source : Department of Agriculture ( Economic Research Service ) | Appendix B Table B New private housing units started authorized and completed and houses sold [ Thousands ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] New housing units started Type of structure Year or month Total                                             p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov p  Dec p  New housing units authorized Type of structure unit to units                         units or more Total unit to units units or more New housing units completed New houses sold Authorized by issuance of local building permits in permit-issuing places : places beginning with ; for ; for ; for ; for ; and for Monthly data do not meet publication standards because tests for identifiable and stable seasonality do not meet reliability standards Note : One-unit estimates prior to for new housing units started and completed and for new houses sold include an upward adjustment of percent to account for structures in permit-issuing areas that did not have permit authorization Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Table B Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and people by race Families People below poverty level Below poverty level Race Hispanic origin and year Number ( millions ) TOTAL ( all races )           WHITE non-Hispanic           BLACK           ASIAN           HISPANIC ( any race )           Median Female money householder Total income no husband ( in present Number ( milPercent dollions ) Number lars ) Number ( milPercent ( milPercent lions ) lions ) Median money income ( in dollars ) of people years old and over with income Males All people Yearround full-time workers Females All people $ $ $ Yearround full-time workers $ $ The term family refers to a group of two or more persons related by birth marriage or adoption and residing together. Every family must include a reference person Adjusted by consumer price index research series ( CPI-U-RS ) Data for American Indians and Alaska natives native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders and those reporting two or more races are included in the total but not shown separately For figures are revised to reflect a correction to the weights in the Annual Social and Economic Supplement ( ASEC ) Beginning with data for the upper income interval used to calculate median incomes was expanded to $ or more Reflects implementation of Census 2010-based population controls comparable to succeeding years For data are based on the ASEC sample of addresses that received income questions similar to those used in the ASEC. The ASEC also included redesigned income questions that were provided to a separate addresses The Current Population Survey allows respondents to choose more than one race. Data shown are for white alone non-Hispanic black alone and Asian alone race categories. ( Black is also black or African American. ) Family race and Hispanic origin are based on the reference person Note : Poverty thresholds are updated each year to reflect changes in the consumer price index ( CPI-U ) For details see publication Series P on the Current Population Survey and Annual Social and Economic Supplements Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) | Appendix B Table B Changes in consumer price indexes [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] December to December                                                                      All items less food and energy All items Total Shelter Medical care                    Apparel Energy Food New vehicles   Total At home   Away from home Total                     Gasoline C-CPI-U                                                       Includes other items not shown separately Data beginning with incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners costs Commodities and services Household energy--electricity utility ( piped ) gas service fuel oil etc.--and motor fuel Chained consumer price index ( C-CPI-U ) introduced in Reflects the effect of substitution that consumers make across item categories in response to changes in relative prices. Data for are subject to revision Note : Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Series reflect changes in composition and renaming beginning in and formula and methodology changes in Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Labor Market Indicators Table B Civilian population and labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Employment Total Total NonAgricultural agricultural Not in labor force Civilian labor force participation rate Civilian employment/ population ratio                                  Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over                                                                          Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Not seasonally adjusted Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force See next page for continuation of table | Appendix B Table B Civilian population and labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Employment Total Total NonAgricultural agricultural Unemployment Not in labor force Civilian labor force participation rate Thousands of persons years of age and over                          : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Civilian employment/ population ratio Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent Beginning in data for agricultural employment are for agricultural and related industries ; data for this series and for nonagricultural employment are not strictly comparable with data for earlier years. Because of independent seasonal adjustment for these two series monthly data will not add to total civilian employment Note : Labor force data in Tables B through B are based on household interviews and usually relate to the calendar week that includes the 12th of the month. Historical comparability is affected by revisions to population controls changes in occupational and industry classification and other changes to the survey. In recent years updated population controls have been introduced annually with the release of January data so data are not strictly comparable with earlier periods. Particularly notable changes were introduced for data in the years and For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see Employment and Earnings or concepts and methodology of the CPS at http : //www.bls.gov/cps/documentation.htm # concepts Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Civilian unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month                                              : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  All civilian workers Males Total Females years years and over Total years years and over Both sexes years White By race Black Black or and African Asian other American Hispanic Married Women or who men Latino spouse maintain ethnic- present famiity lies                                                                           Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Beginning in persons who selected this race group only. Prior to persons who selected more than one race were included in the group they identified as the main race. Data for black or African American were for black prior to Data discontinued for black and other series. See Employment and Earnings or concepts and methodology of the CPS at http : //www.bls.gov/cps/documentation.htm # concepts for details Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race Not seasonally adjusted Note : Data relate to persons years of age and over See Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) | Appendix B Table B Unemployment by duration and reason [ Thousands of persons except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Duration of unemployment Year or month                                              : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Reason for unemployment Average Median ( mean ) duration duration ( weeks ) ( weeks ) Job losers Total On layoff Other Job ReNew leavers entrants entrants Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not sum to totals Beginning with January includes unemployment durations of up to years ; prior data are for up to years Beginning with January job losers and persons who completed temporary jobs Note : Data relate to persons years of age and over See Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry [ Thousands of jobs ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Private industries Year or month                                             p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec p  Total nonagricultural employment Goods-producing industries Total private Total Mining and logging Private service-providing industries Trade transportation and utilities Manufacturing Construction Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Total Total Retail trade Includes wholesale trade transportation and warehousing and utilities not shown separately Note : Data in Tables B and B are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period that includes the 12th of the month. Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B through B ) which include proprietors self-employed persons unpaid family workers and private household workers ; which count persons as See next page for continuation of table | Appendix B Table B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of jobs ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Private industries Continued Government Private service-providing industries Continued Year or month Information                                             p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec p  Financial activities Professional and business services Education and health services Leisure and hospitality Other services Total Federal State Local Note ( cont d ) : employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; which are based on a sample of the working-age population ; and which count persons only once as employed unemployed or not in the labor force. In the data shown here persons who work at more than one job are counted each time they appear on a payroll Establishment data for employment hours and earnings are classified based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) For further description and details see Employment and Earnings Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Average weekly hours Year or month                                             p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec p  Total private Average hourly earnings Manufacturing Total Total private Overtime Current dollars $ dollars $ Average weekly earnings total private Manufacturing ( current dollars ) $ Percent change from year earlier Level Current dollars $ dollars $ Current dollars dollars For production employees in goods-producing industries and for nonsupervisory employees in private service-providing industries ; total includes private industry groups shown in Table B Current dollars divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers on a = base Note : See Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) | Appendix B Table B Productivity and related data business and nonfarm business sectors [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Output per hour of all persons Year or quarter                                                  p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Output Hours of all persons Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector Hours at work of all persons engaged in sector including hours of employees proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by consumer price series. The consumer price series for is based on the consumer price index research series ( CPIU-RS ) and for recent quarters is based on the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( CPI-U ) Current dollar output divided by the output index Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Interest Rates Money Stock and Government Finance Table B Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( at auction ) 3-month 6-month                                                                                     Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Constant maturities 3-year         10-year 30-year                                            Aaa Baa Highgrade Newmunicipal home bonds mort ( Stangage dard & yields Poor s ) Prime rate charged by banks Discount window ( Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) Primary Adjustment credit credit                                                                                         Federal funds rate           High bill rate at auction issue date within period bank-discount basis. On or after October data are stop yields from uniform-price auctions Before that date they are weighted average yields from multiple-price auctions See next page for continuation of table | Appendix B Table B Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( at auction ) 3-month 6-month Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Constant maturities 3-year 10-year 30-year Aaa Baa Highgrade Newmunicipal home bonds mort ( Stangage dard & yields Poor s ) Prime rate charged by banks Discount window ( Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) Primary credit Adjustment credit High-low : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  High-low High-low                                                             Federal funds rate Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Department of the Treasury. The 30-year Treasury constant maturity series was discontinued on February and reintroduced on February Beginning with December data for corporate Aaa series are industrial bonds only Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning with January not strictly comparable with prior rates For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for are ranges of the rate in effect during the period Primary credit replaced adjustment credit as the Federal Reserve s principal discount window lending program effective January Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day s transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred Through April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in one year or less Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Housing Finance Agency Moody s Investors Service and Standard & Poor s Interest Rates Money Stock and Government Finance | Table B Money stock and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures except debt end-of-period basis ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] M1 Year and month December :                                          : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  M2 Debt Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits M1 plus savings deposits retail MMMF balances and small time deposits Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors                   Percent change From previous period From year or months earlier M1 M2 Debt                   Consists of outstanding credit market debt of the U.S. Government State and local governments and private nonfinancial sectors Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) Savings deposits include money market deposit accounts Annual changes are from December to December ; monthly changes are from six months earlier at a simple annual rate Annual changes are from fourth quarter to fourth quarter. Quarterly changes are from previous quarter at annual rate Note : For further information on the composition of M1 and M2 see the H.6 release of the Federal Reserve Board. The Federal Reserve no longer publishes the M3 monetary aggregate and most of its components. Institutional money market mutual fund balances are published as a memorandum item in the H.6 release and measures of large-denomination time deposits are published in the H.8 and Z.1 releases. For details see H.6 release of March Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System | Appendix B Table B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Total Fiscal year or period                              Transition quarter                                        ( estimates )  ( estimates )  Receipts Outlays On-budget Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Federal debt ( end of period ) Off-budget Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Gross Federal Held by the public Addendum : Gross domestic product Note : Fiscal years through were on a July June basis ; beginning with October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis. The transition quarter is the three-month period from July through September See Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year for additional information Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Interest Rates Money Stock and Government Finance | Table B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years [ Percent ; fiscal years ] Fiscal year or period Outlays Receipts                                   Transition quarter                                        ( estimates )  ( estimates )  National defense Total Note : See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget | Appendix B Federal debt ( end of period ) Surplus or deficit ( ) Gross Federal Held by public Table B Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Receipts ( on-budget and off-budget ) Fiscal year or period                              Transition quarter                                        ( estimates )  ( estimates )  Total Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Outlays ( on-budget and off-budget ) Social insurance and Other retirement receipts National defense Total InterInnaMedi- come Social Net Depart- tional Health care secu- secu- interrity est ment of rity Total Defense affairs military                                 Other Surplus or deficit ( ) ( onbudget and offbudget ) Note : See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Interest Rates Money Stock and Government Finance | Table B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Description RECEIPTS OUTLAYS AND SURPLUS OR DEFICIT Total : Receipts  Outlays  Surplus or deficit ( )  On-budget : Receipts  Outlays  Surplus or deficit ( )  Off-budget : Receipts  Outlays  Surplus or deficit ( )  OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD Gross Federal debt  Held by Federal Government accounts  Held by the public  Federal Reserve System  Other  Actual Estimates     RECEIPTS BY SOURCE Total : On-budget and off-budget  Individual income taxes  Corporation income taxes  Social insurance and retirement receipts  On-budget  Off-budget  Excise taxes  Estate and gift taxes  Customs duties and fees  Miscellaneous receipts  Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System  All other  Legislative proposals       OUTLAYS BY FUNCTION Total : On-budget and off-budget  National defense  International affairs  General science space and technology  Energy  Natural resources and environment  Agriculture  Commerce and housing credit  On-budget  Off-budget  Transportation  Community and regional development  Education training employment and social services  Health  Medicare  Income security  Social security  On-budget  Off-budget  Veterans benefits and services  Administration of justice  General government  Net interest  On-budget  Off-budget  Allowances      Undistributed offsetting receipts  On-budget  Off-budget  Includes Undistributed Allowance for Immigration Reform Note : See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget | Appendix B Table B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Year or quarter Current receipts                                                  p   : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p   Current expenditures Federal Government Net government saving ( NIPA ) Current receipts     Current expenditures Net Federal Government saving ( NIPA ) State and local government Current receipts     Current expenditures Net State and local government saving ( NIPA ) Addendum : Grantsin-aid to State and local governments   Note : Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal current expenditures and State and local current receipts. Total government current receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Interest Rates Money Stock and Government Finance | Table B State and local government revenues and expenditures fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year                                                            Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Individual income taxes General expenditures by function Corporation net income taxes Revenue from Federal Government All other Total Education Highways Public welfare All other Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes motor vehicle license taxes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes intergovernmental payments to the Federal Government Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans services air transportation sea and inland port facilities parking facilities police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development solid waste management financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other government administration interest on general debt and other general expenditures not elsewhere classified Note : Except for States listed data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregation of data for government fiscal years that ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years ; Texas used August and Alabama and Michigan used September as end dates. Data for and earlier years include data for government fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) | Appendix B Table B U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] End of fiscal year or month Total Treasury securities outstanding                                        : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Marketable Total Treasury Treasury Treasury bills notes bonds Nonmarketable Treasury inflation-protected securities Total Notes Bonds                                                                 Total U.S savings securities Foreign series Government account series Other Data beginning with January are interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing securities ; prior data are interest-bearing securities only Data from to and to include Federal Financing Bank securities not shown separately. Beginning with data for January includes Floating Rate Notes not shown separately Through series is U.S. savings bonds. Beginning includes U.S. retirement plan bonds U.S. individual retirement bonds and U.S. savings notes previously included in other nonmarketable securities Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreign-currency-denominated issues Includes depository bonds ; retirement plan bonds through ; Rural Electrification Administration bonds ; State and local bonds ; special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks ; for the period July through February depositary compensation securities ; and beginning August Hope bonds for the HOPE For Homeowners Program Note : In fiscal year the fiscal year was on a July June basis ; beginning with October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis Source : Department of the Treasury Interest Rates Money Stock and Government Finance | Table B Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities [ Billions of dollars ] End of month : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  Total public debt Federal Reserve and IntragovernTotal mental privately holdheld ings Held by private investors Pension funds Depository institutions  U.S savings bonds Private State and local governments Insurance companies Mutual funds State and local governments Foreign and international Other investors        Face value Federal Reserve holdings exclude Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements Includes U.S. chartered depository institutions foreign banking offices in U.S. banks in U.S. affiliated areas credit unions and bank holding companies Current accrual value includes myRA Includes Treasury securities held by the Federal Employees Retirement System Thrift Savings Plan G Fund. Includes money market mutual funds mutual funds and closed-end investment companies Includes nonmarketable foreign series Treasury securities and Treasury deposit funds. Excludes Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements in custody accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Estimates reflect benchmarks to this series at differing intervals ; for further detail see Treasury Bulletin and http : //www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/pages/index.aspx Includes individuals Government-sponsored enterprises brokers and dealers bank personal trusts and estates corporate and noncorporate businesses and other investors Note : Data shown in this table are as of January Source : Department of the Treasury | Appendix B