ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Together With THE ANNUAL REPORT of the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Transmitted to the Congress February economic re p ort of the president transmitted to the congress february together with the annual report of the council of economic advisers C O N T E N T S ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT. ANNUAL REPORT OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS * CHAPTER INCLUSIVE GROWTH IN THE UNITED STATES. CHAPTER THE YEAR IN REVIEW AND THE YEARS AHEAD CHAPTER THE GLOBAL MACROECONOMIC SITUATION. CHAPTER I  NEQUALITY IN EARLY CHILDHOOD AND EFFECTIVE PUBLIC POLICY INTERVENTIONS CHAPTER TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION. CHAPTER T  HE ECONOMIC BENEFITS OF INVESTING IN U.S. INFRASTRUCTURE CHAPTER T  HE 70TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS REFERENCES APPENDIX A  REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING APPENDIX B  STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION. ____________ * For a detailed table of contents of the Council s Report see page iii economic report of the president economic report of the president To the Congress of the United States : When I took office our Nation was in the midst of the worst recession since the Great Depression. The economy was shedding jobs a month. The auto industry was on the brink of collapse and our manufacturing sector was in decline. Many families were struggling to pay their bills and make ends meet. Millions more saw their savings evaporate even as retirement neared Seven years later thanks to the grit and determination of the American people the United States of America has rebuilt reformed and emerged as the strongest most durable economy in the world We are in the middle of the longest streak of private-sector job creation in history : million new jobs ; the strongest two years of job growth since the 90s ; an unemployment rate cut in half. Manufacturing has added jobs in the past six years and our auto industry just had its best year of sales ever. We are less reliant on foreign oil than at any point in the previous four decades. Nearly million people have gained health coverage under the Affordable Care Act cutting the uninsured rate to a record low. And we ve done all this while dramatically cutting our budget deficit In we continued to take steps forward with strong job growth and wages rising at their fastest rate in the recovery. Here in Washington Congress came together to pass a budget secure long-term transportation funding reform education laws and make tax cuts for working families permanent So claims that America s economy is in decline or that we haven t made progress are simply not true. What is true and the reason that a Economic Report of the President | lot of Americans feel anxious is that the economy has been changing in profound ways starting long before the Great Recession. Today technology doesn t just replace jobs on the assembly line but rather affects any job where work can be automated. Companies in a global economy face tougher competition from abroad and they can locate anywhere. As a result workers have less leverage for a raise. And more and more wealth and income is concentrated at the very top All these trends have squeezed workers making it difficult for middle-class families to feel secure even when they have jobs and the economy is growing. For the past seven years our goal has been not just strengthening economic growth but also creating an economy where everyone who works hard gets a fair shot. We ve made progress. But we need to make more. And we must choose policies that not only make us stronger today but also reflect the kind of country we aspire to be in the coming decades Real opportunity requires every American to get the education and training they need to land a good-paying job. Together we ve increased access to early childhood education lifted high school graduation rates to new highs and boosted graduates in fields like engineering. In the coming years we should build on that progress by providing pre-school for all offering every student the hands-on computer science and math classes that make them job-ready on day one and recruiting and supporting more great teachers for our kids. And we have to make college affordable for every American. Because no hardworking student should be saddled with unmanageable debt. We ve already doubled investments in college scholarships and tax credits and capped student loan payments to percent of a borrower s income. Now we need colleges to find innovative ways to cut costs and help more students finish their degrees Of course a great education isn t all we need in this new economy We also need benefits and protections that provide a basic measure of security. Social Security and Medicare are more important than ever and we shouldn t weaken them ; we should strengthen them. For Americans short of retirement basic benefits should be just as mobile as everything else is today. That s part of what the Affordable Care Act is all about. It helps fill the gaps in employer-based care so that when we lose a job or go back to school or start that new business we ll still have coverage We can build on this progress by further strengthening our social safety net and modernizing it for the changing economy. For example | Economic Report of the President when a hardworking American loses his job we shouldn t just make sure he can get unemployment insurance ; we should make sure that program encourages him to retrain for a business that s ready to hire him. If that new job doesn t pay as much there should be a system of wage insurance in place so that he can still pay his bills. And even if he s going from job to job it shouldn t be difficult for him to save for retirement and take his savings with him. That s the way we make the economy work better for everyone But there are broader choices to make about what role the government should play in making sure the system s not rigged in favor of the wealthiest and biggest corporations. A thriving private sector is the lifeblood of our economy and we can all agree that there are outdated regulations that need to be changed and red tape that needs to be cut. But after years of record corporate profits working families won t have more opportunities or see faster wage growth by letting the biggest companies make their own rules at the expense of everyone else ; or by allowing attacks on collective bargaining to go unanswered In this new economy workers and start-ups and small businesses need more of a voice not less. The rules should work for them. And this year I plan to lift up the many businesses that have figured out that doing right by their workers ends up being good for their shareholders their customers and their communities so that we can spread those best practices across America In fact many of our best corporate citizens are also our most creative and that spirit of innovation is essential to helping us meet our biggest challenges. Over the past seven years we have nurtured that spirit by protecting an open Internet creating online tools to help entrepreneurs start their businesses in a single day and taking bold new steps to get more students and low-income Americans online. But we can do so much more especially for medical research and clean energy sources. With marking the warmest year on record we need to build on our existing investments in clean energy and accelerate the transition away from fossil fuels At the same time I ll keep pushing forward on work that still needs to be done like fixing our broken immigration system raising the minimum wage providing two years of free community college to responsible students ensuring equal pay for equal work opening U.S exports to new markets and expanding tax cuts for low-income workers Economic Report of the President | without kids. All these things still matter to hardworking families ; they are still the right thing to do and I will not let up until they get done I have never been more optimistic about America s future than I am today. Over the past seven years I have seen the strength resilience and commitment of the American people. I know that when we are united in the face of challenges our Nation emerges stronger and better than before And when we work together there are no limits to what we can achieve The White House February | Economic Report of the President the annual report of the council of economic advisers letter of transmittal Council of Economic Advisers Washington D.C. February Mr. President : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely yours Jason Furman Chairman Sandra E. Black Member Jay C. Shambaugh Member C O N T E N T S CHAPTER INCLUSIVE GROWTH IN THE UNITED STATES. FORMS OF ECONOMIC INEQUALITY : INCOME WEALTH AND OPPORTUNITY. Income Inequality. Wealth Inequality. Inequality of Opportunity.. The Interplay of the Forms of Inequality. SOURCES OF INEQUALITY : COMPETITIVE MARKETS AND ECONOMIC RENTS. The Competitive Channel. The Rents Channel. THE INTERPLAY OF INEQUALITY AND GROWTH. POLICIES TO PROMOTE INCLUSIVE GROWTH. Strengthening Aggregate Demand. Promoting Equality of Opportunity. Reducing Market Power Concentration and Rent-Seeking Behavior. Protecting Families Against the Consequences of Inequality While Fostering Mobility. CONCLUSION : THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT. CHAPTER THE YEAR IN REVIEW AND THE YEARS AHEAD POLICY DEVELOPMENTS.. Fiscal Policy Monetary Policy. LABOR MARKET OUTPUT. Consumer Spending. Housing Markets. Investment. Net Exports. PRODUCTIVITY. WAGE GROWTH AND PRICE INFLATION.. FINANCIAL MARKETS. THE OUTLOOK.. Forecast over the Next Three Years.. Forecast over the Long Term. CONCLUSION. CHAPTER THE GLOBAL MACROECONOMIC SITUATION. SOURCES OF THE BROADER SLOWDOWN DEVELOPMENTS IN Euro area United Kingdom Japan. Emerging markets U.S. TRADE. CONCLUSION. CHAPTER INEQUALITY IN EARLY CHILDHOOD AND EFFECTIVE PUBLIC POLICY INTERVENTIONS INTRODUCTION. THE ECONOMICS OF INVESTING EARLY AND THE CONSEQUENCES OF EARLY LIFE DISADVANTAGE Pathways for Returns to Early Investments. Inequality in Early Health and Human Capital Investments The Role of Public Investment in Early Childhood. POLICY INTERVENTIONS THAT IMPROVE CHILDREN S OUTCOMES. Direct Indirect and In-Kind Investments in Early Health and Human Capital. Income and Other Near-Cash Transfer Programs CONCLUSION. | Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers CHAPTER TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION.. COMPETITION AND DYNAMISM PLAY A CRITICAL ROLE. The Role of Startups. Declining Business Dynamism. Declining Labor Market Dynamism. TRENDS IN R&D SPENDING AND PATENTING.. The Growth of Private R&D and Decline of Public R&D.. Recent Trends in Patenting. NEW OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES. Robotics Effect of Robotics on Workers Internet and New Business Models. The Digital Divide Challenge. CONCLUSION CHAPTER THE ECONOMIC BENEFITS OF INVESTING IN U.S INFRASTRUCTURE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES FOR INFRASTRUCTURE POLICY Role of Government. THE STATE OF U.S. INFRASTRUCTURE Current Investment Levels Transportation Infrastructure Quality. Congestion. BENEFITS OF INVESTING IN INFRASTRUCTURE. Short-Term Demand-Side Benefits Long-Term Supply-Side Benefits. Infrastructure s Direct Boost to Productivity Infrastructure Investment and Agglomeration. Spillover Effects.. Household Effects.. PROSPECTS FOR INCREASED INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENT Low Interest Rates. Maintenance and Repair. MANAGING AND FUNDING INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS. User Fees. Public-Private Partnerships. Contents | THE ROLE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT. Federal Grants. Federal Lending and Loan Guarantees. Tax-Exempt Bonds. Build America Bonds. Recent Legislation. CONCLUSION. CHAPTER THE 70TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS.. GOALS AND DUTIES. Origins of CEA Legislative History of the Employment Act of Institutional Structure Policy Focus. HELP TO DEVELOP ECONOMIC POLICY. Keyserling and Full-Employment Economics The Heller Council and the Tax Cut. Countercyclical Policy in Other Administrations.. Microeconomic Policy. Ensuring that Policies are in the Public Interest.. HELP TO ADVANCE THE PRESIDENT S ECONOMIC AGENDA. Nourse and Keyserling Institutional Lessons. GATHER ANALYZE AND INTERPRET INFORMATION ON ECONOMIC TRENDS AND DEVELOPMENTS. The Burns Council and the Recession. The 1970s and Stagflation. ENGAGE THE ECONOMICS COMMUNITY. The Origins of Economists in the White House. Institutional Advantages and Challenges. CONCLUSION. REFERENCES. | Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers APPENDIXES A. B. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production FIGURES 1.2a. 1.2b. 1.6a. 1.6b. 2-i. 2-ii. 2-iii. 2-iv. 2-v. Share of Income Earned by Top Percent Share of Total Labor Capital Income Accruing to Top Percent Based on Piketty-Saez Data. Share of Total Labor Capital Income Accruing to Top Percent Based on Congressional Budget Office Data. Distribution of Household Wealth ( Survey of Consumer Finances ) Distribution of Household Wealth ( Saez-Zucman ) Intergenerational Earnings Mobility The Great Gatsby Curve Within the United States The Great Gatsby Curve Across Countries Change in Employment by Detailed Occupation U.S. Union Membership & Top Percent Income Share Corporate Profits and Real Interest Rates Return on Invested Capital Excluding Goodwill U.S. PubliclyTraded Nonfinancial Firms Share of Workers with a State Occupational License Real Construction Costs and House Prices Unemployment Rate Oil and Commodity Prices North American Oil Rig Count and Oil Price Crude Oil Production and Net Imports Federal Budget Deficit Contribution of Government Purchases to Real GDP Growth Government Purchases as Share of Nominal GDP Forecast of Federal Funds Rate at Year End Real State and Local Government Purchases During Recoveries State and Local Government Surplus as Percent of Nominal GDP State and Local Pensions Unfunded Liabilities 12-Month Change in Nonfarm Payroll Employment Actual and Consensus Forecast Unemployment Rate Unemployment Rate by Duration Rates of Part-Time Work Alternative Measures of Labor Force Underutilization Labor Force Participation Decomposition Real Growth in GDP Private Domestic Final Purchases ( PDFP ) and Gross Domestic Output ( GDO ) Personal Saving Rate Contents | Consumer Sentiment 2-vi. Average GDP Revision 2-vii. Average Output Growth by Calendar Quarter Estimates Months After Quarter s End. Real Income Growth Over Next Year Household Debt Relative to Disposable Personal Income ( DPI ) Consumption and Wealth Relative to Disposable Personal Income ( DPI ) 2-viii. GDP Growth : Official Statistics and Okun s Law Prediction 2-ix. Contribution to Growth in Real Advertising National House Price Indexes Housing Affordability Index 2-x. Real Construction Costs and House Prices 2-xi. Zoning and Affordability in Select Metro Areas Single-Family and Multifamily Housing Starts Average Annual Growth in Real Business Fixed Investment ( BFI ) 2-xii. Business Fixed Investment Across Advanced Economies Net Investment as a Share of the Capital Stock Capital Services per Unit of Real Output Private Business Sector Total Payouts to Shareholders Nonfinancial Corporate Businesses Inventory-to-Sales Ratio Contribution of Inventory Investment to Real GDP Growth Foreign Real GDP and U.S. Export Growth Contribution of Net Exports to U.S. Real GDP Growth Sources of Productivity Growth vs. Labor Productivity and Major Components Nominal Wage Growth Over Past Year Consumer Price Inflation Energy and Import Price Inflation Long-Term Inflation Expectations Nominal 10-Year Treasury Yields Nominal Long- and Short-Term Interest Rates 2-xiii. R-Squared from Trailing 20-Year Price-Price Phillips Curve Rolling Regression 2-xiv. NAIRU from Trailing 20-Year Price-Price Phillips Curve Rolling Regression 2-xv. Unemployment Rate Coefficient from Trailing 20-Year Price-Price Phillips Curve Rolling Regression IMF World Real GDP Growth Forecast Real Broad Trade-Weighted Dollar Real GDP per Working Age Population ( WAP ) Pre- vs Post-Crisis | Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers 3.i. 3.ii. 3.iii. 3.iv. 3.v. 3.vi. 3.vii. Percent Gap Between Actual and Projected ( Oct-2010 ) : Cumulative Real GDP Growth between and Actual and Forecasted Working-Age Population by Region Actual and Forecasted Dependency Ratios by Region Real GDP Growth and Demographic Trends Current Account Balance as a Share of GDP Real GDP Percent Gap Between Actual and Projected ( Oct-2010 ) : Cumulative Real GDP Growth between and Euro Area Sovereign Interest Rate Spreads Over Germany U.S. European and Chinese Volatility Indices. U.S. European and Chinese Stock Markets Measures of Industrial Activity in China China s Foreign Exchange Rate and Trading Band Change in Commodity Futures Prices June to December World Industrial Production and Commodity Prices Brazil s Current Account Balance. U.S. Trade in Goods U.S. Trade in Services Composition of U.S. Exports Composition of U.S. Imports China s Foreign Exchange Rate and Trading Band China s Foreign Exchange Rate and Trading Band China s Foreign Exchange Rate and Trading Band Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills SES Gaps are Mostly Established by Kindergarten. Official Poverty Rate for Households with Children by Householder Characteristic Likelihood of Scoring Very Low on Early Health Measures Household Food Insecurity Rates Disparities in Underlying Factors Behind Outcome Gaps. Likelihood of Scoring Very Low on Measures of Cognition at Age Achievement Gap is Largely Set by Age Likelihood of Scoring Very Low on Behavioral Indexes at Age Mother s Time Spent on Child Care by Educational Attainment High-Income Parents Spend More Time on Educational Activities with their Children Preschool Enrollment by Mother s Education Annual Cost of Juvenile Incarceration vs. Other Youth Investments Low Birth Weight by Maternal Socioeconomic Status Increase in Income and Payroll Taxes Paid Through Age from an Additional Year of Medicaid Eligibility in Childhood Contents | 5.i. 5.ii. 5.iii. 5.iv. Effects of WIC Participation on Birth Outcomes Impact of Food Stamp Exposure on Metabolic Syndrome by Age of First Exposure. Long-Term Impacts of Exposure to Food Stamps as a Child. Most Early Childhood Programs Have Positive Cognitive and Achievement Impacts. Net Benefit Per Child of Perry Preschool Rises Over the Lifecycle. Increase in Probability of Survival Past Age Among Mothers Pension Recipients Average Annual Earnings in Adulthood Among Children Younger than When Their Family Participated in MTO Labor Productivity Growth Quantity and Volume of Venture Capital Deals Firm Entry and Exit Rates in the United States Share of Workers with a State Occupational License U.S. Job Creation and Destruction Rates Federal and Nonfederal Research and Development as a Share of GDP Real Private Research & Development ( R&D ) Investment Growth Federal Research and Development ( R&D ) Investment Share of Research and Development ( R&D ) by Funding Source Gross Domestic Expenditure on Research and Development ( R&D ) Percent of Patent Applications by First Time U.S. Patenters Trends in Patent Litigation Estimated Worldwide Annual Supply of Industrial Robots Estimated Annual Shipments of Industrial Robots by Main Industries Robot Density : Automotive vs. Non-Automotive Patents with Robot Class Probability of Automation by an Occupation s Median Hourly Wage. Share of Information and Communications Technology ( ICT ) in Value Added New York City Taxi Medallion Transactions Chicago Taxi Medallion Transactions Household Income and Home Internet Use Composition of Public Spending on Water and Transportation Infrastructure as a Share of GDP Public Gross Fixed Investment as a Share of GDP for G-7 Countries Average Age of Public Structures Quality of U.S. Infrastructure Government Bond Yields | Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers Relationship between Output Growth and the Ratio of Maintenance Investment to New Infrastructure Investment. Ratio of Public Spending on Operation and Maintenance to Public Spending on New Capital TABLES 2-i. 2-ii. Increase in Income Share Accounted for by Inequality Within Labor Income Change in Market Concentration by Sector Estimated Impact of Oil Price Declines on Output Job Growth Consistent with Unemployment and Participation Paths Selected Interest Rates Administration Economic Forecast. Supply-Side Components of Actual and Potential Real Output Growth Contribution to Average Annual Growth of R&D Investment. Quality of Infrastructure in G-7 Member Countries. Measures of U.S. Traffic Congestion. Input-Output Effects of Infrastructure Investment. Direct Contribution of the Public Capital Stock to Productivity Growth BOXES Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Macroeconomic Rebalancing Private Domestic Final Purchases as a Predictive Indicator of GDP Impact of Oil Price Declines on Spending and Production Challenges in the State and Local Sector Expectations for Future Job Growth A Better Measure of Output : Gross Domestic Output ( GDO ) Are Official Estimates of GDP Missing More Growth ? Constraints on Housing Supply Slowdown in Investment Growth across Advanced Economies Policy Proposals to Raise Output over the Next-Ten Years Stable Inflation Rate of Unemployment Changing Demographic Trends and Global Growth Market Volatility in the Second Half of Commodity Prices and Inflation in the Global Economy The Importance of the Trans-Pacific Partnership ( TPP ) for the U.S. Economy Gender Differences in Early Outcomes and Responses to Investment Types of Public Investment Federal Early Childhood Programs : An Overview Technological Innovation that Stimulates Learning during Out-of-School Time Nutrition and Income Programs Help Sustain Human Capital Development throughout Childhood Contents | Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Box : Trade Occupational Licensing Major Research Initiatives Patent Legislation The On-Demand Economy Clean Energy and Transportation Infrastructure Elasticity of Output to Public Capital The Interstate Highway System 21st Century Clean Transportation Plan Former CEA Chair Laura D Andrea Tyson ( ) Former CEA Chair Christina Romer ( ) Former CEA Chairman N. Gregory Mankiw ( ) Former CEA Chairman Joseph Stiglitz ( ) Former CEA Chairman Alan Greenspan ( ) Former CEA Chairman Martin Feldstein ( ) | Economic Report of the President C H A P T E R INCLUSIVE GROWTH IN THE UNITED STATES T he U.S. economic recovery entered its seventh year in Our businesses created million jobs in and the unemployment rate fell to percent half its level in fall far faster than forecasters expected. Private domestic final purchases the most stable and persistent components of economic output rose percent over the four quarters of the year bolstered by solid personal consumption strong residential investment and record-setting investment in research and development. Health care price growth remained at low levels not seen in nearly five decades as the Nation s uninsured rate fell below percent for the first time ever. Overall consumers were more confident about the economy than in any year since Nominal wage growth remained too low but still grew faster in than at any time since the recovery began. While more work remains to be done on each of these fronts especially in terms of wage growth the U.S economy exhibited substantial strength throughout the year At the same time slowing foreign demand has weighed on exports and impacted the manufacturing sector low oil prices while boosting household balance sheets have constrained investment and job growth in the drilling industry and financial market volatility is also impacting the economy. The divergence between strong domestic demand and these global factors will remain an important macroeconomic dynamic in But we must not lose sight of the longer-term challenges that the U.S economy has faced for decades most notably the insufficient growth of middle-class incomes. Last year s Economic Report of the President focused on the three factors that drive middle-class incomes : productivity growth inequality and participation in our economy. This year s Report examines the economics and policies that can strengthen productivity without exacerbating inequality promoting robust and inclusive growth that can be shared by a broad group of households. Many of these policies increase economic efficiency as well as equity unleashing productivity growth that benefits families across the income distribution Despite progress during the recovery and promising economic trends inequality remains a defining challenge of the 21st century economy. This is a global issue but one that is particularly salient in the United States While rising income and wealth inequality tend to attract the most attention the last few decades have seen an especially unequal distribution of something more fundamental the opportunity to succeed in our economy Too many Americans ability to innovate and participate in the labor force is constrained by their circumstances. For example children of low-income families face broad disadvantages that limit their ability to get ahead in school and later in life ; our criminal justice system fosters inequities and inefficiencies that limit opportunity ; and persistent biases against women and minorities limit their full economic participation. Unequal outcomes often reward hard work and innovation and may promote the efficient use of our resources and raise overall living standards. But unequal outcomes that arise from unequal opportunities barriers that keep some individuals from realizing their full potential are a detriment to growth and fairness The President supports a wide range of policies to promote equality of opportunity for all Americans detailed extensively later in this chapter The overall increase in income inequality in recent decades is large enough to accommodate many partial explanations. The traditional view is that inequality arises from competitive markets paying workers investors and innovators according to their productivity with divergences in productivity stemming from changes in technology globalization and education. Such a mechanism promotes productivity growth by encouraging productive labor wise investments and innovation But many economists have recently emphasized another contributor to rising income inequality : economic rents. Rents are unproductive income paid to labor or capital above what is necessary to keep that labor at work or that capital invested. Rents arise when markets are not perfectly competitive such as when uncompetitive markets yield monopoly profits or preferential regulation protects entities from competition. For example a firm might be willing to sell a piece of software for $ based on costs and a reasonable return to capital. But if the firm has no competition it may be able to sell the same product for $ the $ difference reflects an economic rent. Rents can serve a productive purpose in encouraging innovation. Some rents are inevitable but the critical question is how they are divided for example between profits and wages. And in many cases the evidence suggests that the pursuit of such rents ( rent-seeking behavior ) exacerbates inequality and can actually impair growth | Chapter To promote inclusive growth both channels of inequality competitive markets and economic rents must be addressed from a pro-growth perspective. Since the competitive channel most effectively promotes growth when competition is open to the widest set of economic actors promoting equality of opportunity helps the competitive channel work better. And because the abuse of market power in pursuit of economic rents results in inherently unproductive inequality strategies to reduce such unfair advantages can promote equality and opportunity. Both of these broad goals would reduce inequality while unleashing productivity growth raising living standards across the income distribution Forms of Economic Inequality : Income Wealth and Opportunity Unequal outcomes may provide incentives for individual effort and therefore play a productive role in the economy. Large rewards can motivate innovators entrepreneurs and workers and compensate them for taking large personal risks choices that in some cases can benefit households more broadly across the economy. Hard work and personal capital developed the first personal computer ; its developer reaped great rewards but so too did aggregate productivity. Inequality can also simply reflect the choices of two otherwise identical people who make different decisions about how to balance work versus leisure or an undesirable job versus a desirable job. But excessive inequality may also reflect substantially more than just deserts ranging from pure luck to economic rents. Moreover while inequality can play an important role in economic growth excessive inequality is not necessarily essential to growth and may even impede growth. This is especially true to the degree that inequality derives from interfering with the competitive market or protecting high returns to capital or labor with barriers natural or otherwise To understand how to promote widely shared growth it is critical to distinguish among various forms of economic inequality to better understand their sources. This Report considers three broad forms : inequality of income inequality of wealth and inequality of opportunity. All are closely related and can influence one another Income Inequality Although a global issue income inequality is particularly important in the United States in terms of both its level and in recent changes. Large advanced economies have seen a persistent trend of rising inequality for decades as the very highest earners capture a larger share of aggregate Inclusive Growth in the United States | income. Until the 1980s the United States experience was similar to other countries ; as recently as the top percent garnered a similar share of the income in the United States as in other G-7 countries as shown in Figure But since the share of income going to the top percent in the United States has exceeded every other G-7 country in each year that data are available. Moreover the United States has continued to diverge further from other advanced economies with the top percent s income share rising percentage point a year on average in the United States from to well above the percentage point average increase in the United Kingdom. While comparable international data are scarce after the gains of the top percent have continued in the United States. In the top percent captured percent of income up from percent in ( World Top Incomes Database ) In contrast to rising inequality within countries inequality across the globe as a whole has been largely stable and possibly even decreasing Fast growth in many poorer and emerging countries has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty in recent decades moderating the trends observed in the advanced world. In fact when measured at a global level the biggest income gains from to went to households between the 15th percentile and the 65th percentile of global income ( Milanovic ) The dynamics of income inequality across many countries have gained considerable attention in recent years perhaps most notably in Thomas Piketty s work Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Following Piketty previous Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) analysis has decomposed inequality into three components : Inequality within labor income ( wages salaries and benefits ) ;  Inequality within capital income ( capital gains dividends and interest ) ; and The division of aggregate income between labor and capital All three of these have different causes dynamics and policy implications CEA has decomposed the changes in inequality in the United States into the three sources using a combination of data from Piketty and his colleague Emmanuel Saez the U.S. Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) and the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts ( NIPA ) Figures 1-2a and 1-2b shows the top percent shares of labor and capital income according to various datasets The data present several issues with volatility systematic measurement error that results from using administrative tax data in an environment of changing tax policies and definitional nuances around what should be | Chapter Percent Figure Share of Income Earned by Top Percent United States Canada Italy Germany United Kingdom France Japan Note : Data for all countries exclude capital gains Source : World Top Incomes Database ( Alvaredo et al. ) classified as labor or capital income. Nonetheless this decomposition exercise illustrates a few broad points In the United States the top percent s share of total income rose from percent in to percent in according to the Piketty-Saez data. Throughout this period the top percent s share of labor income rose steadily while its share of capital income only began a sustained rise around as shown in Figure 1-2a. Overall the 9-percentage-point increase in the share of income that Piketty and Saez find going to the top percent from to is attributable to the three factors discussed above in the following dimensions : percent due to increased inequality within labor income ; percent due to increased inequality within capital income ; and percent due to a shift in income from labor to capital. This finding is broadly consistent with the recent emphasis on labor income inequality though it tells us that capital income is also a reasonably important driver of income inequality. Other data discussed below show a bigger share for the shift from labor to capital income However when looking at the extreme upper end of the income distribution in more recent periods capital income becomes much more important. Table shows the relative importance of the distribution of income within labor in explaining the increased share of income going to the top in different data sets and different periods Inclusive Growth in the United States | Figure 1-2a Share of Total Labor Capital Income Accruing to Top Percent Based on Piketty-Saez Data Index = Share of Labor Income Share of Total Income Share of Capital Income Source : Piketty and Saez ( ) Figure 1-2b Share of Total Labor Capital Income Accruing to Top Percent Based on Congressional Budget Office Data Index = Share of Labor Income Share of Total Income Share of Capital Income Source : Congressional Budget Office ( ) | Chapter Table Increase in Income Share Accounted for by Inequality Within Labor Income Top % Top % Top % ( Piketty-Saez ) % % % ( Piketty-Saez ) % % % Income Excluding Capital Gains ( Piketty-Saez ) Income Including Capital Gains % % % ( Piketty-Saez ) % % % ( Piketty-Saez ) % % % ( Piketty-Saez ) % % % Note : Values for any given year calculated as a centered three-year moving average Source : CEA calculations based on Piketty-Saez ( ) and Congressional Budget Office ( ) The higher up the income scale the less important inequality within labor income is in explaining the overall increase in inequality and the commensurately more important the degree of inequality within capital income There is a strong temporal pattern as well with inequality within capital income becoming increasingly important over time. The relevant CBO data only go back to and do not show any finer measurements than the top percent but they tell a similar story both in terms of the overall magnitudes and in terms of within-capital inequality being more important higher up the income scale Inequality within Labor Income The topic of inequality within labor income has been studied extensively. As a factual matter those at the very top of the income distribution ( top percent ) are about percent managers in non-financial industries and about percent financial professionals with the remaining percent spread across law medicine real estate entrepreneurship arts media sports and other occupations ( Bakija Cole and Heim ) A variety of explanations have been put forward for the overall rise in labor income inequality including the increased return to skills especially given technological change the increased national and global reach of corporations the slowdown in increases in educational attainment ( weakening the skill base and earning power of the lower part of the income distribution ) and changes in norms and corporate governance ( such that a wider gap between CEO and worker pay is now acceptable ) The rising importance of unproductive economic rents is likely also contributing to the broad increase in inequality. Workers and managers at firms earning supernormal Inclusive Growth in the United States | return likely reflecting increased aggregate rents are paid progressively more than their counterparts at other firms. Moreover as union membership declines inequality can rise further as workers at the bottom of the income distribution lose market power Inequality within Capital Income A second source of increased inequality is the distribution of capital income. As the distribution of wealth becomes increasingly unequal the returns to that wealth like interest dividends and capital gains will generate more inequality. In addition the fact that those at higher wealth levels seem to receive higher returns to capital when coupled with reductions in tax rates on capital income in recent decades has increased the contribution of capital income to overall inequality. Further if some firms earn monopoly profits owners of those firms may benefit more than others. These issues have been studied much less than labor income inequality though they clearly merit much more attention given their increasing importance over time Division of Income between Labor and Capital Wealth is much more unequally distributed than labor income. As a result the extent to which aggregate income is divided between returns to labor and returns to wealth ( capital income ) matters for aggregate inequality. When the labor share of income falls the offsetting increase in capital income ( returns to wealth ) is distributed especially unequally increasing overall inequality. In Europe the share of income going to labor has been falling since about In contrast a marked decline in the labor share of income occurred only after in the United States though there is some volatility in the data. The relative importance of this factor in the overall increase in inequality is harder to consistently quantify although the importance of labor and capital income inequality in recent decades suggests that it plays only a supporting role Wealth Inequality When unequally distributed income is saved it results in unequally distributed wealth. Growing wealth inequality in the United States reflects many of the trends and many of the same causes as rising income inequality Wealth inequality is particularly difficult to measure accurately because we do not track wealth in the way we do income and trends in wealth inequality are concentrated among a small number of households. One perspective on wealth inequality comes from the Federal Reserve s Survey of Consumer Finances ( SCF ) which as shown in Figure shows that the top percent | Chapter Figure Distribution of Household Wealth ( Survey of Consumer Finances ) Percent of Total Household Wealth Top Percent Bottom Percent Top 4th-10th Percentiles Source : Federal Reserve Board of Governors Survey of Consumer Finances of households have held more than percent of aggregate wealth since ( Bricker et al. ) This share has been on a consistent uptrend since the late 1980s. The next percent of households in the wealth distribution hold roughly percent of aggregate wealth a share that been fairly stable time during this period. Notably the loss in wealth share experienced by the bottom percent of households which in held only percent of all wealth is accounted for by the rise in share captured by the top percent This is not a uniform spreading of the wealth distribution ; it is a rising concentration of wealth at the very top An alternative analysis by Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman finds that the rise in wealth inequality is due to the very top of the wealth distribution. Using capital income reported on tax returns they estimate that the share of wealth held by the top percent of households has more than tripled from percent of total household wealth in to percent in reversing a decline over the prior decades.1 As shown in Figure the wealth share of these households ( approximately families with average net wealth per family above $ million ) is now nearly as large as it was in ( Saez and Zucman ) Any method to measure wealth is imperfect and unlike income individuals are not required to report the value of their wealth each year so there is no administrative data to use as a benchmark for the distribution the two methods discussed here each have their advantages and disadvantages. ( Bricker et al Saez and Zucman ) Inclusive Growth in the United States | Figure Distribution of Household Wealth ( Saez-Zucman ) Percent of Total Household Wealth Bottom Percent Top Percent to Top Percent Top Percent Source : Saez and Zucman ( ) Saez and Zucman argue that this increase in wealth concentration is compounded by an increase in differences in saving rates across wealth classes ( for instance wealthier individuals save a larger percentage of their income ) More generally they hypothesize that income inequality has a snowballing effect on the wealth distribution : a larger share of income is earned by top wealth holders who then save at higher rates which pushes wealth concentration up ; this dynamic leads to rising capital-income concentration and contributes to even greater top income and wealth shares Rising wealth inequality is perhaps best understood as the ultimate outcome of economic growth that leaves the middle class behind. But it is also an important cause of income inequality. In part it directly reinforces itself because concentrated wealth leads to concentrated capital income. But more importantly it helps entrench a broader inequality of opportunity that blocks the path to full economic participation for wide swaths of the potential U.S. labor force and innovation force Inequality of Opportunity The traditional argument that inequality results from normal economic competition rests on the notion that competition for unequally distributed rewards encourages production. But when inequality has become so entrenched that it passes across generations and limits opportunity it | Chapter narrows the pool of human capital that can compete. Such throttling of opportunity is unambiguously bad for growth preventing potential innovators from full economic participation and weighing on productivity growth Further if entrenched interests are able to limit future competition either by influencing the policymaking process or by abusing their market power dynamism in labor markets or firm entry can decrease. While some level of income and wealth inequality can play a constructive role the implications of unevenly distributed opportunity are simpler working the wrong way for both equity and efficiency While inequality of opportunity is an international phenomenon it is especially important in the United States. Mishel et al. ( ) based on data from Corak ( ) assembles a set of intergenerational earnings elasticities across large advanced economies with similar incomes to the United States The intergenerational earnings elasticity reflects the extent to which the earnings of parents and children are correlated the higher the elasticity the less mobile the society. Such mobility can be understood as a measure of the inequality of opportunity. If children at all income levels faced the same set of opportunities one might expect a lower elasticity. Among the peer countries identified by Mishel the United States ranks in the top half as shown in Figure Other measures of mobility support the observation : Raj Chetty has found that a child born in the 1980s to parents in the bottom percent of the income distribution has only a percent chance of moving to the top percent. A similar child has a percent chance in Denmark and a percent chance in Canada ( Chetty ) It is important to understand the forms that this inequality of opportunity takes and to explore the institutional structures that entrench the pattern. Three particular examples that the Council of Economic Advisers has recently explored in a series of reports include the experience of children in low-income families inequities in the criminal justice system and the systemic challenges faced by women in the U.S. economy. The President has a robust agenda to promote equality of opportunity for all Americans detailed extensively later in this chapter Children in Low-Income Families Barriers to opportunity take many forms but those that appear early in life for children and youth are particularly costly to society as their impacts accumulate over many years shaping adolescents and young adults during their critical transition to adulthood beyond. Moreover there is evidence that in recent decades family income has become more important in shaping children s outcomes. Chapter of this Report focuses on Inclusive Growth in the United States | Figure Intergenerational Earnings Mobility Elasticity Between Earnings of Fathers and Sons Less Earnings Mobility More Earnings Mobility Source : Mishel et al. ( ) ; Corak ( ) the particular challenges facing children and the policies that can improve outcomes for them Parents socioeconomic status can produce an inequality of opportunity via a number of channels. Financial expenditure is one obvious pathway. As income inequality has grown so has inequality in child-related expenditures. Parents in the top income quintile now spend seven times more on children s materials and enrichment activities such as books computers summer camps and music lessons than families in the bottom income quintile and other research suggests that this inequality in expenditure has grown over time ( Duncan and Murnane ) A family s socioeconomic status can also impact a child s chances through housing stability and neighborhood conditions food security and access to medical care as well as in the types of activities that parents participate in with their children. Sustained exposure to the toxic stresses of poverty during childhood can prevent children from achieving their potential exacerbating later-life income inequality and limiting national economic growth Criminal Justice The criminal justice system is plagued with inequalities of opportunity both along racial lines and along income lines in the form of monetary payments such as fines fees and bail. The dramatic rise in incarceration | Chapter over the past several decades has been distributed unequally disproportionately impacting low-income households and minorities. In the majority of State and Federal prisoners were White ; but by over percent of sentenced prisoners were minorities ( Minor-Harper ; Carson ) Even when there is little difference in the likelihood of committing a crime individuals of color are much more likely to be arrested. For example an African-American individual is nearly four times as likely as a White individual to be arrested for marijuana possession even though individuals of both races reported using marijuana at similar rates in ( ACLU ) Different rates of interaction with the criminal justice system by income and race can create substantial barriers to economic success limiting opportunity for many The expanding use of monetary penalties fines fees and bails also disproportionately impact poor defendants and offenders who have fewer resources available to manage criminal justice debt. Financial penalties also serve as a regressive form of punishment as the same level of debt presents an increasingly larger burden as one moves down the income scale. Such systemic challenges limit the opportunities available to low-income families preventing them from full participation in our economy ( CEA 2015a ) Women in the Economy Over the last five decades women have made enormous strides in the U.S. labor market. Our economy is $ trillion or percent larger than it would have been without women s increased participation in the labor force and hours worked since ( CEA ) Although the United States was initially a leader in bringing women into the labor force our progress has stalled somewhat over the past or years. In the United States ranked seventh in female prime-age ( ) labor force participation out of advanced economies for which data is available but in the United States fell to 20th place ( OECD ) Part of the explanation may be that the United States lags behind many of its peer countries in terms of pro-family policies like paid leave requirements that ease the burden on working families Moreover women in the labor force face a persistent wage gap. The typical woman working full-time full-year earns percent less than the typical man. In addition while the pay gap closed by percentage points between and it has remained flat since In the past two years some modest progress has been made with the gap closing by percentage point from to and by an additional percentage point between and The wage gap has many causes and contributors including gender Inclusive Growth in the United States | gaps in education and experience ; differences in choices of occupation and industry ; decisions about family responsibilities ; and discrimination The Interplay of the Forms of Inequality These three forms of inequality discussed above are not conceptually distinct phenomena they closely affect one another. Wealth inequality is in some respects an outcome of income inequality as the saving of unequally distributed income produces unequally distributed wealth. But inequality of opportunity is in many ways both a cause and a result of income and wealth inequality. Therefore unequally distributed opportunities entrench an unequal income distribution and an unequal income distribution leads to many of the inequities faced by low-income and low-wealth children The Great Gatsby curve a term introduced by former CEA Chair Alan Krueger illustrates the relationship between income inequality and inequality of opportunity. When plotted across counties or across countries Figures 1-6a and 1-6b shows that areas with more income inequality also tend to have less mobility for children from low-income families. This relationship also holds across large advanced economies The Great Gatsby curve shows that inequality is correlated with lower mobility and one important transmission mechanism is the distribution of opportunity. When disparities in education training social connection and the criminal justice system are distributed as unequally as overall wealth poorer families have a much harder time succeeding in the economy Sources of Inequality : Competitive Markets and Economic Rents Classical economics suggests that income inequality is a product of competitive markets with income differences reflecting pure productivity differences. Under this view inequality encourages growth by rewarding the most productive labor and the highest-returning capital. But recently economists and commentators have suggested that much of the rise in inequality can be explained by the rising importance of economic rents Recent work by the Council of Economic Advisers has focused on the influence of economic rents or their division in the labor market ( CEA 2015c ) in the housing sector ( Furman 2015a ) in occupational licensing ( Furman 2015b ) and in the broader capital markets ( Furman and Orszag ) The long-term trend of rising inequality is sufficiently large that multiple forces are likely playing a part. While there is truth to the competitive markets view that an unequal distribution of income compensation for | Chapter Figure 1-6a The " Great Gatsby Curve " Within the United States Upward Mobility Less Upward Mobility More Inequality Inequality ( Gini Coefficient for Parent Family Income ) Note : U.S. commuting zones were ordered by Gini coefficient and divided into equally sized bins. Each blue dot represents a single bin. Upward mobility reflects the mean percentile in the national income distribution for those individuals in each bin whose parents were at the 25th percentile of the national income distribution between and Source : CEA calculations based on Chetty ( ) Figure 1-6b The " Great Gatsby Curve " Across Countries Upward Mobility ( Inverted Intergenerational Earnings Elasticity ) Finland Denmark Norway Sweden Germany France New Zealand Japan Less Upward Mobility United Kingdom More Inequality Inequality ( Gini Coefficient ) United States Note : Intergenerational earnings elasticity is measured as the elasticity between a father 's earnings and their son s adult earnings. The children studied were born during the early to mid 1960s and their adult income was measured in the mid to late 1990s Source : Corak ( ) ; OECD Inclusive Growth in the United States | differences in productivity there is also evidence of rents complicating the income-productivity link. This Report considers each channel in turn The Competitive Channel The traditional economic explanation of inequality is grounded in competitive markets wherein workers receive wages commensurate with their productivity. According to this explanation a combination of skillbiased technological change a slowdown in the increase in educational attainment and globalization have increased the demand for highly skilled workers at the same time that their relative supply has not kept pace resulting in higher wages for these high-productivity workers and greater inequality Skill-Biased Technological Change Many economists have pointed to the role of technology in increasing inequality ( Autor ) This argument asserts that technology can most readily replace labor in tasks that are easily automated which tend to involve routine tasks that place them in the middle of the skill and wage distributions. Over time employment moves to both the lower and higher ends of the occupational skill ranking as shown in Figure where occupations are ranked by average wage as a proxy for skill. While technology is a better replacement for tasks that are easy to routinize it complements the abilities of highly skilled workers and improves their productivity thereby increasing their earnings and employment opportunities. Lower-skilled workers are not necessarily made more productive but neither are they easily replaced as their jobs often include interpersonal interactions and variable situations that are difficult to automate. Taken together this view of the role of technology points to both rising inequality and rising job polarization Educational Attainment The increase in skill-biased technological change has been compounded by a slowdown in the rate of increase in educational attainment Schooling attainment rose for much of the 20th century in part due to measures like the G.I. Bill the expansion of high schools and community colleges and greater educational attainment by women. However growth in years of schooling slowed substantially around The rate of growth in the college-educated population fell by almost percent from percent a year between and to percent per year between and according to estimates by Lawrence Katz and Claudia Goldin While the pool of skilled workers is still growing in recent decades it has | Chapter Figure Change in Employment by Detailed Occupation Change in Total Employment Millions Service Occupations Except Protective and Household Teachers Except Postsecondary Technicians and Related Support Occupations Executive Administrative and Managerial Occupations ManagementRelated Occupations Machine Operators $ $ Secretaries Stenographers and Typists $ $ $ Average Hourly Wage ( in Dollars ) $ Note : Excludes five occupational categories with outlying wages and relatively small changes in employment ( Farm Occupations Except Managerial ; Private Household Occupations ; Engineers Architects and Surveyors ; Lawyers and Judges ; and Health Diagnosing Occupations ) Average wages exclude individuals who are self-employed who have real wages below $ or greater than $ ( in dollars ) or whose wages are imputed. Top-coded earnings are adjusted following Lemieux ( ) and all wages are adjusted for inflation using the CPI-U-RS Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations grown at a slower rate than has the demand for these workers increasing the wage premium that more educated workers command and thus raising inequality Globalization Other economists have pointed to the rapid rise in globalization that has occurred since the 1980s as a potential explanation for growing inequality within the United States especially the expansion of trade with China since ( Greater globalization also coincided with a shift in national income shares from labor to capital a worldwide phenomenon. ) Economic theory predicts that such trade may have some effect on wages for lowskilled workers in the United States who now face more competition from low-skilled Chinese workers while reducing wages for high-skilled workers in China who now face more competition from high-skilled American workers. But some evidence militates in the other direction. For example the returns to education have increased in a wide range of countries over the last several decades including many relatively poor countries. This suggests either that some other more-subtle globalization explanation is operative or alternatively that the technology/education explanations are even more important than the globalization explanation Inclusive Growth in the United States | To some extent some of these forces like skill-biased technological change and globalization reflect the type of desirable economic progress that promotes productivity growth. But that competitive channel works best when the competition is open to the broadest pool of potential labor and investable capital. Public policy is therefore critical to ensuring that the competitive channel works well in part by providing a cushion for those disadvantaged by the system such as providing job retraining unemployment insurance robust Social Security access to health care and other policies for which the President has advocated. But government also has an important role in reducing the inequality of opportunity that creates barriers to success for some groups and thus limits the pool of workers who can successfully compete in the labor market As important as these forces are the competitive channel does not appear to explain the full rise in income inequality in recent decades Indeed as mentioned earlier there is evidence that an especially unproductive element is at work the rising influence of economic rents and their distribution The Rents Channel Many economists have recently advanced an explanation of inequality grounded in the importance of economic rents the notion that investors or highly compensated workers are receiving more income than they would require to undertake their production or work. Classic examples of such rents include monopoly profits and the unearned benefits of preferential government regulation. Rents can result from abuses of market power and tend to encourage rent-seeking behavior the unproductive use of resources to capture such rewards According to this view the unequal distribution of these rents rather than the conventional explanation that inequality reflects only actual differences in worker productivity or the allocation of capital is an important cause of rising income inequality. To the degree that this interpretation is correct it suggests that it is possible to reduce inequality without hurting efficiency by changing how the rents are divided or even while increasing efficiency by acting to reduce these rents. There is relatively little academic literature on this question and data are scarce since rents can not be directly observed but considerable evidence appears to support the notion that rents are exacerbating inequality It is important to note that not all economic rents are undesirable For example in a perfectly competitive market the price settles at a level below that which some buyers would be willing to pay and above that which some sellers would be willing to accept. The rents collected by these buyers | Chapter and sellers consumer and producer surplus are widely considered one of the chief benefits of market competition. In addition temporary monopoly power that guarantees rents for a firm can be an incentive for additional innovation one of the goals of our patent system. Nevertheless growing rents the increasingly unequal division of rents between workers and firms and rent-seeking behavior are often highly problematic and appear to have become more so in recent decades ( Furman and Orszag ) The Division of Rents in Wage Negotiations : Declining Unionization and the Minimum Wage Whenever a firm hires a worker the difference between the highest wage the firm would pay and the lowest wage the worker would accept is the surplus created by the job match an economic rent. The division of that rent between firm and work depends on their relative bargaining power. As markets grow concentrated and certain forms of labor are commoditized the balance of bargaining power leans toward the firm. Unionization and collective bargaining along with policies like the minimum wage help level the playing field concentrating labor and encouraging the firm to share those rents with labor. This process traditionally helped bolster the wages of lower- and middle-wage workers thereby reducing inequality But union membership has declined consistently since the 1970s as shown in Figure Approximately a quarter of all U.S. workers belonged to a union in but by union membership had dropped to just below percent of total employment roughly the same level as the mid-1930s. In some states just percent of workers belong to unions ( CEA 2015c ) Research suggests that declining unionization accounts for between a fifth and a third of the increase in inequality since the 1970s ( Western and Rosenfeld ) Other research shows that union workers have higher wages than their nonunion counterparts with unions raising wages by up to percent for their workers compared with similar nonunion workers ( Boskin ) Unions also increase the likelihood workers have access to benefits and work under safe conditions Of course other specific policies can help promote wage growth by affecting the division of economic rents. The minimum wage is one such policy geared to those workers with the very-least bargaining power. A minimum wage protects some workers from having their lack of bargaining power exploited by firms in the wage negotiation helping direct some of the rents from their job match to the workers themselves. But the real value of the minimum wage has declined [ ] percent over the past three decades losing its ability to protect workers in parallel with declining unionization Inclusive Growth in the United States | Figure U.S. Union Membership & Top Percent Income Share Percent Top Percent Share of Income Troy and Sheflin ( ) CPS : Membership Note : Union membersahip is expressed as a percent of total employment. Total employment from to is derived from estimates in Weir ( ) For to employment data are annual averages from the monthly Current Population Survey Source : Troy and Sheflin ( ) ; Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; Weir ( ) ; World Wealth and Income Database ; CEA calculations Greater support for collective bargaining and the minimum wage are both policies that can help address the increasingly unequal division of economic rents promoting stronger wage growth and reduced inequality and to the degree that such policies are about changing the divisions of rents they need not reduce efficiency. In some respects like improving worker s voice and motivation such policies can actually boost efficiency Some Evidence for the Growth of Aggregate Rents The challenge is not just that the division of rents is changing based on comparative bargaining power. Moreover the economic structure appears to be generating greater rents and tilting these toward profits and profitable firms Corporate Profits and Interest Rates One important piece of evidence that rents are on the rise is the divergence of rising corporate profits and declining real interest rates. In the absence of economic rents corporate profits should generally follow the path of interest rates which reflect the prevailing return to capital in the economy. But over the past three decades corporate profits have risen as interest rates have fallen as shown in Figure This suggests that some corporate profits could reflect an increase in the economic rents collected by corporations not a pure return to capital. Of course this divergence can | Chapter Percent Figure Corporate Profits and Real Interest Rates Corporate Profits as Share of Gross Domestic Income 1-Year Real U.S Treasury Rate Note : Corporate profits for are an average of the first three quarters of the year. The real U.S. Treasury rate is defined as the nominal constant-maturity rate estimated by the Federal Reserve less realized inflation defined by the Consumer Price Index Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Federal Reserve Percent Figure Return on Invested Capital Excluding Goodwill U.S. Publicly-Traded Nonfinancial Firms 90th Percentile 75th Percentile Median 25th Percentile Note : The return on invested capital definition is based on Koller et al ( ) and the data presented here are updated and augmented versions of the figures presented in Chapter of that volume. The McKinsey data includes McKinsey analysis of Standard & Poor s data and exclude financial firms from the analysis because of the practical complexities of computing returns on invested capital for such firms Source : Koller et al. ( ) ; McKinsey & Company ; Furman and Orszag ( ) Inclusive Growth in the United States | Table Change in Market Concentration by Sector Industry Percentage Point Change in Revenue Share Earned by Largest Firms Transportation and Warehousing Finance and Insurance Utilities Educational Services Retail Trade Real Estate Rental and Leasing Wholesale Trade Accommodation and Food Services Professional Scientific and Technical Services Administrative/ Support Other Services Non-Public Admin Health Care and Assistance Arts Entertainment and Recreation Note : Concentration ratio data is displayed for all North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) sectors for which data is available from to Source : Census Bureau be affected by other factors such as credit risk but such factors are unlikely to explain the full gap Market Concentration and the Distribution of Profits Another piece of evidence for the rising importance of rents is increased market concentration across a number of industries. Table shows that the share of revenue earned by the largest firms increased across most industries between and This observation complements a range of studies that find increasing concentration in air travel telecommunications banking food-processing and other sectors of the economy Increased concentration may play a role in the strikingly large and growing disparity in return to invested capital across major corporations ( Furman and Orszag ) As shown in Figure the returns earned by firms at the 90th percentile are now more than six times larger than those of the median firm up from less than three times larger in Occupational Licensing There is also evidence of increased rent-seeking in the requirement of a government-issued license to be employed in certain professions ( occupational licensing ) As documented in Kleiner and Krueger ( ) the share of the U.S. workforce covered by state licensing laws grew five-fold in the | Chapter Percent Figure Share of Workers with a State Occupational License 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s Source : Council of State Governments ( ) ; Greene ( ) ; Kleiner ( ) ; Kleiner ( ) ; and Kleiner and Krueger ( ) Westat data ; CEA calculations second half of the 20th century from less than percent in the early 1950s to percent by as shown in Figure Although state licenses account for the bulk of licensing the addition of locally and Federally licensed occupations further raises the share of the workforce that is licensed to percent While licensing can play an important role in protecting consumer health and safety there is evidence that some licensing requirements create economic rents for licensed practitioners at the expense of excluded workers and consumers increasing inefficiency and potentially also increasing inequality. First the employment barriers created by licensing raise wages for those who are successful in gaining entry to a licensed occupation by restricting employment in the licensed profession and lowering wages for excluded workers. Estimates find that unlicensed workers earn to 15-percent lower wages than licensed workers with similar levels of education training and experience ( Kleiner and Krueger ) Second research finds that more restrictive licensing laws lead to higher prices for goods and services in many cases for lower-income households while the quality health and safety benefits do not always materialize ( Kleiner ) Finally some state-specific licensing requirements create unnecessary barriers to entry for out-of-state licensed practitioners reducing mobility across state lines ( Johnson and Kleiner ) Inclusive Growth in the United States | Housing and Land-Use Restrictions There is evidence that land-use regulation may also play a role in the presence of increased economic rents. Such regulation in the housing market can serve legitimate welfare-enhancing purposes such as restrictions that prohibit industrial activities from occurring alongside or within residential neighborhoods or limitations on the size of a dwelling due to a fragile local water supply. But when excessive and primarily geared toward protecting the interests of current landowners including their property values landuse regulations decrease housing affordability and reduce nationwide productivity and growth. These are impacts detailed in Chapters and of this Report respectively. The presence of rents in the housing market moreover may also restrict labor mobility and exacerbate inequality One main indication that land-use regulation gives rise to economic rents is that in the aggregate real house prices are higher than real construction costs and this differential has increased since at least the early 1980s as shown in Figure In fact Glaeser Gyourko and Saks ( ) find that more stringent land-use regulations have driven house price appreciation in excess of construction costs since before which time quality improvements actually drove much of the price increases. Further in a large and growing set of U.S. cities including major population centers such as New York and Los Angeles and high-productivity cities like San Francisco home prices are usually at least percent above construction costs. ( Glaeser and Gyourko ) In addition rental payments in the housing market in these areas often rise faster than wages The Interplay of Inequality and Growth The relationship between inequality and growth continues to be the subject of much debate in the economics literature. The traditional finding for canonical policy responses to inequality like progressive taxation and income support for low-income households is that there is a tradeoff between equity and efficiency the famous leaky bucket coined by Arthur Okun ( ) There has also been a long-standing macroeconomic debate about the consequences of inequality with one traditional view being that more inequality leads to more savings by high-income households and thus a higher level of output ( Duesenberry ) The current theory and evidence at both a micro and macro level is considerably more ambiguous than these traditional views and suggests a number of mechanisms by which inequality can be harmful to growth. As discussed above one clear-cut example is that to the degree that inequality is | Chapter Figure Real Construction Costs and House Prices Index = Real House Prices Real Construction Costs Source : Gyourko and Molloy ( ) generated by anti-competitive rents then fostering greater competition has the potential to improve both equity and efficiency simultaneously But even with respect to inequality that stems from competitive markets the relationship between such inequality and output is unclear. While there are no doubt respects in which such inequality can help motivate additional innovation and growth a range of new research has also emphasized that there are a number of ways through which inequality may in fact constrain economic growth. This literature starts from the observation that the traditional emphasis on the quantity of capital even if true is dwarfed by the importance of the quality of capital technology and entrepreneurship. In particular this approach emphasizes a number of ways by which inequality could harm growth : ( ) by reducing access to the education necessary for the full population to reach its full potential ; ( ) by reducing entrepreneurship and risk-taking ; ( ) by undermining the trust necessary for a decentralized market economy and by increasing monitoring costs ; and ( ) by leading to increased political instability growth-reducing policies and uncertainty ( Ostry Berg and Tsangarides ) In keeping with this much recent microeconomic evidence finds important exceptions to the leaky bucket. For example as discussed in Chapter a number of anti-poverty programs focused on children have Inclusive Growth in the United States | been shown to increase incomes in later life illustrating the importance of the educational channel between inequality and growth It is impossible to have the same degree of confidence about causation at the macroeconomic level as at the microeconomic level. There are no comparable natural experiments and the causality between inequality and growth clearly runs in both directions. Nevertheless the fact that several recent papers have found that inequality is harmful to growth suggests at a minimum that it is unlikely that there is a substantial tradeoff between equality and growth For example cross-country analysis from Jonathan Ostry Andrew Berg and Charalambos Tsangarides at the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) provides better evidence of the harm done by inequality and the lack of harm done by progressive policies. The IMF study finds that inequality decreases both the magnitude and sustainability of growth and that progressive redistributive policies alone are neutral for the magnitude and sustainability of growth ( with a small caveat that very large amounts of redistribution those policies that redistribute above the 75th percentile of income could have a small negative effect on growth ) The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) also found associations between higher inequality and reduced growth across OECD member countries ( Cingano ) The OECD focused on inequality of opportunity particularly disparities in education as the chief transmission mechanism of inequality s restraint on growth Ultimately the link between growth and inequality at an aggregate level is ambiguous not admitting a single direction for all countries at all times and all types of inequality. Rather the most important question is the one that policymakers face when they have the opportunity to address these trends on the margins : What are the policies that address inequality in a relatively efficient manner ? Policies to Promote Inclusive Growth As economists understanding of the relationship between growth and inequality evolves it is critical to choose economic policies that can unleash growth in an inclusive manner along with those policies that can reduce inequality in an efficient manner. Analysis of the various forms and sources of inequality in the United States can help to elucidate the mechanisms by which certain pro-growth policies can reduce inequality through either the competitive channel or the rents channel. Policies that promote inclusive growth can be grouped in four categories : those that strengthen aggregate demand in general ; those that make the competitive channel work better by | Chapter promoting equality of opportunity ; those that reduce unproductive inequality by reducing inefficient rents and rent-seeking behavior ; and those that help better protect workers and their families from the consequences of inequality while in many cases also serving as a springboard for upward mobility. The President s agenda for middle-class economics includes a range of policies along each of these dimensions Strengthening Aggregate Demand When an economy operates below its full potential pro-growth policies that help to close the output gap naturally combat inequality. Indeed unemployment or sub-optimal employment is a form of inequality itself resulting in zero or insufficient labor earnings for a subset of workers. The same macroeconomic policies usually employed to boost growth and return the economy to full employment can unambiguously reduce this cyclical form of income inequality Aggressive demand management strategies implemented by the United States can in this context also be seen as distributional policies. Part of the U.S. response to the global financial crisis involved massive support to low-income households via the fiscal expansion in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of and extended unemployment insurance among other programs. While fiscal expansion and accommodative monetary policy worked to boost aggregate incomes their principal goal was the restoration of income to those who found themselves out of work during the crisis Additionally a lower unemployment rate one important effect of boosting aggregate demand can help increase wages and draw marginalized workers back into the labor force. Rising labor demand and higher wages can also encourage workers to upgrade their skills and education Therefore a tight labor market can have substantial advantages for workers particularly those at the bottom of the economic ladder making a strong economy an important tool for fighting inequality Moreover weak aggregate demand can have long-lasting effects Many unemployed workers receive lower incomes for years to come even after finding a job ; the other side of these potentially long-lasting reductions in earnings is the possibility of long-run scarring in the economy and persistently lower output in the years after a recession ends. That is why continuing to support stronger growth a low unemployment rate and expanded labor force participation remains a critical goal of Administration policy The need for such policies was closely aligned across countries in the immediate wake of the recent crisis. Today many advanced economies find themselves at different stages of the business cycle. However as sub-par Inclusive Growth in the United States | wage growth manifests itself as a global phenomenon it is clear that most of the industrialized world remains below full employment underscoring the continued need for appropriate demand-management strategies Promoting Equality of Opportunity The competitive channel of inequality works best when that competition is open to the largest pool of potential labor and investable capital so it depends upon equality of opportunity that allows all Americans to participate in the economy to their full potential. Education and training are critical in this respect. To that end the President put forward a plan to increase access to child care for working families while investing billions of dollars in quality early learning and preschool programs to help our youngest learners succeed especially those from low-income families. The Administration has provided unprecedented resources and worked with business leaders state and local governments and others to align job training programs with labor market demand and the President signed the bipartisan Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act ( WIOA ) the first legislative reform of Federal job training programs in nearly years which will improve business engagement accountability access and alignment across job training employment service and adult education programs. Moreover the President continues to lead a movement to make community college free for responsible students. All of these steps help increase the supply of skilled workers allowing more people to take advantage of the returns to skills while also increasing the relative demand for unskilled workers driving up their wages and reducing the dispersion of incomes In addition an important element of opportunity is giving everyone the opportunity to participate in the workforce if they choose to and it makes sense given their family situation. The President supports a range of policies to boost labor force participation including promoting access to paid leave and paid sick days to help encourage Americans to join the labor force ; promoting greater access to high-quality child care ; reforming taxes to make work more attractive for secondary earners ; and helping provide training programs and other assistance finding jobs Reducing Market Power Concentration and Rent-Seeking Behavior To the degree that rising aggregate rents stemming from growing market power are contributing to increased inequality then changing the balance of that power or fostering more competitive markets will increase efficiency while reducing inequality. Policies like a minimum wage and greater support for collective bargaining can help level the playing field for workers in negotiations with employers. Because such policies only change | Chapter the division of rents they can reduce inequality without necessarily reducing overall welfare. In fact when appropriately tailored they can foster the previously discussed growth benefits of a better-paid workforce like greater access to education and increased entrepreneurship Heightened antitrust enforcement rationalizing licensing requirements for employment reducing zoning and other land use restrictions and appropriately balancing intellectual property regimes all can help reduce excessive rents. Firms with extensive market power can take many anticompetitive actions that generate inefficient rents. Often there are existing regulations prohibiting such behavior. A robust enforcement regime for the regulations that fight rent-seeking can therefore improve efficiency and inequality at the same time Finally to the degree that rent-seeking warps regulations policymakers should reduce the ability of people or corporations to seek rents successfully through political reforms and other steps to reduce the influence of regulatory lobbying. Much like the first two channels policies that reduce these rents can also increase efficiency while reducing inequality Protecting Families Against the Consequences of Inequality While Fostering Mobility A progressive tax system combined with important benefits that exist today like unemployment insurance and the Affordable Care Act and new proposals the President has made like wage insurance can help both reduce inequality and protect the people who get an unlucky draw in a given year or over time. In many cases such policies do not just affect after-tax incomes but also help increase before-tax incomes over time. The Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) for example has been shown to increase labor force participation by single mothers raising their earnings and their aftertax income ( Liebman ) Moreover a growing body of economic research has helped confirm that programs to support low-income families can not only strengthen the position of the families themselves but also have important benefits for long-term productivity ( Brown Kowalski and Lurie ; Hoynes Schanzenbach and Almond ; Chetty Friedman and Rockoff ) Indeed the link between growth and equality is especially apparent at the lower end of the income distribution where the unequal distribution of opportunity is most important Economists have evaluated the long-term benefits of historical government programs targeted toward low-income families in the United States. Compared with similar children who received no support children from families who received temporary income support at the start of the Inclusive Growth in the United States | 20th century saw higher wages more education and lower mortality with benefits from a few years of income support lasting for years or more ( Aizer Eli and Ferrie ) The U.S. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program formerly known as the Food Stamp Program ; the EITC one of the government s largest tools to reduce child poverty ; and Medicaid the health program for low-income Americans have all been shown to have similar benefits ( CEA 2015b ) Greater education lower mortality and lower crime rates do not just benefit the affected individual but also support productivity and potential growth in the aggregate. Many of these policies would also strengthen labor force participation. When the public sector makes important investments in supporting the most disadvantaged families there are clear benefits to aggregate growth Conclusion : The Economic Report of the President Middle-class incomes are driven by productivity growth labor force participation and the equality of outcomes. As the U.S. economy moves beyond the recovery from the financial crisis our policy stance should focus on promoting each of those factors to foster inclusive growth. This year s Economic Report of the President considers several elements of the inclusive growth agenda. Chapter begins by reviewing the United States macroeconomic progress in and considering the outlook for the years to come and Chapter focuses on the United States progress in a global context Chapter focuses on one especially important element of the inequality of opportunity discussed in this chapter the particular economic challenges low-income children face. Chapters and consider two key elements of productivity growth on which American businesses and policymakers should focus even more closely : technological innovation and infrastructure investment. Finally Chapter concludes with a retrospective look at the institutional structure and history of the President s Council of Economic Advisers on its 70th anniversary | Chapter C H A P T E R THE YEAR IN REVIEW AND THE YEARS AHEAD T he U.S. economy continued to grow in as the recovery extended into its seventh year with widespread growth in domestic demand strong gains in labor markets and real wages and low inflation. Real gross domestic product ( GDP ) increased percent during the four quarters of the year down from 2.5-percent growth during and In residential investment led the growth in demand while consumer spending again rose solidly. Business fixed investment growth slowed from earlier in the recovery and increased at about the same pace as real GDP. Weak growth among our foreign trading partners restrained exports and government purchases increased modestly after falling for most of the preceding five years Over the course of the economy added million jobs completing the strongest two years of job growth since In December private-sector employment had grown for consecutive months the longest stretch of uninterrupted job gains on record with a total of million jobs added. During nonfarm job growth averaged a month a somewhat more moderate pace than during but similar to the strong pace of the three preceding years. The unemployment rate fell percentage point during the months through December after falling a percentage point a year on average during the three preceding years ( Figure ) Inflation remained low with consumer price inflation ( CPI ) at only percent during the months of reflecting a sharp decline in oil prices Core CPI which excludes food and energy increased percent above the year-earlier rate of percent. Real average hourly earnings of production and nonsupervisory workers rose percent over the months of as nominal wage growth exceeded price inflation Challenges remain for including uncertain prospects for global growth constraints posed by slowing trend growth in the labor force due to demographic shifts and the yet incomplete labor market recovery. Turmoil Figure Unemployment Rate Percent Dec-2015 Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey in stock markets around the world and further sharp declines in oil prices in early underscore the risks facing the U.S. economy ; in particular in the energy-producing and export-intensive sectors. And yet the labor market continues to recover with the unemployment rate declining to percent in January its lowest level since February The economic recovery in recent years has differed across labor and output measures. The labor market continued to strengthen and by the end of the unemployment rate had fallen to half its recessionary peak but real output growth at percent during the four quarters of was slower than its pace in recent years. As a consequence labor productivity measured as real output-per-hour in the nonfarm sector has grown more slowly than its long-term trend thus far during this business cycle. The labor force participation rate has fallen largely due to the baby-boom cohorts moving into retirement but some of the decline represents the continuation of the decades-long downward trend in the participation of prime-age males as well as the decline in participation of prime-age females since While real GDP grew moderately during the quarterly pace of economic growth was uneven. First-quarter growth ( 0.6-percent annual rate ) was held down by a labor dispute at the West coast ports and unusually | Chapter cold weather.1 The economy rebounded in the second quarter growing at a 3.9-percent annual rate followed by more steady growth of percent in the third quarter. Growth slowed again in the fourth quarter to percent at an annual rate weighed down by declines in inventory investment and exports The price of oil as measured by the spot price of European light crude oil from the North Sea ( known as Brent ) fell to $ per barrel at the end of December about a third of its level in June ( Figure ) The oil-price decline from mid-2014 to the end of reflected both increased global supply of oil including rising production in the United States Saudi Arabia and Iraq and slower global economic growth. It is difficult to precisely separate the role of supply and demand but the comparison to non-energy commodity prices highlights the mix of factors affecting oil prices. Non-energy commodity prices also declined over this period a sign of weakening global demand. But the non-energy commodity price decline of about percent was considerably less than the about 65-percent decline in oil prices pointing to the role of oil supply in lowering prices. Lower oil prices affect the U.S. economy through numerous channels ( CEA ) On balance CEA estimates that lower oil prices directly boosted real GDP growth by percentage point during despite the adverse impacts on domestic energy producers and manufacturers that sell to the energy sector ( see Box ) Relatedly the decline in oil prices noticeably held down price inflation and supported real income growth in Oil and commodity prices continued to fall sharply in early and are likely to continue to affect consumers and energy producers Foreign growth slowed markedly in particularly in China and other emerging-market economies with the International Monetary Fund s ( IMF ) October report estimating that world year-over-year growth was percent in the slowest rate of global growth since ( see Chapter for more discussion ) Spillovers from the slowing pace of China s growth affected many commodity-exporting countries. Slowing foreign growth sharply reduced U.S. exports as the growth rate of our trade partners was percentage points lower during the four quarters ending in : Q3 ( the latest available data ) than during the year earlier period Three snowstorms occurred during : Q1 that were so severe that the National Climate Data Center rated them in the Northeast Snowfall Impact Scale ( NESIS ) NESIS scores are a function of the area affected by the snowstorm the amount of snow and the number of people living in the path of the storm ( Kocin and Uccellini ) During the years on record : Q1 was only the fourth time that a quarter was impacted by three or more NESIS-rated storms The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Oil and Commodity Prices Index ( Jun-2014 = ) Non-Energy Commodities Dec-2015 Oil Jan-2014 Jul-2014 Jan-2015 Jul-2015 Note : Displayed oil price is the Brent average monthly spot price Source : Energy Information Administration ; Financial Times ; Standard & Poor 's Jan-2016 Policy Developments Fiscal Policy Fiscal restraint in the United States continued in fiscal year ( FY ) with the Federal budget deficit falling percentage point to percent of GDP the lowest level since and below the average over the last years. The deficit as a share of GDP has fallen by about three-fourths since the most rapid six-year deficit reduction since the demobilization after World War II ( Figure ) The additional deficit reduction in was through automatic stabilizers such as the increase in tax collections as income rises and was much less severe than the percentage point a year decline in the deficit-to-GDP ratio during the three preceding years when changes in tax or spending policy were the primary driver The two-year Bipartisan Budget Act of passed in December helped provide fiscal-policy stability during FY and FY Since that time a series of agreements most recently the Bipartisan Budget Act of have avoided a Federal shutdown partly relieved automatic Federal spending cuts known as sequestration and relaxed the Federal debt limit. Government purchases including consumption and gross investment at the Federal as well as State and local levels added modestly to overall | Chapter Box : Impact of Oil Price Declines on Spending and Production The United States is a net importer of oil so a decline in oil prices is generally expected to boost domestic real income and lower incomes in countries that are net exporters of oil such as Saudi Arabia and Russia Yet U.S. net oil imports have fallen percent in the last ten years due to both greater domestic production and lower consumption so the U.S economy is less sensitive to oil price movements today than in the past Moreover the direct impact of oil price changes on energy consumers and energy producers moves in opposite directions. The overall impact of oil price changes also depends on the sources of those price changes.1 For example if oil prices fall due to lower demand in a weakening global economy this is likely to also coincide with a reduction in U.S. GDP growth but it would be incorrect to infer that the oil price decline itself hurt U.S. GDP growth. In contrast if the price of oil falls due to an increase in oil supply such as from technological advances in oil extraction or improving geopolitical conditions in oil producing countries lower oil prices would tend to increase U.S. GDP. This box analyzes the direct impact of the fall in the price of oil from mid-2014 to late on the U.S. economy an exercise that is most informative when the oil price declines are driven primarily by an increase in oil supply Overall CEA estimates as shown in Table 2-i that the decline in oil prices had the direct impact of boosting real GDP growth by percentage point during and percentage point during Considerable uncertainty surrounds these estimates of the direct effects of the oil price decline and moreover these estimates exclude indirect effects The boost to output and consumption from lower oil prices is largely due to the lower cost of imported oil. U.S. net imports of petroTable 2-i Estimated Impact of Oil Price Declines on Output Growth ( Q4-to-Q4 ) Total Impact Contribution from : Consumption ( via imported-oil savings ) Drilling and mining investment Cumulative Level Source : CEA calculations ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Energy Information Administration See also Hamilton ( ) and Kilian ( ) for differing empirical assessments of the source of oil price shocks since the mid-1970s and how oil price shocks have affected the economy The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | leum and products averaged billion barrels per year in and so each $ per barrel decline in the price of imports saved the U.S. economy about $ billion per year or about percent of nominal GDP. In as a whole the United States spent about $ billion less on net imported oil than if prices had stayed at their mid-2014 level. In total the net transfer of income to the United States depends on how much oil prices decline and how long those low prices persist. These savings are spread across all oil-using sectors especially consumers for whom lower gasoline prices freed up income for other purchases. It may take time for consumers to make those additional purchases so the timing of the additional spending may lag the declines in oil prices. In fact the personal saving rate moved up around the start of when oil prices declined rapidly but then consumer spending grew strongly in the middle of the year. As oil prices declined sharply in late the personal saving rate moved up back up in the fourth quarter suggesting some delay again in the consumption response. CEA estimates that assuming all the savings on imported oil were spent within the year then they would add percentage point to GDP growth in ( shown in the Consumption line in Table 2-i ) This direct estimate does not include additional effects like the multiplier associated with additional economic activity the boost to consumer confidence and the potential benefits of lower inflation for monetary policy management Dollars Figure 2-i North American Oil Rig Count and Oil Price Weekly Total Oil Price ( left axis ) Rig Count ( right axis ) Dec-2015 Note : Displayed oil price is the Brent average monthly spot price Source : Energy Information Administration ; Baker Hughes Inc | Chapter Roughly speaking the decline in the price of domestically-produced oil sold to U.S. consumers has largely offsetting effects for American oil producers and consumers although differences in how consumers and producers adjust to lower oil prices may differ enough for aggregate impacts from this channel to appear over shorter horizons. Thus the primary boost to overall output comes from imported oil. However the share of imported oil has declined as domestic production increased and domestic oil use fell so the overall boost to the U.S. economy from this oil price decline is smaller than would have been the case historically Changes in oil prices also affect the amount of investment done by oil firms. Oil drilling and exploration dropped sharply in as shown in Figure 2-i and these declines weighed down U.S. investment ( and GDP ) and are not reflected in the net-import savings discussed above. Oil drilling and exploration as measured by the number of oil rigs in operation peaked in September and dropped percent by December In addition investment in oil and mining equipment fell percent during As shown in the Drilling line in Table 2-i the cutback in this investment reduced real GDP growth by percentage point in assuming that investment growth in the drilling sector would have been unchanged if the price had not fallen. In addition this direct estimate excludes potential additional economic costs including the multiplier effect and also spillovers from the stresses in credit markets associated with increased default risks of oil companies. On the Figure 2-ii Crude Oil Production and Net Imports Million Barrels per Day Net Imports Nov-2015 Production Note : Data are not seasonally adjusted Source : Energy Information Administration Petroleum Supply Monthly The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | other hand oil-using industries benefit from lower oil prices and might increase investment an effect that is also not captured here The current direct estimate of a percentage point increase in GDP growth in is well below the percentage point boost implied by the econometric model used in earlier CEA analysis ( CEA ) One explanation for the difference is that the econometric models which are estimated off past oil price changes also pick up the indirect effects on demand described above. Moreover any model which assumes a linear relationship between oil prices and output may be less applicable when oil prices fall below production costs. Price declines large enough to cause bankruptcies or large equity price declines in the energy sector could have additional negative impacts. Thinking more broadly about previous historical episodes another explanation for the smaller boost to GDP from this oil price decline is that the United States now consumes less oil than it did in ( CEA 2015c for an extensive discussion ) and produces million barrels a day more than in so that net oil imports are down ( see Figure 2-ii ) As a result the boost to consumption from cheaper imported oil is smaller than in the past and the impact on oil-sector investment is larger. Moreover new technologies such as hydraulic fracturing ( fracking ) may make investment even more sensitive to oil price changes. By this same logic the U.S. economy will be more resilient to possible future increases in the price of oil The vector auto-regression in the earlier CEA report showed a range of GDP impacts from a 10-percent oil price change depending on the import share of oil. The lower end of the range cited here is consistent with the current import share output growth in calendar year ( percentage point ) shown in Figure after subtracting an average of percentage point a year from growth during the four years through The contribution of Federal purchases to real GDP growth is expected to increase further in a positive change reinforced by the recent Federal budget deal Federal. Having contracted substantially in recent years Federal fiscal policy was less restrictive in FY The Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act signed into law in December made the fiscal environment through the end of FY more stable ( that is compared with a string of short-term continuing resolutions ) The Temporary Debt Limit Extension Act signed in February suspended the debt ceiling through March When the Federal debt reached its limit on March the U.S. Treasury resorted to extraordinary measures to function through October without exceeding the debt limit. As the new fiscal year approached on October and budget negotiations began in Congress | Chapter Figure Federal Budget Deficit Percent of GDP Fiscal Year Fiscal Year Note : Dashed line represents average over Source : Office of Management and Budget ; Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts Figure Contribution of Government Purchases to Real GDP Growth Percentage Point Annual Rate State & Local Federal Total Government Note : Contributions are computed using Q4-to-Q4 changes Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Haver Analytics The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | there was some risk of a government shutdown but a continuing resolution extended spending ( at static levels ) through December Negotiations continued during the period covered by the continuing resolution eventually resulting in the Bipartisan Budget Act of signed on November That agreement suspended the debt ceiling again through March and lifted sequester spending caps by $ billion in FY and by $ billion in FY ( about and percent of GDP respectively ) split equally between defense and nondefense spending. The passage of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of in December set programmatic spending levels consistent with the new caps established by the budget agreement including increases in investment in research and development early education and infrastructure. December legislation also made permanent a number of expiring tax provisions including credits for research and development small businesses and low-income households. Absent any further changes in policy the debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to rise steadily over the 10-year budget window increasing from percent of GDP at the end of FY to percent at the end of FY The policies proposed in the President s Budget would stabilize the debt and put it on a declining path through when it reaches percent of GDP State and Local. State and local government purchases ( consumption plus gross investment ) contributed positively but weakly to real GDP growth in for the second consecutive year following four years of negative contributions. The State and local share of nominal GDP fell from its historical peak of percent in to percent in a level not seen since the late 1980s as State and local governments cut their purchases in the face of budget pressures ( Box ) In State and local government purchases were about 60-percent larger than Federal purchases and four times larger than Federal nondefense purchases ( Figure ) In a broad view of fiscal policy changes in State and local purchases can be as important as changes in Federal purchases Monetary Policy In December the Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) increased the target range for the federal funds rate by percentage point ending seven years at its effective lower bound and maintained that range in January of this year. The FOMC s decision to tighten monetary policy was based on its judgment that labor markets had improved considerably and that it was reasonably confident that inflation would move up over the medium term to its 2-percent objective. When it raised the federal funds rate an event widely referred to as lift off the FOMC stated that it expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant | Chapter Figure Government Purchases as Share of Nominal GDP Percent State and Local : Q4 Federal Defense Federal Nondefense Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Haver Analytics Percent Figure Forecast of Federal Funds Rate at Year End Midpoint of FOMC Modal Forecast Dec-2015 Market-Implied Federal Funds Rate Dec-2014 Mar-2015 Jun-2015 Sep-2015 Note : Market-implied rate is computed using federal funds rate futures contracts Source : Bloomberg Professional Service ; CEA calculations Dec-2015 The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box : Challenges in the State and Local Sector During the current expansion growth in State and local purchases has been the weakest of any business-cycle recovery in the post-World War II period ( Figure 2-iii ) During the four quarters of State and local purchases subtracted percentage point from GDP growth and then subtracted about another percentage point in both and Spending in this sector stabilized in and added modestly to GDP growth in and State and local governments also cut jobs early in the recovery. Beginning in though this trend began to shift State and local governments have added jobs since January Even so employment in this sector remains below its previous high in with about percent of this net job loss in educational services. The 1.4-percent decline in education employment exceeded the 0.9-percent decline in the school-age population ( ages to ) over the period. This mismatch implies a rising student-teacher ratio Figure 2-iii Real State and Local Government Purchases During Recoveries Index ( Level at Trough = ) Average Quarters from Trough Note : " Average " indicates average across recessionary periods from excluding the recession due to overlap with the recession Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations Despite some recovery in there are still factors likely to restrain State and local spending growth. State and local governments continue to spend more than they collect in revenues and their aggregate deficit during the first three quarters of amounted to nearly percent of nominal GDP. This deficit has shrunk however during the recovery ( Figure 2-iv ) During State and local expenditures ( including transfers and interest payments as well as purchases ) were roughly flat at about percent of GDP and revenues held at about | Chapter percent of GDP. Until State and local governments only ran deficits during recessions.1 Since then State and local governments have frequently run deficits Unfunded pension obligations place a heavy burden on State and local government finances. The size of these unfunded pension liabilities relative to State and local receipts ballooned immediately after the recession and remains elevated at a level that was about percent of a year s revenue in the first three quarters of ( Figure 2-v ) Figure 2-iv State and Local Government Surplus as Percent of Nominal GDP Percent : Q3 Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Haver Analytics out of states have constitutions or statutes mandating a balanced budget and many local governments have similar provisions. This does not prevent them from running deficits. Many of those balanced budget statutes apply only to the operating budget while deficits may be allowed on their capital accounts. Also spending from rainy day funds appears as a deficit on the government balance sheet in the national income and product accounts The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure 2-v State and Local Pensions Unfunded Liabilities Percent of Total Annual State and Local Receipts : Q3 Source : Federal Reserve Board ; Haver Analytics only gradual increases in the federal funds rate ; the federal funds rate is likely to remain for some time below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run ( FOMC ) Over the course of forecasts for the year-end federal funds rate from both monetary policymakers and financial markets were revised down as shown in Figure implying a later date of lift off and fewer rate increases in By the time the FOMC voted to raise rates in December financial markets had largely anticipated the increase. Moreover lift off had already largely been incorporated in many investors expectations about longer-term interest rates stock prices and the dollar. Accordingly changes in yields on 10-year Treasury notes ( Figure ) and 30-year mortgage rates were small in the immediate wake of lift off. The size of the Federal Reserve s balance sheet at the end of was $ trillion more than five times its size in reflecting several large-scale asset purchase programs ( quantitative easing ) from to which are estimated to have lowered long-term interest rates by about a percentage point ( Engen et al. and the references therein ) Moreover the Federal Reserve believes the larger stock of Federal Reserve asset holdings has continued to influence long-term interest rates even after the end | Chapter of new purchases.2 The increase in the Federal Reserve assets has coincided with a large increase in reserves held by banks. In an environment of superabundant reserves the Federal Reserve has had to change the way in which it raises the federal funds rate. In its communications over the course of and the FOMC indicated that the tools that the Federal Reserve intended to use during policy normalization would include interest paid on reserves and overnight reverse repurchase agreements.3 In recent years FOMC participants have tended to lower their forecasts for the longer-run level for the federal funds rate. The revisions have been consistent with downward trends in long-term interest rates in U.S and global financial markets Labor Market The labor market continued to improve rapidly in with many measures of labor-market performance now recovered to or near their prerecession levels. Over the course of the year the economy added million jobs completing the strongest two years of job growth since American businesses have now added million jobs over straight months through December extending the longest streak on record. The unemployment rate had fallen by half from its peak during the recession to percent in December its lowest level since April The robust pace of job growth has translated into broad-based gains but some slack remains in the labor market including a somewhat elevated level of part-time employment and a depressed level of labor force participation. Moreover the pace of nominal wage growth picked up only modestly during Private employment increased by million jobs during the months of after rising by million jobs in ( Figure ) About half of the jobs in came from professional and business services as well as education and health services both of which have been major drivers of job growth in this recovery. These sectors account for a large part of growth despite the fact that they make up only about percent of private-sector jobs in the economy. Education and health services added jobs in Federal Reserve Chair Yellen ( ) has stated that the underlying theory in which asset prices are directly linked to the outstanding quantity of assets dates back to the early 1950s Consequently the term structure of interest rates can be influenced by exogenous shocks in supply and demand at specific maturities. Purchases of longer-term securities by the central bank can be viewed as a shift in supply that tends to push up the prices and drive down the yields on those securities. See Ihrig et al. ( ) for a discussion of how interest rates paid on excess reserves and overnight reverse repurchase agreements have replaced open market operations the buying and selling of Treasury securities as the way in which the Federal Reserve achieves its target policy rate The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure 12-Month Change in Nonfarm Payroll Employment Millions Not Seasonally Adjusted Private Dec-2015 Total Note : Total excludes temporary decennial Census workers. Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Employment Statistics its largest one-year increase on record and professional and business services added jobs consistent with its growth over the course of this recovery Despite overall strength particularly in the services sector some industries faced specific headwinds that held down growth in Slower job growth in the oil-sensitive mining and logging sector and the exportsensitive manufacturing sector can more than account for the modest slowdown in job growth during Mining and logging lost jobs in largely due to industry cutbacks in the face of the sharp fall in oil prices and has reverted to its level of employment. Manufacturing also experienced a weak year of job growth adding only jobs likely reflecting the global economic slowdown dampening demand for U.S. exports. Given that exports are comprised disproportionately of goods and manufactured products a slowdown in exports affects goods-producing jobs more than the service sector The labor market s improvement was also apparent in the continued rapid decline of the unemployment rate. By December the unemployment rate had fallen to percent falling an average of percentage point a year from to below its pre-recession average of percent.4 Throughout this section pre-recession average refers to the average from December to December | Chapter Figure Actual and Consensus Forecast Unemployment Rate Percent of Labor Force Blue Chip Consensus Actual Forecast Note : Annual forecasts are current as of March of the stated year. Black dashed line represents December value ( percent ) Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; Blue Chip Economic Indicators The unemployment rate reached this level before most forecasters expected As of March economists generally expected the unemployment rate to remain above percent at least until ( Figure ) The unexpectedly low level of the unemployment rate along with little pickup in inflation also led many economists to revise down the natural rate of unemployment Still it appears that the unemployment rate is almost back to normal levels and the pace of decline is expected to moderate next year Although the overall unemployment rate is now below its pre-recession average and mirrors other indicators of labor market strength some broader indicators of labor market slack remained above their pre-recession levels. For example the long-term unemployment rate was percent in December the lowest it has been since but above its pre-recession average of percent ( Figure ) Despite this continued elevation the number of long-term unemployed fell faster in than the number of short-term unemployed. In the long-term unemployment rate fell by percentage point accounting for over percent of the decline in the overall unemployment rate though the long-term unemployed make up about one-quarter of the unemployed. If the number of long-term unemployed continues to fall at the same rate as it has over the past year it will reach its pre-recession average in The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Unemployment Rate by Duration Percent of Labor Force Unemployed for Weeks or Less Dec-2015 Unemployed for Weeks or More Note : Shading denotes recession. Dashed lines represent averages over Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey Similarly the share of the labor force working part-time for economic reasons while falling steadily remains above its pre-recession average and could indicate continued underutilization of labor. Between December and December the share of the labor force usually working part-time rose from to percent driven by a large rise in the share of people working part-time for economic reasons. As the recovery progressed the share of the labor force working part-time began to recede ( Figure ) In the share of the labor force working part-time for economic reasons continued to fall declining percentage point. As of December the rate stood at percent percentage points below its peak in but still above its pre-recession average of percent The persistence in the rate of part-time work for economic reasons especially relative to other measures of slack is largely responsible for the continued elevation of the U-6 underemployment rate. The Care must be taken when comparing the share of workers who are part-time for economic reasons before and after the redesign of the Current Population Survey. CEA used the multiplicative adjustment factors reported by Polivka and Miller ( ) in order to place the pre-1994 estimates of the part-time for economic reasons rate on a comparable basis with postredesign estimates. For the part-time series for which Polivka and Miller do not report suitable adjustment factors the pre- and post-redesign series were spliced by multiplying the pre-1994 estimates by the ratio of the January rate to the December rate. This procedure generates similar results to the Polivka and Miller factors for series for which multiplicative factors are available | Chapter Figure Rates of Part-Time Work Percent of Labor Force Total Part-Time Dec-2015 Part-Time for Non-Economic Reasons Part-Time for Economic Reasons Note : Shading denotes recession. Dashed line represents pre-recession average. See footnote for details on comparability over time Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; Polivka and Miller ( ) ; CEA calculations underemployment rate uses a broader concept of labor market slack than the unemployment rate including discouraged workers who have given up on looking for a job those marginally attached to the labor force and those employed part-time for economic reasons. Although it has recovered percent from its peak during the recession as of December it stood at percent. During the months of the U-6 rate declined percentage point ( Figure ) The labor force participation rate ( LFPR ) edged down over the year by percentage point roughly in line with what one would have expected based on shifting demographics. Throughout the recovery and following the longer-term trend of population aging the decline in the working-age share of the population has pushed down the LFPR. Between the first quarter of and the fourth quarter of the LFPR fell percentage points. CEA estimates that more than half of this decline was due to the aging of the babyboom generation into retirement ( Figure ) These demographic-related declines will become steeper in the near term as the peak of the baby-boom generation retires. Between the first quarter of and the fourth quarter of about a sixth of the participation-rate decline was due to cyclical factors indicated by the high unemployment rates that caused potential job-seekers to delay entry into the labor force or become discouraged. The cyclical contribution to the participation decline has eased in recent years to The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Alternative Measures of Labor Force Underutilization Percent of Labor Force U-6 ( U-5 and Part-Time for Economic Reasons as Share of Labor Force ) U-5 ( U-4 and Marginally Attached as Share of Labor Force ) Dec-2015 U-4 ( Unemployed and Discouraged Workers as Share of Labor Force ) U-3 ( Unemployed as Share of Labor Force ) Note : Dashed lines represent pre-recession averages. Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey Figure Labor Force Participation Decomposition Percent of Civilian Non-Institutional Population Aged Aging Trends Cyclical Effects Actual Residual : Q4 Source : Haver Analytics ; Social Security Administration ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations | Chapter less than a tenth of the overall decline in participation as the economy has recovered and is likely to ease further as the unemployment rate continues to decline. The remaining percent of the decline in the participation rate since is unrelated to population aging or changes in the unemployment rate. This residual likely reflects structural factors like the longstanding downward trend in participation among prime-age workers and other cyclical factors such as the high levels of long-term unemployment in the Great Recession that are not fully captured in the unemployment rate. In the additional drag from unexplained factors largely offset the boost to participation from the cyclical recovery. In light of ongoing demographic shifts and longer-term trends the participation rate is expected to decline modestly in even as cyclical factors recede further. The Administration has proposed policies to support labor force participation through more flexible workplaces and paid leave expanded high-quality pre-school increased subsidies for child care and a wage insurance system that would encourage reentry into work ( Box ) As the recovery in the labor market progresses the pace of job growth consistent with a strong overall labor market is likely to fall as the unemployment rate begins to plateau particularly in light of demographic patterns ( Box ) Output Real GDP grew percent over the four quarters of somewhat below its pace in recent years. GDP grew at a similar pace as gross domestic output ( GDO ) a more accurate measure of output than GDP during the four quarters through : Q3 which is the most recent quarter of GDO data ( Figure ) Gross domestic output discussed more in Box is a newly published aggregate calculated as the average of real GDP and real gross domestic income. The overall composition of demand during shows that most of the growth was accounted for by the household spending sectors : consumer spending and residential investment while contributions from the other sectors were small and generally offsetting. Residential investment was the fastest-growing major component of demand increasing percent during the four quarters of the year and contributing percentage point to the four-quarter growth of GDP. Consumer spending which comprises about two-thirds of GDP increased percent and can account for all the year s output growth. In addition sales of new cars and light trucks hit million in the highest level on record The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box : Expectations for Future Job Growth Given the progress of the labor market recovery as well as ongoing population aging steady state job growth the level consistent with a stable low unemployment rate is lower than the robust growth seen over the past several years. As the unemployment rate reaches a low level it is unlikely to continue declining at the same pace as earlier in the recovery and could begin to plateau. Thus the economy would not need to add as many jobs to maintain a strong overall labor market In fact CEA estimates that only jobs a month would be needed in to keep the unemployment rate unchanged at percent ( top middle cell in Table 2-ii ) if labor force participation declined in line with demographics. In contrast if job gains were a month in still well below the pace in and participation declined with its aging trend the unemployment rate would be expected to fall another percentage point by : Q4. In reality the relationship between jobs and the unemployment rate could differ for a variety of reasons including that the two series are drawn from different surveys that are subject to different measurement errors Both male and female labor force participation have been falling on an age-adjusted basis ( For men this has been happening since the 1950s ; for women since ) In the business cycle from to the labor force participation rate fell percentage point a year during a period when the demographics of aging exerted little downward force on the aggregate participation rate. If this were to continue then only jobs a month would be needed to stabilize the unemployment rate If instead there were enough cyclical improvement to keep the labor force participation rate constant in offsetting any aging and other trends then more job growth would be needed for each level of the unemployment rate. Even if the unemployment rate falls to percent and there is a cyclical rebound in labor force participation the economy would only need to add jobs a month a slower pace than during the past two years. Thus a slower pace of job growth in would be consistent with a normalizing and strong labor market Table 2-ii Job Growth Consistent with Unemployment and Participation Paths ( Thousands Monthly Average in ) Labor Force Participation Rate Unemployment Rate Flat Falls with Aging Aging & Secular Declines Falls percentage point Flat Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Social Security Administration ; CEA calculations | Chapter Business fixed investment grew percent with strong growth in intellectual property but slow growth in equipment and structures which was held back by investment in the drilling sector amid low oil prices Inventory investment added almost a percentage point to growth at an annual rate in the first quarter of but subtracted almost as much during the second half of the year. Manufacturing production continued to expand but at a slower pace than in Domestic motor vehicle assemblies grew percent during the four quarters averaging million units in their highest level since Growth in domestic demand was resilient in though weaker foreign growth was a headwind. The aggregate of consumption and fixed investment known as private domestic final purchases ( PDFP ) also rose faster than overall output at percent in ( Figure ) The solid pace of PDFP growth in which is typically a better predictor of the next quarter s future output growth than current output growth suggests that near-term U.S. growth prospects are positive. Nevertheless CEA expects that the components of real GDP that are not in PDFP such as net exports will hold back overall real GDP growth next year. In particular weaker foreign growth likely will continue to weigh on net exports. Real exports decreased percent in compared with 2.4-percent growth in and 5.2-percent growth in Figure Real Growth in GDP Private Domestic Final Purchases ( PDFP ) and Gross Domestic Output ( GDO ) 4-Quarter Percent Change PDFP ( : Q4 ) GDP ( : Q4 ) GDO ( : Q3 ) Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Consumer Spending Real consumer spending increased percent during the four quarters of somewhat below the 3.2-percent growth last year. Moderate spending growth was accompanied by stronger growth in real disposable income due in part to the direct impact of lower oil prices ( see Box ) as well as by upbeat consumer sentiment and earlier gains in household wealth Low interest rates and improving access to credit particularly auto loans also supported consumer spending. Overall the personal saving rate has largely been fairly stable at around percent of disposable personal income since the beginning of implying that consumer spending growth has largely tracked real income growth ( Figure ) Growth was strong for real household purchases of durable goods ( percent ) Growth was moderate for nondurables ( percent ) and services ( percent ) As discussed above in Box CEA estimates that the direct impact of the decline in oil prices via its reduction in net imported oil costs since mid-2014 boosted consumer spending growth by percentage point in following about percentage point in Light motor vehicle sales rose to million units in the highest level on record and the sixth consecutive yearly increase. Sales trended up during the year near million units at an annual rate in the fourth quarter Motor vehicle assemblies also increased from the first to the second half of the year and at year end inventory-to-sales ratios were near their long-term averages. Between and the average age of the fleet of private light motor vehicles rose from to years likely reflecting an increase in vehicle quality as well as some delay in new purchases during the recession. If so replacement demand in addition to ongoing recovery in labor markets and income growth should support new vehicle sales during Consumer sentiment improved noticeably around the start of as gasoline prices declined sharply and remained more optimistic in than at any point in the recovery In the University of Michigan s Index of Consumer Sentiment moved back in line with its levels before the recession and the Conference Board Index while still somewhat lower than before the recession was also at its highest level in the recovery ( Figure ) Relatedly the recovery in 6Note that the estimated boost to spending in Box is somewhat smaller since those are contributions to GDP growth and PCE is only percent of GDP. Some of the boost to consumer spending growth from lower oil prices may be missing in the official data since BEA is unable to remove gasoline sales at non-gasoline establishments such as Big Box retailers in its translation of the retail sales data. Sharp declines in gasoline prices make the real outlays at these establishments which are all treated as non-gasoline spending look weaker than they actually are. CEA estimates that this measurement error is understating real PCE growth by about percentage point during | Chapter Figure Personal Saving Rate Percent : Q4 Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Haver Analytics Figure Consumer Sentiment Diffusion Index University of Michigan ( : Q1 = ) Dec-2015 Conference Board ( = ) Source : The Conference Board ; University of Michigan ; Haver Analytics The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box : A Better Measure of Output : Gross Domestic Output ( GDO ) Measuring the strength of the economy can be difficult as it depends on surveys and administrative source data that are necessarily imperfect and incomplete in their ability to capture a complex dynamic and large economy. Official statistics measure the total output of the economy in two distinct ways : first gross domestic product ( GDP ) which cumulates various measures of production by adding consumption investment government spending and net exports ; and second gross domestic income ( GDI ) which cumulates incomes by adding labor compensation business profits and other sources of income. In theory these two measures of output should be identical ; however they differ in practice because of measurement error. For example the level of GDP was about 1-percent less than GDI during the first three quarters of though over longer time periods neither measure is typically stronger or weaker.1 In July the Bureau of Economic Analysis ( BEA ) began publishing the average of GDP and GDI which CEA refers to as gross domestic output ( GDO ) Real GDO growth is often close to real GDP growth but differences can be important. For example GDO slowed more in than GDP and gave an earlier signal of the impending severe recession Percent Annual Rate Figure 2-vi Average GDP Revision Gross Domestic Output Higher than GDP Initially Gross Domestic Output Lower than GDP Initially Note : Average is calculated over Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations The fourth-quarter estimate of GDI was not published when this Report went to press | Chapter BEA revises the official statistics on output several times because the first estimates within months of a quarter s end use incomplete and preliminary data an unavoidable tradeoff for getting a quick read on economic activity. Research has shown that GDO can be especially helpful in predicting future revisions to GDP and thus may improve CEA s ability to assess current economic conditions ( CEA 2015a ) In fact when GDO growth is initially estimated to be faster than GDP growth GDP growth tends to revise up and vice versa ( Figure 2-vi ) Through the third quarter of GDP and GDO grew percent and percent respectively from a year earlier GDO also sheds light on recent economic anomalies such as the weakness in first-quarter GDP growth in recent years. When initial estimates showed a decline in real GDP in : Q1 some analysts argued first-quarter growth was being systematically understated because of incomplete adjustment for seasonal changes ( referred to as residual seasonality ) One sign of a measurement problem for the interval was that estimates of first-quarter GDI ( and thus GDO ) growth at the time were less depressed than was first-quarter GDP growth ( Figure 2-vii ) In the initial estimate of first-quarter GDO growth was again Figure 2-vii Average Output Growth by Calendar Quarter Estimates Months After Quarter 's End Percent Annual Rate Q1 Q2 to Q4 GDP Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis. CEA calculations Gross Domestic Income The analysis in Figure 2-vi and Figure 2-vii uses the BEA s third estimate of GDP which is published three months after a quarter s end. This data release also includes either the first ( in the fourth quarter ) or second estimate of GDI The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | above GDP growth. In fact at the annual revision in July BEA revisited its seasonal adjustment and incorporated revised source data which led to an upward revision in : Q1 GDP growth It has long been the practice in many economic analyses including those at CEA to combine product- and income-side measures of output as a way to reduce measurement error and gain a more accurate picture of the economy. In fact CEA began using an average of GDP and GDI with the Economic Report to the President. No single measure of the economy is perfect. Measures are subject to measurement error transitory shocks and conceptual challenges. As a result it is important to look at multiple measures of economic conditions and over longer periods of time to discern trends. Widening the focus from GDP to other measures of output like GDO provides a more accurate and forward-looking picture of the state of the economy income expectations was particularly welcome and likely supported spending growth in Expected real income growth as measured in the Michigan Survey fell sharply during the recession and remained depressed even after actual real income growth had begun to recover. This heightened pessimism contrasted with the past several decades when income expectations and actual income growth tended move together reasonably well ( Figure ; Sahm ) Unusual caution about income prospects may have weighed on consumer borrowing and spending growth. The rebound in income expectations in was a sign that the extra pessimism may have begun to wane Meanwhile the debt of U.S. households relative to their disposable income continued to fall ( Figure ) Before the financial crisis household debt relative to income rose dramatically largely due to net mortgage originations and then declined sharply after the crisis a pattern known as deleveraging. Charge offs of delinquent mortgage debt played an important role in lowering household debt but the decline in new mortgage originations played a role as well ( Vidangos ) By the end of : Q2 the debt-to-income ratio was at its lowest level since The level of mortgage debt relative to income continued to decline in while consumer credit ( including credit card auto and student loans ) relative to income increased slightly Moreover with historically low interest rates the amount of income required to service these debts has fallen dramatically. Estimates based on aggregate data could mask higher debt burdens for some families ; that is the health of personal finances varies substantially across households | Chapter Index * Figure Real Income Growth Over Next Year 1-Year-Ahead Percent Change Expected Income ( left axis ) Actual Future Income ( right axis ) * Index is when the share of the population expecting an increase in income exactly balances the share of the population expecting a decrease in income. An index above means a larger share expects an increase in income Note : Shading denotes recession Source : University of Michigan ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Nonetheless according to the Survey of Consumer Finances the fraction of families with payment-to-income ratios greater than percent declined below the level seen in ( Bricker et al. ) Earlier gains in household net worth ( that is assets less debts also referred to as household wealth ) also supported consumer spending growth in but to a lesser extent than in ( Figure ) Yet declines in equity wealth since the second quarter of have likely weighed some on spending. The wealth-to-income ratio remained elevated in following its marked increase during Changes in net worth have been spread unevenly across households though and these disparities may have implications for families and macroeconomic activity. For example wealth has become increasingly concentrated such that the share of wealth held by the bottom percent of households fell from percent in to percent in ( Bricker et al. ) Housing Markets The housing market recovery picked up steam in undergoing what was by some measures the largest improvement since Singlefamily home sales bolstered by stronger labor market conditions and low mortgage interest rates increased substantially to their highest level since Real residential investment increased percent during the four The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Household Debt Relative to Disposable Personal Income ( DPI ) Ratio to Annual DPI : Q3 Total Mortgage Debt Consumer Credit Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Federal Reserve Board ; Bureau of Economic Analysis Figure Consumption and Wealth Relative to Disposable Personal Income ( DPI ) Ratio to Annual DPI Consumption ( left axis ) Net Housing Wealth ( right axis ) Total Net Wealth ( right axis ) Years of DPI : Q4 Stock Market Wealth ( right axis ) Note : Shading denotes recession. Values imputed for : Q4 by CEA Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts ; Federal Reserve Board Financial Accounts of the United States ; CEA calculations | Chapter Box : Are Official Estimates of GDP Missing More Growth ? While GDP growth rebounded after its sharp drop in the recession it has held above percent on average since despite marked improvement in the labor market. The unemployment rate is one of the most informative statistics on business-cycle changes in economic activity and generally seen as less prone to mis-measurement than real GDP. Thus when the unemployment rate sends a more positive signal than GDP growth it is natural to question among other things whether measurement error in GDP has gotten worse.1 If true this would change one s understanding of the economy and recovery Official GDP estimates from the Bureau of Economic Analysis use high-quality data from various sources and follow international standards for national accounting. Even with diligent efforts and improving methods accurately measuring the U.S. economy is a formidable challenge given its size and complexity. The potential understatement of growth in the official GDP estimates could come from incomplete coverage of new goods and services as well as prices that do not fully reflect quality improvements. This is a long-standing and well-known issue and has motivated a series of methodological improvements since the first estimate of national income was published in The substantial declines in the unemployment rate and robust job gains in recent years would historically have tended to coincide with a pickup in real GDP growth relative to its trend. Yet as Figure 2-viii shows the official estimate of real GDP growth ( the blue line ) has held slightly above percent in recent years as opposed to picking up. One way to roughly quantify the amount of missing GDP growth vis- -vis labor market recovery is with an empirical regularity known as Okun s Law. Official GDP growth has been about 1-percent point below the output growth predicted from the labor market ( the orange line ) since and about percentage points below since The persistent discrepancy between recovery in the product market and labor market For example Hatzius and Dawsey ( ) calculated that measurement problems including an underestimate of the high-tech price declines and free online media have led to official statistics to miss percentage point of annual growth this decade up from percentage point of missing growth in the period The labor-market prediction of output growth using Okun s Law relies on several assumptions and is intended as an illustration. On its own this gap is not evidence of measurement error in GDP. According to Okun s Law a percentage point decline in the unemployment typically coincides with a percentage point pickup in real output growth above its trend. The trend here counterfactually assumes annual labor productivity growth at its historical average changes in the labor force participation rate only due to demographics and a constant unemployment rate of percent The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | might be a sign of a growing measurement problem or it may signal a slowdown in trend productivity Goods and services without a direct market exchange have long posed a challenge in GDP statistics but the proliferation of free online media and open-source software have led to claims that digital dark matter is increasingly a source of missing GDP growth. Researchers have used various methods to value the real output in this sector despite the fact that in some cases the inputs as well as the outputs do not have a market price. The quantitative impact on real GDP growth in each case is fairly modest. In many cases the impact on consumer surplus which is related to how much more consumers or firms would be willing to pay for these free goods and services is large but that is a measure of overall welfare not simply output. Taken together however missing GDP from digital dark matter could be substantial ; the question is whether we are missing more GDP growth than in the past. As one example online videos may have largely substituted for television shows neither of which are fully reflected in real GDP growth Alternate methods have led to widely different estimates of the value of online media to consumers. One method relies on the marketvalue of consumers time either to value the time they spend watching online media as in Brynjolfsson and Oh ( ) or to value the time saved with online search tools as in Varian ( ) The estimates from this method tend to be considerable though they are framed in terms Figure 2-viii GDP Growth : Official Statistics and " Okun 's Law " Prediction 4-Quarter Percent Change Official GDP : Q4 Predicted from Labor Market Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Haver Analytics ; CEA calculations | Chapter of consumer surplus which should in general be much larger than the contribution to GDP. There are many goods and services such as electricity or indoor plumbing which consumers value more than their market price suggests but GDP focuses on market prices not subjective willingness to pay. Taken together research estimates roughly percentage point of missing GDP growth a year from free online media accounts since ( Hatzius and Dawsey ) One way to value the output from online media is by its cost of production plus the cost of advertising that supports the content. The media is not free because consumers exchange exposure to ads for access to the media. Currently advertising is not included in GDP because it is treated as an intermediate good yet this new method follows the national accounting framework for nonmarket goods. This method estimates much less missing GDP growth only a few basis points of growth a year ( Nakamura and Soloveichik ) The main reason for the modest overall effect is that advertising-supported media existed in the past and so this method weighs the substitution from advertisingpaid print media to online media. The Internet s contribution to total advertising growth has increased considerably while the contribution of print advertising has declined ( Figure 2-ix ) Relative to the recession there has been a pickup in advertising growth consistent with more missing GDP growth. Yet this approach also highlights a drawback with the official statistics because currently Percent Figure 2-ix Contribution to Growth in Real Advertising Internet TV/Radio Print Total Note : Components may not sum to total due to rounding Source : Nakamura and Soloveichik ( ) The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | any shift from consumer-paid media to ad-supported media would show up as a decline in output Open-source software is an example of an even more daunting measurement challenge because in many cases it is both acquired and produced for free.3 One way to estimate the real investment of firms in open-source software is to use the near-market good approach from Nordhaus ( ) It is less clear how much more GDP growth is missing in recent years due to open-source software but the expansion of online platforms providing these goods suggests a growing measurement issue Taken together it appears that the official statistics have always missed some GDP growth and it is possible that the bias has worsened some in recent years though not by nearly enough to explain the slowdown in productivity growth or the mismatch between labor and product market growth. Some of the measurement problems particularly those related to quality-adjusted prices of high-tech goods appear to have worsened lately. Still the contributions to GDP and productivity growth from this mis-measurement are relatively modest while mismeasurement in larger hard-to-measure sectors like health care merit further in-depth study BEA measures own account software based on an estimate of wages paid to computer programmers and system analysts ( see NIPA Handbook p. ) To the extent that employers are paying programmers to produce open-source software it will be included in BEA s investment and GDP numbers. However unlike traditional prepackaged software open-source software does not generate investment from the sale of copies so less investment is captured in GDP with the open-source approach than with traditional sales of prepackaged software quarters of above the 5.1-percent growth in and far faster than overall real GDP growth of percent in While the cyclical recovery in the housing market is well underway several structural challenges remain including a constrained housing supply low affordability in some areas of the country ( see Box ) and persistently muted household formation for year-olds. These challenges may explain why some aspects of the housing market or areas of the country have yet to recover House prices continued to rise in similar to the pace in but below that of National home prices increased between and percent ( depending on the index ) during broadly in line with growth in but well below the rapid growth in Nominal house prices are between and percent above their recessionary trough and between and percent below their pre-recession peak ( Figure ) However in real terms | Chapter Figure National House Price Indexes Index Jan-2012 = Standard & Poor 's/ Case-Shiller ( Nov-2015 ) CoreLogic ( Dec-2015 ) Zillow ( Dec-2015 ) Federal Housing Finance Agency ( Nov-2015 ) Note : Shading denotes recession. The Standard & Poor 's/Case-Shiller Federal Housing Finance Agency and CoreLogic indexes all adjust for the quality of homes sold but only cover homes that are bought or sold whereas Zillow reflects prices for all homes on the market Source : Zillow ; CoreLogic ; Federal Housing Finance Agency ; Standard & Poor 's/Case-Shiller ( measured relative to the general rise in consumer prices ) house prices still remain roughly percent below their pre-recession peak Continued house price increases improved owners equity relative to the debt they owe on their houses. Homeowners equity as of December equaled slightly more than half of the total value of household real estate ( percent ) percentage points higher than the recessionary trough and near the average of percent in the two decades prior to the Great Recession As of : Q3 rising home prices since : Q4 helped lift more than million households out of a negative equity position ( Gudell ) The overall share of single-family homeowners with an underwater mortgage ( when mortgage debt exceeds the value of their house ) was percent in : Q3 down from a high of percent in In addition the number of delinquent home mortgages ( when the homeowner misses at least one monthly payment ) has fallen to its lowest level since though the share of mortgages that are seriously delinquent ( payment more than days overdue with the bank considering the mortgages to be in danger of default ) remains somewhat elevated. This improvement supports overall economic growth because homeowners with underwater or delinquent mortgages are less likely to spend or relocate in search of better-paying jobs Single-family homes remained more affordable in than the historical average as rising incomes and low and steady mortgage rates partially The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Index * Figure Housing Affordability Index Nov-2015 * Index is when the median income family can exactly qualify for a mortgage on a median-priced home. An index over means that the median income family has more than enough income to qualify for a mortgage on a median-priced home Note : Dashed line represents average over Source : National Association of Realtors offset the effect of rising house prices on the cost of homeownership ( Figure ) Nevertheless affordability decreased somewhat in the past two years because median home prices grew faster than median family incomes. Box covers an additional threat to affordability housing supply constraints Despite the affordability of housing national homeownership was percent in the fourth quarter of much lower than the historical average due to a variety of trends in the housing market. The decline has been particularly concentrated among young households. The homeownership rate of those under the age of was nearly percent at the end of roughly 10-percentage points lower than its all-time high in A number of factors contributed to this decline. Most importantly young adults are waiting longer to get married or form households. First-time home buyers are about three years older on average than the previous generation of homebuyers Second credit availability remains tight for borrowers with credit scores below Third it can be difficult for households especially those living in urban areas to save for a down payment. In response the Administration has pursued policies to improve access to credit and expand homeownership. In January the President announced a reduction in the annual mortgage insurance premium on Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) loans. The lower premium saved the typical new homeowner $ in and existing homeowners who refinanced realized similar savings. In addition FHA s new guidance for lenders of single-family loans took effect in | Chapter Box : Constraints on Housing Supply Supply constraints provide a structural challenge in the housing market particularly in high-mobility economically vibrant cities. When housing supply is constrained it has less room to expand when demand increases leading to higher prices and lower affordability. Limits on new construction can in turn impede growth in local labor markets and restrain aggregate output growth. Some constraints on the supply of housing come from geography while others are man-made. Constraints due to land-use regulations such as minimum lot size requirements height restrictions and ordinances prohibiting multifamily housing fall into the man-made category and thus could be amended to support more inclusive growth. While these regulations can sometimes serve legitimate purposes such as the protection of human health and safety and the prevention of environmental degradation land-use regulations can also be used to protect vested interests in housing markets Gyourko and Molloy ( ) argue that supply constraints have worsened in recent decades in large part due to more restrictive land-use regulations. House prices have risen faster than construction costs in real terms ( Figure 2-x ) providing indirect evidence that land-use regulations are pushing up the price of land According to Gyourko and Molloy ( ) between and real house prices were percent above real construction costs compared with an average gap of percent during the 1990s. Several other Figure 2-x Real Construction Costs and House Prices Index = Real House Prices Real Construction Costs Source : Gyourko and Malloy ( ) The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | studies note that land-use regulations have been increasing since roughly driving much of the real house appreciation that has occurred over this time ( Glaeser Gyourko and Saks ; Glaeser and Ward ; Been et al. ) This pattern is noteworthy because of the positive correlation between cities housing affordability and the strictness of their land use regulations as measured by the Wharton Residential Land Use Regulation Index ( Figure 2-xi ; Gyourko et al. ) Cities to the lower right of the figure which include Boston and San Francisco have stringent land-use regulations and low affordability. Cities at the upper left which include St. Louis and Cleveland have low regulation and high affordability. Supply constraints by themselves do not make cities low in affordability. Rather the less responsive housing supply that results from regulation prevents these cities which often happen to be desirable migration destinations for workers looking for higher-paying jobs from accommodating a rise in housing demand In addition to housing affordability these regulations have a range of impacts on the economy more broadly. Reduced housing affordability whether as an ancillary result of regulation or by design prevents individuals from moving to high productivity areas. Indeed empirical evidence from Molloy Smith and Wozniak ( ) indicates that migration across all distances in the United States has been in decline since the middle of the 1980s. This decreased labor market mobility has important implications for intergenerational economic mobility ( Chetty et al. ) Figure 2-xi Zoning and Affordability in Select Metro Areas NAR Housing Affordability Index ( ) Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index ( Higher Values = More Regulation ) Source : National Associaltion of Realtors ( NAR ) ; Gyourko Saiz and Summers ( ) | Chapter and also was estimated in recent research to have held back current GDP by almost percent ( Hsieh and Moretti ) Land-use regulations may also make it more difficult for the housing market to accommodate shifts in preferences due to changing demographics such as increased demand for modifications of existing structures due to aging and increased demand for multifamily housing due to higher levels of urbanization ( Goodman et al. ) A number of Administration initiatives ranging from the Multifamily Risk-Sharing Mortgage program to the Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing rule try to facilitate the ability of housing supply to respond to housing demand Ensuring that zoning and other constraints do not prevent housing supply from growing in high productivity areas will be an important objective of Federal as well as State and local policymakers September while additional work is underway to further increase clarity and transparency to encourage more lending to creditworthy borrowers Another phenomenon holding back homeownership that has less to do with access to credit is that in some areas home prices and rents are rising more quickly than either per capita personal income or wages. And real median income for household heads aged in remained modestly below pre-recession levels. While homes are more affordable at the national level housing has become more expensive in many desirable cities like San Jose San Francisco Los Angeles San Diego and New York ( see Box ) Finally inventories of existing homes available for sale have not recovered fully and by the end of were percent below their average over Household formation showed some tentative signs of picking up in recent years from the low pace prevailing since the recession. The number of households continued to increase in albeit at a slower pace than in Most of the new households formed were among those between the ages of and ( Kolko ) This uptick contributed to a solid rise in housing starts. Housing starts including multifamily starts were about million units in ( Figure ) Nevertheless starts remained well below the 1.5-to-1.7 million rate that is consistent with long-term demographics and the replacement of existing housing stock.7 Furthermore because homebuilding has been below that pace since the recession pent-up demand for housing may play a role in supporting further recovery in the housing Demographics and historical trends would have predicted to million new households formed each year requiring housing ( Joint Center for Housing Studies ) Together with the assumption that about percent of the existing homes deteriorate and need to be replaced a given year this yields an underlying trend of and million housing starts per year The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Single-Family and Multifamily Housing Starts Thousands of Units Annual Rate Single-Family Starts Multifamily Starts Dec-2015 Source : Census Bureau Figure Average Annual Growth in Real Business Fixed Investment ( BFI ) Percent Annual Rate Intellectual Property Equipment Structures BFI Note : Components may not sum to total due to rounding. Growth rate computed using Q4-to-Q4 changes Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Haver Analytics | Chapter market. Nevertheless the construction of multifamily units mostly rental apartments also picked up and now exceeds its pre-recession levels Investment Business Fixed Investment. After being a bright spot early in the recovery investment growth moderated in Real business fixed investment grew only percent during the four quarters of slower than the 5-percent increase during and much slower that the 9-percent increase in In the rate of investment growth was largely maintained for intellectual property but was offset by sharp declines in drilling and mining structures ( see Box for more details ) and slower growth in equipment investment. The slowdown in investment growth is largely associated with the moderate pace of recovery in overall U.S. output and is not limited to the United States ( Box ) Slower investment growth is a concern because it limits the productive capacity of the economy. Investment net of depreciation is required to increase the capital stock. In net investment as a share of the capital stock fell to its lowest level in the post-World War II era and the nominal capital stock even declined. Although net investment has rebounded somewhat in the recovery its level as a share of the capital stock remains well below the historical average ( Figure ) The slowdown in investment has also contributed to the slowdown in productivity growth. Historically capital deepening capital per hour worked has added nearly percentage point to labor productivity growth but since capital deepening has added only about a half percentage point. The recovery in output has not been matched by a level of investment sufficient to generate substantial growth in the capital-to-labor ratio Changes in capital deepening tend to reverse themselves yet the persistence of low productivity is likely tied to the persistence of the investment slowdown. The pessimistic view is that the recent investment slowdown reflects a trend toward less capital due to a shift toward production with lower capital intensity slower trend labor force growth or fewer start-ups. The optimistic view which is in line with historical experience is that having largely bounced back from the capital overhang following the Great Recession investment will return toward its prior stronger trend With the sharp fall in output in the amount of capital services relative to output rose considerably ( see Figure ) Even years into the recovery businesses had access to more capital services than the level of output would typically have required. The excess of capital suppressed new investment and helped lower capital services growth. Capital services relative to output have now regressed back to trend a factor supporting The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box : Slowdown in Investment Growth across Advanced Economies Across advanced economies including the United States business fixed investment is currently percent below what would have been expected from pre-crisis trends ( Figure 2-xii ) The shortfalls have been in all categories of investment not just business investment but also public investment and housing Weak investment in advanced economies may largely be explained by the steady rather than increasing pace of the recovery in output as opposed to other issues : such as confidence regulatory factors or excessive share buybacks ( IMF ) In the standard accelerator model investment increases when output growth is expected to increase With steady growth and some excess capacity left from the recession it is not that surprising that firms demand for investment goods has increased slowly. Other trends common across advanced economies may be suppressing investment such as : a digital start-up requiring less capital investment ( Summers ) ; or constraints on entry of new firms ( Decker et al. ) Figure 2-xii Business Fixed Investment Across Advanced Economies Log Index * = Linear Trend Actual Source : International Monetary Fund future investment. This view is consistent with historically weaker periods of investment growth being on average followed by stronger periods. This historical pattern argues for faster growth in investment spending during than in the recent past | Chapter Figure Net Investment as a Share of the Capital Stock Percent Note : Dashed line represents average over Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis Index = Figure Capital Services per Unit of Real Output Private Business Sector : Q4 Capital Services per Unit of Output Nonlinear Trend Note : Post-1964 data interpolated quarterly using Macroeconomic Advisers quarterly data. Pre-1965 data interpolated by moving average. Nonlinear trend is a bi-weight filter using a 60-quarter window Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Labor Productivity and Costs ; Macroeconomic Advisers ; CEA calculations The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | On the other hand there are longer-running trends of less dynamism in the business sector as discussed in Chapter on innovation pre-dating the last recession that could suggest persistently lower investment. The share of new firms among all firms the start-up rate has trended down over the past decades and fell further in this recovery. Moreover research has shown that start-ups and young firms which engage heavily in hiring and investment are also failing at a higher rate since ( Decker et al. forthcoming ) The Administration has pursued policies to support investment including additional funding for public research and development and public infrastructure. In addition the President has proposed business tax reform that would directly spur private investment. ( See also Box ) While investment has been low the rate of payouts to shareholders by nonfinancial firms in the form of dividends or net share buybacks ( Figure ) has been rising. Nonfinancial corporations are now returning nearly half of the funds that could be used for investment to stockholders. The share of funds being returned to stockholders both in the form of dividends and net share buy backs has been gradually trending higher for several decades and the current combined level was markedly exceeded only in the run-up to the last recession. The lower investment growth and higher share of funds returned to shareholders suggests firms had more cash than they thought they could profitably invest. The rise in payouts to shareholders may be related to the decline in the start-up rate as young firms are more likely to re-invest their cash flow than mature firms Inventory Investment. Inventories increased faster than final sales in pushing up manufacturing and trade inventories to months supply in November The inventory-to-sales ratio has risen this year but has trended down over the past few decades likely reflecting changes in supply-chain management and the diminishing share of goods in GDP ( Figure ) The unusually high level of oil inventories in related to both upside surprises in the supply of oil and weaker-than-expected global demand for oil is a portion of the inventory buildup Real inventory investment the change in the inventory stock picked up noticeably in the first quarter of adding percentage point to first-quarter GDP growth and remained high in the second quarter Inventory investment averaged about $ billion at an annual rate in the first two quarters of the year well above the $ billion level of inventory investment needed to keep up with average sales growth. The third quarter saw a drop back down to $ billion subtracting percentage point from GDP growth. Inventory investment declined further in the fourth quarter to $ billion and subtracted percentage point from GDP growth. As shown | Chapter Percent Figure Total Payouts to Shareholders Nonfinancial Corporate Businesses : Q3 Note : Series shown is the four-quarter moving average of the ratio of dividends plus share buybacks relative to profits plus depreciation minus taxes Source : Federal Reserve Board ; Haver Analytics ; CEA calculations Months ' Supply Figure Inventory-to-Sales Ratio Nov-2015 Note : Manufacturing and trade inventories at book value Source : Census Bureau Manufacturing and Trade Inventories and Sales ; Haver Analytics The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Percentage Points Figure Contribution of Inventory Investment to Real GDP Growth 4-Quarter Moving Average : Q4 Source : Bureau of Economics Analysis ; Haver Analytics in Figure changes in inventory investment often affect the quarterly pattern of output growth but have limited effect on annual growth Net Exports Weak demand in much of the world outside the United States as discussed more in Chapter and the stronger dollar that has come with it has been a drag on U.S. exports which declined percent in nominal terms during Part of this was due to the drop in export prices as lower oil and commodity prices have meant lower prices for U.S. exports of agricultural goods or oil-related products. Adjusting for prices real exports declined percent during the four quarters of shown in Figure At the same time real U.S. imports increased percent reflecting both the relative strength of domestic demand and the lower price of imports. Taken together Figure shows net exports subtracted percentage point from GDP growth during after subtracting a comparable amount to overall growth in The external sector is likely to be a drag on growth in as well Productivity Although employment growth has been strong the growth in output has been more moderate. Thus recent growth of labor productivity ( that | Chapter Figure Foreign Real GDP and U.S. Export Growth 4-Quarter Percent Change Trade-Weighted Foreign Real GDP Growth ( left axis ) 4-Quarter Percent Change : Q3 U.S. Real Exports ( right axis ) : Q4 Source : National Sources ; CEA calculations Percentage Points Figure Contribution of Net Exports to U.S Real GDP Growth Note : Contributions are computed using Q4-to-Q4 changes Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Haver Analytics The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | is output per hour ) has been below its long-term average pace. Because productivity fluctuates with the business cycle it should be measured over a long interval or between comparable cyclical stages. When measured with product-side data from the national income and product accounts ( the measure published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and based on data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis ) labor productivity has risen at a 1.2-percent annual rate during the almost eight years from the business cycle peak in : Q4 to : Q3. But when using the income-side measure nonfarm productivity has risen at a 1.6-percent rate. The best measure of productivity growth is probably the average of these figures similar to the average used for gross domestic output in Box yielding an estimate of a 1.4-percent annual rate of growth in productivity thus far in this business cycle. This is a slower pace of growth than the 2.2-percent growth seen between businesscycle peaks in and partially due to the transitory after-effects of the severe recession including reduced investment associated with the capital overhang The slowdown in labor productivity growth in the post-recessionary period can be attributed to lower growth in total factor productivity and a reduction in capital intensity as shown in Figure Historically capital intensity or changes in capital per hour has added nearly percentage point to labor productivity growth. But since capital intensity has added about a half percentage point as discussed previously in the investment section. Thus reduced capital deepening can account for roughly a third of the below-average productivity growth since Moreover the contribution from total factor productivity growth over the past few years has been half its historical average of percentage points. Increasing public infrastructure investment an issue discussed in Chapter and raising educational levels as discussed in Chapter will support labor productivity growth Since : Q4 productivity growth has been even lower averaging only percent per year ( using information from the income and product sides of the accounts ) It is difficult to interpret productivity growth over very short windows in part because it is affected by changing business-cycle conditions and also because it is subject to sizeable measurement error Nevertheless the same pattern applies even more strongly to this shorter window with the majority of the most recent slowdown in productivity growth accounted for by the reduction in the amount of capital services per worker. As shown in Figure a decline in capital intensity has not occurred previously in the postwar period How should recent productivity growth color forecasts of future productivity ? The degree that a slowdown in capital accumulation has played an important role in the recent slower productivity growth offers some | Chapter Figure Sources of Productivity Growth vs. Percentage Points Average Annual Rate Labor Composition Capital Intensity Multifactor Productivity Productivity Note : Contributions computed using annual data Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Figure Labor Productivity and Major Components Percent Change Annual Rate ( 5-Year Moving Average ) Capital Intensity Labor Productivity Total Factor Productivity Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Haver Analytics The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | grounds for optimism about the future. Historically capital accumulation tends to pick up after a period of weakness. This could be even truer in the wake of the Great Recession which is a rare enough event in its severity that it should not form a basis for future extrapolations about long-run trends. Moreover historically longer time periods have given more accurate readings on future productivity growth. Labor productivity growth since the business-cycle peak in has averaged percent a year the figure that the Administration uses to project the long-term growth rate of labor productivity. Administration policies supporting infrastructure investment education trade and immigration reform will help facilitate the acceleration from the slow growth rate of recent years. However in the near-term the Administration s outlook foresees a continuation of relatively subdued productivity growth in but then a pickup in subsequent years Wage Growth and Price Inflation Nominal wage growth began to slowly pick up in but with the strengthening labor market has room to rise even further. Average nominal hourly earnings for all private employees increased percent during the months of compared with percent on average in the two prior years. Hourly compensation as measured in the Employment Cost Index increased percent in down from percent a year earlier. In contrast the more-volatile compensation per hour rose percent during above its percent growth a year earlier. Taken together as shown in Figure wage growth has moved up gradually as labor markets have tightened but has not reached a pace that would signal a full recovery. An important question in the labor market this year will be whether nominal wages will continue to grow faster as the labor market tightens Consumer prices as measured in the price index for personal consumption expenditures ( PCE ) and shown in Figure were up only slightly over due to large declines in energy prices ( see Figure ) Overall inflation was well below the Federal Reserve s longer-run objective of percent. Core PCE inflation which excludes energy and food prices and tends to be a better predictor of future inflation than overall inflation was also less than the 2-percent target rising only percent during the months of Lower imported goods as well as the pass through of The Federal Reserve s defines its inflation objective in terms of the PCE price index. The consumer price index ( CPI ) is an alternate measure of prices paid by consumers and is used to index some government transfers and taxes. Largely because of a different method of aggregating the individual components PCE inflation has averaged about percentage point a year less than the CPI inflation since During the months of for example core CPI prices increased percent more than the percent increase in core PCE prices | Chapter Figure Nominal Wage Growth Over Past Year Percent Change Compensation per Hour ( : Q4 ) Average Hourly Earnings ( Dec-2015 ) Employment Cost Index ( : Q4 ) Note : Compensation per hour is for the business sector. Average hourly earnings are for production and nonsupervisory workers. The employment cost index is for the private sector Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Department of Labor ; Haver Analytics Figure Consumer Price Inflation 12-Month Percent Change Federal Reserve Longer-Run Objective Core PCE Dec-15 Total PCE Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Haver Analytics The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Energy and Import Price Inflation Percent Percent Non-Oil Import Prices ( right axis ) : Q4 PCE Energy Prices ( left axis ) Dec-2015 Note : The Personal Consumption Expenditures ( PCE ) energy price index is used to compute inflation Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Haver Analytics lower energy costs to non-energy goods likely weighed on core inflation this year. The speed and degree to which these factors wane are two keys to the inflationary pressures in the economy this year Changes in import prices can meaningfully affect domestic price inflation through various channels. If imports become less expensive then domestic price inflation may be reduced as consumers switch to relatively cheaper goods from abroad. Competitive pressures from lower import prices may also lead domestic producers to lower their prices. Finally the lower price inflation for imported inputs may be passed through to goods produced domestically. Prices for non-oil imports declined sharply in weighing on domestic core price inflation ( Figure ) Over the four quarters of the price of non-oil imports fell percent the largest fourquarter decline since : Q3. The decline in non-oil import prices likely reflects a stronger dollar as well as falling non-energy commodity prices The pass through of non-oil import prices to core inflation is expected to continue albeit to a lesser extent in Survey-based measures of long-term expectations for inflation have been generally well-anchored both during the last recession and more recently. This steadiness suggests a view that the factors that pushed down inflation in will be temporary as well as confidence that the Federal Reserve will be able to address any inflationary pressures in the coming years. Nevertheless market-based measures of inflation compensation | Chapter Figure Long-Term Inflation Expectations 4-Quarter Percent Change Actual PCE Inflation Forecast Next Years : Q4 Dec-2015 Note : Shading denotes recession. The Forecast Next Years is the median forecast for CPI inflation from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. The Personal Consumption Expenditures ( PCE ) price index is used to compute inflation Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Survey of Professional Forecasters ( estimated from the rates on Treasury inflation protected securities ) have declined raising some concerns about long-term inflation expectations Financial Markets Over the course of the year developments in U.S. financial markets largely reflected diminished prospects for global growth particularly in China and other emerging markets and expected tightening of monetary policy. At the same time consensus forecasts of long-run U.S. interest rates have fallen following the long downward trend that reflects a variety of factors ranging from demographics to changing term premiums. This section like the rest of this chapter focuses on developments through the end of In early U.S. and global equity indexes and commodity prices especially oil fell while spreads on high-yield bonds rose Since the early 1980s long-term interest rates as measured by the yields on 10-year Treasury notes have trended downward as shown in Figure The evolution of U.S. interest rates over the past years has coincided with interest-rate movements in advanced economies including the United Kingdom and the euro area. The global trend in long-term rates is partly the result of lower inflation lower foreign output growth aging demographics lower investment demand and increased world saving as evidenced by the reduction in rates beginning well before the financial The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | crisis.9 But these changes have been greatly exacerbated by some more transitory factors including the effects of quantitative easing on the supply of long-term debt lower term premiums private-sector deleveraging and flight-to-safety flows Longer-term interest rates as measured by the yields on 10-year U.S Treasury notes and shown in Figure were relatively stable on net in ending the year at percent about the same rate as at the end of but noticeably down from year-end The yields on 3-month U.S Treasury notes also remained low in only starting to rise meaningfully above zero in mid-November reflecting expectations for the FOMC to raise its target rate Similarly corporate borrowing costs rebounded almost basis points over the months of to percent roughly in line with its level at year-end Increased corporate bond yields coupled with roughly unchanged Treasury yields point to rising credit spreads Market estimates for long-term U.S. Treasury rates increased over the past year. The 10-year U.S. Treasury rate years forward which measures the market s expectation of the 10-year interest rate a decade from today was percent in December The market-based forward rate was nearly percentage point below the consensus forecast of 4.1-percent for Some of the gap may be explained by a lower term premium global flight-to-safety flows or divergent expectations about long-term productivity and output growth. Forward rates incorporate risk premiums can be highly volatile and their movements may reflect transitory developments as opposed to structural changes ; as such they may be poor predictors for future rates. For a more in-depth analysis into the 10-year U.S. Treasury rate years forward and the overall shift to lower long-term rates see the Council of Economic Advisers ( ) report Long-Term Interest Rates : A Survey. Overall stock prices were little changed on net in The Standard and Poor s ( S&P ) index edged down less than percent for the year following a percent rise in ( the best year since ) and another percent rise in In the first half of the S&P index had increased ; however declines since August erased most of the year s gains. Nevertheless at the end of December the S&P index was about percent above its pre-recession peak in Recent aging of the baby-boom generation has led to a disproportionate share of the population being distributed into age cohorts with relatively high saving rates which in turn has held down interest rates. Continued aging of the baby-boom generation will likely exert upward pressure on interest rates as its members enter retirement and consume their savings | Chapter Percent Figure Nominal 10-Year Treasury Yields United Kingdom United States Dec-2015 Euro Area Source : U.S. Treasury ; European Central Bank ; Bank of England Percent Figure Nominal Long- and Short-Term Interest Rates 10-Year Treasury Yield 12/31/2015 Jan-2015 3-Month Treasury Yield Apr-2015 Jul-2015 Oct-2015 Jan-2016 Note : Yields are constant-maturity interest rates calculated from the U.S. Treasury yield curve Source : Federal Reserve Board The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | The Outlook Forecast over the Next Three Years Real GDP grew percent on average during the three years through and the Administration forecast ( finalized on November ) projects an acceleration to 2.7-percent growth during The Administration forecast is slightly above the Blue-Chip consensus forecast of percent and in line with the CBO forecast of percent two outside forecasts from January The Administration expects that investment will grow faster in than in the recent past though weaker global demand likely will be partially offsetting. Federal fiscal policy will be simulative in and even more so than it might otherwise have been without the Bipartisan Budget Agreement. With a strengthening State and local sector fiscal actions will likely be expansionary in Meanwhile core inflation ( excluding food and energy ) remains low partly due to declining import prices and below average capacity utilization so resource utilization does not appear to impose any constraints during the next four quarters. For consumers a pickup in nominal and real wage gains in together with strong employment growth will probably boost spending in These income gains following a multiyear period of successful deleveraging leave consumers in an improved financial position. Business investment also shows brighter prospects for growth in than in earlier years as the overhang of excess capital that suppressed investment earlier in this expansion has been reduced. As the economy continues to grow businesses will need new facilities equipment and intellectual property to meet growing demand. The decline in oil prices over the last year and half are likely to add to GDP on net in as discussed in Box Although most domestic signals are positive the United States faces headwinds from abroad. The available indicators suggest that the economies of Brazil Canada China India and our euro area trading partners are growing slowly. The trade-weighted average of foreign GDP growth in was slower than in Slow global growth is forecasted for as well. Weakness abroad not only reduces our exports but also raises risks of adverse financial and other spillovers to the U.S. economy With broader measures of labor market slack somewhat elevated and the capacity utilization rate in manufacturing at about percent the economy still has a bit of room to grow faster than its potential rate. Even if the unemployment rate falls below the level consistent with long-run stable inflation near-term inflation likely will be held down by the recent declines | Chapter Table Selected Interest Rates Dec-2014 Dec-2015 Difference 3-Month U.S. Treasury Yield 5-Year U.S. Treasury Yield Federal Funds Effective 2-Year U.S. Treasury Yield 10-Year U.S. Treasury Yield 10-Year BBB Corporate Bonds Yield 30-Year U.S. Treasury Yield 30-Year Fixed Mortgage Rate Note : All interest rates are the final daily or weekly data in the given month. Treasury yields are constantmaturity yields estimated by the Federal Reserve Board. Corporate bond yields are option-adjusted yields estimated by Standard & Poor 's Global Fixed Income Research. The mortgage rate is that reported in the Freddie Mac Primary Mortgage Survey Source : Federal Reserve Board ; Standard & Poor 's ; Freddie Mac ; CEA calculations in import prices. And even if inflation increases modestly it may remain below the Federal Reserve s long-run target of 2-percent inflation The Administration s economic forecast presented in Table underpins the President s FY budget. When the Administration forecast was finalized in November real GDP growth during the four quarters of was projected at percent. Data released after the forecast was finalized point to real GDP growth during that is below the Administration s forecast By long-standing convention this forecast reflects the economic effects of the President s budgetary and other economic policy proposals in the FY budget. Together these act to increase the growth rate of GDP during the 10-year budget window ( Box ) Real GDP is projected to grow and percent during the four quarters of and respectively. These growth rates exceed the Administration s estimated rate of potential real GDP growth over the long run of percent a year. As a consequence the unemployment rate is likely to fall from its percent level in : Q4 eventually falling to percent in : Q4 and remaining at that level before ticking back up to percent in : Q4. These levels below the Administration s estimate of percent for the rate of unemployment consistent with stable inflation can be expected to incrementally raise inflation. As discussed in ( Box ) the effect of unemployment on changing the rate of inflation appears to have diminished in recent decades and estimates derived over the past two decades suggest that if the unemployment rate were to remain percentage point below the stable-inflation rate of unemployment for a full year The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Table Administration Economic Forecast GDP Real Price Consumer UnemployNominal GDP Index Price Index ment Rate GDP ( Chain ( Chain ( CPI-U ) ( Percent ) Type ) Type ) Percent Change Q4-to-Q4 Interest Rate 91Day Treasury Bills ( Percent ) Interest Rate 10Year Treasury Notes ( Percent ) Level Calendar Year ( Actual ) Note : Forecast was based on data available as of November and were used for the FY Budget. The interest rate on 91-day T-bills is measured on a secondary-market discount basis Source : Forecast was done jointly with the Council of Economic Advisers the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget then the rate of inflation would increase by percentage point. In the Administration forecast the economy will be below the stable-inflation level of unemployment by an average of percentage point in and which can be expected to raise the rate of core inflation by less than percentage point each year. With the rate of core PCE inflation during at percent the 0.2-percentage point inflation increase during the next three years would still leave the rate of inflation at the end of below the Federal Reserve s 2-percent target for this index Nominal interest rates are currently low because of a reduction in the long-run interest rate and that the economy has not fully healed from the last recession. Monetary policy has also kept rates low. Consistent with the Federal Reserve s forward policy guidance at the time of the Administration forecast long-term interest rates are projected to rise consistent with the rise in short-term rates. Eventually real interest rates ( that is nominal rates less the projected rate of inflation ) are predicted to move toward but still remain well below their historical average. These interest-rate paths | Chapter are close to those projected by the consensus of professional economic forecasters. During the past several years consensus forecasts for long-term interest rates and long-term economic growth have fallen reflecting changes in views on productivity the term premium along with other global and domestic factors Forecast over the Long Term As discussed earlier the long-run growth rate of the economy is determined by the growth of its supply-side components including those governed by demographics and technological change. The growth rate that characterizes the long-run trend in real U.S. output or potential output plays an important role in guiding the Administration s long-run forecast. The potential output projections are based on the assumption that the President s full set of policy proposals which would boost long-run output are enacted ( Box ) After three years of growth above potential through real output growth shifts down to its long-term trend rate of percent. These growth rates are slower than historical averages due to the retirement of the baby-boom generation and slower growth of the workingage population Table shows the Administration s forecast for the contribution of each supply-side factor to the growth in potential real output : the workingage population ; the rate of labor force participation ; the employed share of the labor force ; the length of the workweek ; labor productivity ; and the difference between productivity growth for the economy as a whole and the nonfarm business sector. The two columns of Table show the average annual growth rate for each factor during a long period of history and over the forecast horizon. The first column shows the long-run average growth rates between the business-cycle peak of and the latest quarter available when the forecast was finalized ( : Q3 ) Many of these variables show substantial fluctuations within business cycles so that long-period growth rates must be examined to uncover underlying trends. The second column shows average projected growth rates between : Q3 and : Q4 ; that is the entire -year interval covered by the Administration forecast The population is projected to grow percent a year on average over the projection period ( line column ) following the latest projection from the Social Security Administration. Over this same period the labor force participation rate is projected to decline percent a year ( line column ) This projected decline in the labor force participation rate primarily reflects a negative demographic trend from the retirement of the baby-boom generation. During the next couple of years however rising labor demand The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box : Policy Proposals to Raise Output over the Next-Ten Years The Administration has a wide-ranging and robust economic agenda that if enacted would expand the labor force and boost productivity. In line with long-standing precedent the Administration s economic forecast incorporates the impact of the President s policy proposals. CEA estimates that in total these proposals would add over percent to the level of output in The Administration s economic forecast however only incorporates 3-percentage points of the total boost to the level of output from these proposals. This adds about percentage point on average to annual growth over the next years The remaining percentage points are not included in the forecast for reasons discussed below. As a result the Administration s forecast for the level of output in is about percent higher than the forecasts from both the Congressional Budget Office and the Blue Chip consensus panel as well as about percent higher than the median forecast from the Federal Open Market Committee Immigration reform. The policy proposal with the largest effect on output is immigration reform as embodied in the bipartisan Border Security Economic Opportunity and Immigration Modernization Act that passed the U.S. Senate in June CBO ( 2013b ) estimated that this legislation if enacted would raise the level of real GDP by percent after years. This effect is so large because immigration reform would benefit the economy by counteracting the effects of an aging native-born population attracting highly skilled immigrants that engage in innovative or entrepreneurial activities and enabling better job-matching for currently undocumented workers who are offered a path to citizenship Much of the overall effect is due to an expanded workforce a factor that is incorporated in the budget savings from immigration reform. Thus to avoid double counting in the budget savings the workforce effects of immigration reform are not incorporated in the economic forecast However percentage point of the total effect from immigration reform is due to increased total factor productivity and this is reflected in the Administration s economic forecast Policies to expand cross-border trade and investment. The other set of policies with a large effect on output are a number of international agreements that would boost cross-border trade and investment including the Trans-Pacific Partnership ( TPP ) the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership ( TTIP ) an expansion of the Information Technology Agreement ( ITA ) a Trade in Services Agreement ( TISA ) and a possible Bilateral Investment Treaty ( BIT ) with China. TPP negotiations have concluded and the Administration is working with Congress to secure its passage. A new study supported by the Peterson Institute for | Chapter International Economics ( Petri and Plummer ) finds that TPP could raise U.S. real income by percent in The European Commission ( ) estimates a roughly similar effect of TTIP on the U.S. economy an increase of percent in GDP in Investments in surface transportation infrastructure. The Administration recognizes that investments in infrastructure support economic growth by creating jobs boosting productivity and strengthening the manufacturing sector. In December the bipartisan Fixing America s Surface Transportation Act ( H.R. ) which authorizes a $ billion increase in surface transportation investment over five years was enacted into law. This funding is an important down payment but the country must further transform our transportation system to achieve a cleaner safer transportation future. The President s FY budget calls for $ billion per year over years to support innovative programs that make our communities more livable and sustainable. The IMF ( ) estimates that given the current underutilization of resources in many advanced economies a percent of GDP permanent increase in public infrastructure investment could help increase output by as much as percent after years. See Chapter in this Report for more discussion Policies to boost labor force participation. The Administration has pursued policies that enable all workers to participate in the labor force to their full potential by making it easier for workers to balance career and family responsibilities. The Administration s FY budget calls to triple the maximum child care tax credit to $ for children younger than while enabling more middle-class families to receive the maximum credit. In addition every year since the President has proposed a Federal-State partnership that would provide all 4-year olds from low- and moderate-income families with access to high-quality preschool. Finally the budget calls to provide technical assistance to help States implement and develop paid parental leave programs. These policies would increase labor force participation and the level of output Policies to make college affordable. The Administration is committed to making college affordable. The budget includes $ billion over years to make the first two years of community college tuition free for responsible students through a Federal-State cost sharing partnership. This plan would increase America s human capital and productivity by enabling million people who would not have enrolled in college to earn an associate s degree Business tax reform. President Obama s framework for business tax reform issued in sets out a series of changes that would strengthen the economy in three main ways. First by lowering average tax rates the President s plan would boost investment in the United The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | States. Second by moving to a more neutral tax system the proposals would result in a more efficient allocation of capital. And third to the degree the new system better addresses externalities for example with a more generous research and development credit it would also increase total factor productivity and therefore growth. ( See Chapter of last year s Report for a discussion of the economic benefits of business tax reform. ) Deficit reduction. CBO s ( 2013a ) analysis of the macroeconomic effects of alternative budgetary paths estimates that a hypothetical $ trillion in primary deficit reduction over years raises the long-term level of real GDP by percent. This effect arises because lower Federal deficits translate into higher national saving lower interest rates and in turn greater private investment. The Administration s FY budget proposal includes $ trillion in primary deficit reduction relative to the Administration s plausible baseline. Using CBO s methodology this would raise the level of output in by percent due to the continuing business-cycle recovery is expected to offset some of this downward trend The employed share of the labor force which is equal to one minus the unemployment rate is expected to rise less than percent a year during the next years because the long-run unemployment rate is only slightly below the rate in : Q3. The workweek is projected to be roughly flat during the forecast period following a long-term decline of percent a year. The workweek is expected to stabilize because some of the demographic forces pushing it down are largely exhausted Labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector is projected to increase percent a year over the entire forecast ( line column ) the same as the average growth rate from to ( line column ) Productivity tends to grow faster in the nonfarm business sector than for the economy as a whole because productivity in the government and household sectors of the economy is presumed ( by a national-income accounting convention ) not to grow ( that is output in those two sectors grows only through the use of more production inputs ) The difference in these growth rates is expected to subtract percent a year during the projection similar to the percent a year decline historically ( line columns and ) This productivity differential is equal to the sum of two other growth rates in the table : the ratio of nonfarm business employment to household employment ( line ) and the ratio of real output to nonfarm business output ( line ) Summing the growth rates of all of its components real output is projected to rise at an average percent a year over the projection ( line | Chapter Table Supply-Side Components of Actual and Potential Real Output Growth Growth ratea History : Q3 to : Q4 Civilian noninstitutional population aged Forecast : Q2 to : Q3 b Component Labor force participation rate Employed share of the labor force Ratio of nonfarm business employment to household employment Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business ) Output per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) Ratio of real output to nonfarm business outputc Sum : Actual real outputc Memo : a c Potential real outputd e Output per worker differential : output vs nonfarm All contributions are in percentage points at an annual rate forecast finalized November Total may not add up due to rounding b c : Q2 was a business-cycle peak. : Q3 is the latest quarter with available data Real output and real nonfarm business output are measured as the average of income- and product-side measures d e Computed as ( line ) * ( line ) Real output per household worker less nonfarm business output per nonfarm business worker. This can be shown to equal ( line ) ( line ) Note : Output is the average of GDP and GDI. Population labor force and household employment have been adjusted for discontinuities in the population series. Nonfarm business employment and the workweek come from the Labor Productivity and Costs database maintained by the Bureau of Labor Statistics Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey Labor Productivity and Costs ; Bureau of Economic Analysis National Income and Product Accounts ; Department of the Treasury ; Office of Management and Budget ; CEA calculations column ) slightly faster than the percent annual growth rate for potential real output ( line column ) Actual output is expected to grow faster than potential output primarily because of the small projected rise in the employment rate ( that is the decline in the unemployment rate ) as currently unemployed workers find jobs and others reenter the labor force or shift from part-time to full-time jobs Real potential output ( line column ) is projected to grow less than the long-term historical growth rate of percent a year ( line column ) primarily due to the lower projected growth rate of the working-age population and the retirement of the baby-boom cohort. If the effects of The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box : Stable Inflation Rate of Unemployment Economic theory generally relates inflation rates and unemployment rates under the view that very low unemployment may signal tight labor markets that generate upward pressure on wages and high demand for goods and services that put upward pressure on prices. The accelerationist Phillips curve relates the increase in the rate of inflation to the rate of unemployment or possibly some other measure of economic slack It can also be used in conjunction with other inflation-sector equations to derive estimates for the rate of unemployment that keeps inflation stable ( NAIRU ) an essential notion for maximizing growth without ever increasing inflation rates. According to the Phillips curve an unemployment rate below the one that would keep inflation stable will result in upward pressure on price inflation. Many have noted that the fit of the Phillips curve has deteriorated ( for instance Ball and Mazumder ) They observed that the Phillips curve would have predicted inflation to fall much more during the Great Recession than it did The deterioration in the ability of a simple Phillips curve model to fit the data is shown in Figure 2-x. As shown by the equation embedded in Figure 2-x the change in the rate of inflation from its expectation ( on the left hand side ) is regressed against a demographically adjusted unemployment rate and a constant term. ( From this regression one can estimate the NAIRU as the ratio of the coefficient on the unemployment rate to the constant. ) The measure of inflation expectations is lagged Figure 2-xiii R-Squared from Trailing 20-Year Price-Price Phillips Curve Rolling Regression R-Squared t te = ut t Series1 Note : Dashed line represents result from regression over entire sample period Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Federal Reserve Board Haver Analytics ; CEA calculations | Chapter inflation up to and then expectations from the Federal Open Market Committee onward. Measuring inflation by the core CPI ( that is excluding food and energy ) Figure 2-x depicts the goodness-of-fit ( known as R ) over rolling 20-year periods. During the 1990s this relationship was robust averaging an R2 of ( meaning that movements in the unemployment rate accounted for percent of the variation in inflation ) Over an estimation period that includes the past years however the R is only slightly above zero ( meaning that this model explains almost none of the recent variation in inflation ) The deterioration in fit in this Phillips curve relationship results in dramatically less precise estimates for the NAIRU as shown in Figure 2-xi which shows the band associated with a 50-percent probability that the true estimate lies within.1 An increased goodness-of-fit corresponds to a thinner confidence band implying less uncertainty over the true value of the NAIRU. Since though uncertainty surrounding the true NAIRU has risen : A mere 50-percent confidence band in ranges from to providing little certainty over the current rate of unemployment that will keep inflation stable. Moreover this is only one model of the NAIRU other models show similar increases in uncertainty over time and the total uncertainty is even larger than shown by any Percent Figure 2-xiv NAIRU from Trailing 20-Year Price-Price Phillips Curve Rolling Regression t te = ut t Note : NAIRU is the unemployment rate that keeps inflation stable. It is calculated as / Dashed line represents result from regression over entire sample period. Shaded area indicates a percent confidence band around the point estimate calculated using a method discussed in Staiger Stock and Watson ( ) for analyzing the ratio of the means of two dependent normal random variables Confidence bands since include implausible negative values Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Federal Reserve Board Haver Analytics ; CEA calculations Confidence band calculated using a method discussed in Staiger Stock and Watson ( ) which extends upon a technique introduced in Fieller ( ) A percent band is used as opposed to a one-sigma band because increasingly higher levels of confidence produce confidence bands that approach unboundedness starting after The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | individual model because of uncertainty over the true process driving inflation Similarly the coefficient on the unemployment gap has changed noticeably evolving toward zero as shown in Figure 2-xii. Over the entire estimation period this coefficient has been about ( meaning that every point-year of low unemployment raises the rate of inflation by four-tenths of a percentage point ) In contrast from to this coefficient averaged about implying that for each point-year of unemployment rate below the NAIRU inflation would rise by a quarter of a percentage point. And the most recent estimate suggests that each point-year of an unemployment rate below the NAIRU would result in a 0.03-percentage point increase in the inflation rate Although uncertainty surrounding the NAIRU has risen drastically over the past few years a small coefficient on the unemployment rate reduces the economic importance of a precise estimate for the NAIRU With an unemployment coefficient of or less an estimated NAIRU that differs by half of a percentage point from its true value will only move core CPI inflation slightly Figure 2-xv Unemployment Rate Coefficient from Trailing 20-Year Price-Price Phillips Curve Rolling Regression t te = ut t Note : Dashed line represents result from regression over entire sample period. Shaded area indicates a one sigma band around the point estimate Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Federal Reserve Board Haver Analytics ; CEA calculations immigration reform on labor-force size were incorporated into this forecast then potential real output growth would exceed the 2.3-percent rate shown in the table | Chapter Upside and Downside Forecast Risks. Like any forecast the Administration s economic forecast is uncertain and several risks are worth enumerating here. One upside risk is from the homebuilding sector which has some upside potential given the current low level of household formation and its potential for increase. Another upside risk would be that more workers are drawn back into the labor force than expected. On the downside it appears that growth in China and many other emergingmarket countries is slowing which may reduce U.S. exports. In addition financial market developments either reflecting spillovers from abroad or U.S.-specific issues are another downside risk. Over the longer-run there are some downside risks to the estimate of potential growth insofar as more recent lower productivity growth rates continue. Yet as Box discusses some of the recent slowdown in productivity growth may be an artifact of the measurement issues in the official statistics and not entirely a reflection of the economy Conclusion The economy continued to strengthen during especially in the labor market with robust employment gains and continued declines in unemployment. Job growth continued to exceed a month for the year as a whole extending the longest streak of uninterrupted private-sector job growth on record and contributing to an American recovery that has outpaced most other advanced economies. Demand is strong is the United States especially in the household sector and will continue to support solid growth in 2016.At the same time we face challenges associated with the slowing global economy that are discussed in the next Chapter Looking ahead some of the most important decisions that we make as a Nation are the structural policies that influence long-term growth. The President s budget sets forth a number of policies that can be expected to increase the level or long-term growth rate of potential output Such policies also aim to boost aggregate demand in the near term and to improve our long-term competitiveness while promising fiscal restraint over the long run. They are an essential complement to policies that make sure this growth is shared by the middle class and those working to get into the middle class The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | C H A P T E R THE GLOBAL MACROECONOMIC SITUATION A lthough the United States experienced continued growth and robust job creation the global economy in had unexpectedly low growth across many regions relative to expectations and even relative to the moresubdued growth seen in recent years. The downward shift in growth has both a broader longer-term aspect as it has applied to both many advanced economies and emerging markets continuously over the last five years and a more acute presentation over the last year and into the beginning of arising in large part from developments in emerging markets. The broader downward revisions to growth forecasts have involved an overall environment of weak global demand disappointing global productivity and shifting demographics. While both advanced and emerging economies have missed growth expectations over the last year a number of advanced economies have roughly met or exceeded expectations while the biggest downward revisions in forecasts have been among large emerging market countries To illustrate the unexpected nature of the developments the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) in January estimated global real gross domestic product ( GDP ) growth of percent in and predicted that it would rise to percent in ( IMF ) The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) in a separate analysis in November forecast global growth of percent in and percent in ( OECD ) Both of these growth estimates for were well below those forecasted just over a year earlier of percent and percent respectively. The deteriorating estimates underscore that weaker global growth particularly among U.S. trading partners was a headwind to U.S. economic growth in The IMF s estimated 3.1-percent growth rate of global real GDP in was slightly lower than the growth rate over the last three years and well below both the growth rate earlier in the recovery and the pre-crisis average of between and percent. This slowdown was not anticipated in earlier forecasts. Figure shows the IMF s forecast for global growth at different points in time. The solid line represents the actual growth outcomes while the dotted lines show the forecast. At first as growth slowed the IMF along with most other forecasters expected a near-term pickup in growth to over percent. Growth has fallen short of expectations in many regions including both advanced and emerging-market economies The global slowdown and the contrast in U.S. growth expectations compared with the world have contributed to a major appreciation of the U.S. dollar. The real trade-weighted dollar as measured by the Federal Reserve s broad index began appreciating sharply in mid-2014 and strengthened percent between July and December ( see Figure ) This is a historically large appreciation. Since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1980s the dollar has appreciated that quickly only two other times : first during the sharp monetary tightening in the early 1980s and again after the onset of the East Asian Crisis in Among the drivers of the recent appreciation is the strong performance of the U.S economy against a backdrop of relatively weak growth in the rest of the world. As a result U.S. Federal Reserve policy is at a different juncture than monetary policy in most foreign countries. While markets expect the Federal Reserve to reduce monetary policy accommodation throughout the European Central Bank ( ECB ) and the Bank of Japan ( BOJ ) are in the midst of maintaining or expanding monetary stimulus with the aim of raising inflation from low levels toward percent As discussed in Chapter the slowdown in global growth is a headwind for the U.S. economy contributing to slower growth of exports. Real net exports subtracted more than half a point from U.S. real GDP growth over the four quarters of on a growth accounting basis. In addition if the global situation deteriorated it would present a more substantial risk to the U.S. economy as well as to economies worldwide. That is why it is critical for economies around the world to focus on growth undertaking the necessary steps to expand demand reform supply encourage trade and manage economic and financial developments as appropriate in different contexts Sources of the Broader Slowdown The slower growth in the world economy relative to the pre-crisis era stems largely from slowdowns relative to expectations in emerging-market economies including large economies like India and China as well as disappointing growth in Europe. Figure compares the growth of GDP per working-age person from to relative to to with points | Chapter Figure IMF World Real GDP Growth Forecast Percent Change Year-over-Year Forecast Sep-2011 Actual Growth Forecast Oct-2012 Forecast Oct-2013 Forecast Oct-2014 Forecast Jan-2016 Forecast Oct-2015 Source : International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) Figure Real Broad Trade-Weighted Dollar Index ( Mar-1973 = ) Appreciation of U.S. Dollar Dec-2015 Note : The index above is a weighted average of the foreign exchange values of the U.S. dollar against major U.S. trading partners Source : Federal Reserve Board ; Haver Analytics The Global Macroeconomic Situation | Figure Real GDP per Working Age Population ( WAP ) Pre- vs. Post-Crisis ( Average Annual Percent Change ) Faster Growth than Pre-Crisis Real GDP/WAP Growth China United States Low Income World Euro Area India Middle Income Japan High Income Brazil Real GDP/WAP Growth Slower Growth than Pre-Crisis Note : Working age population is aged Source : World Bank ; CEA calculations on the 45-degree line representing unchanged growth rates between these two periods. In general while they may still have some demand-related slack to make up following the crisis the United States and Japan are growing at similar rates compared with their growth before the financial crisis after adjusting for changes to working-age population. Low-income countries have on average seen an increase in growth. The euro area has slowed relative to pre-crisis rates of growth with some large emerging markets also slowing A similar pattern emerges in downgrades to the IMF forecasts over the past five years. Overall the level of output among G-20 countries is 6-percent smaller in than what the IMF had predicted in after the full extent of the recessions caused by the financial crisis became apparent. Growth over the last five years has fallen short of expectation in of the G-20 economies as shown in Figure with only Saudi Arabia and Turkey slightly exceeding expectations compared with substantial shortfalls across some other nations. In total China and India account for about half of the 6-percent underperformance of the G-20 economy relative to the projections with shortfalls in the United States and the European Union accounting for another one-quarter. The United States accounts for a sizeable part of the aggregate slowdown despite good growth in GDP per working-age person and having a relatively small cumulative growth shortfall ( just percent over the period ) because it is such a large share of the | Chapter Percent Figure Percent Gap Between Actual and Projected ( Oct-2010 ) Cumulative Real GDP Growth between and Saudi Arabia Turkey Canada Germany United Kingdom United States Japan Korea Argentina Australia EU * China Indonesia France India Mexico Italy South Africa EU * = European Union ex. Germany France Italy and the United Source : International Monetary Fund ; CEA calculations Brazil Russia world economy. Likewise China and India did not underperform as much as Russia or Brazil but they make up a larger part of the shortfall because they are a much more significant part of the world economy The persistently disappointing world growth over the last half-decade has root causes both in longer-term demand and supply. On the supply side there has been disappointing labor productivity growth or the ability to produce more output from the same labor inputs across a range of countries since the crisis. While variable from year to year G-7 countries had average labor productivity growth rates near or above percent a year throughout the latter half of the 20th century. Those rates have all dropped ; in some cases to near zero. Labor productivity growth for Japan is projected to be a sixth of its annual rate from to and for the euro area a third of its average preceding the financial crisis. Similarly for most other advanced economies labor productivity is projected to be much lower in than it was prior to the financial crisis ( Conference Board ) Productivity growth in the United States has broadly outperformed other countries with both a smaller decline from the period and one of the higher growth rates in the G-7 at present. Some of the slowdown may simply reflect a slow global recovery. An important factor in lower productivity growth has been the decline in the pace of investment per worker referred to as capital deepening. To the extent that this represents a cyclical shortfall in demand The Global Macroeconomic Situation | economists would expect capital deepening and productivity growth to pick up in the coming years Sharp and persistent productivity slowdowns are not unprecedented ( Eichengreen Park and Shin ) but if sustained slower productivity growth will mean slower output growth and slower improvements in living standards. Particularly concerning is the fact that global total factor productivity ( TFP ) growth an indication of innovation above-and-beyond just deploying more capital has slowed to roughly zero in the last three years following pre-crisis rates of percent ( Conference Board ) At the same time the labor force is growing more slowly in the United States and many other economies around the world. The size of the labor force determined both by population changes and movements in the rate at which people choose to participate in the labor market provides the other key supply-side input for overall economic growth. With an aging population and falling labor force participation rates across demographic groups the size of the labor force has presented a headwind to U.S. growth mirrored to varying degrees across other economies globally ( See Box ) In addition as noted in Chapter investment has been disappointing in all of the major advanced economies since the financial crisis. This is worrying from a supply perspective as there will be a lower capital stock and possibly lower productivity growth in the future due to reduced investment today ; but it also represents a lack of demand in the world economy. Lower investment can generally be explained by the slower pace of global recovery as faster growth generates more investment demand by firms but lower investment also represents lower demand for goods and services itself Persistent demand weakness has been visible in many countries. The unemployment rate has stayed well above pre-crisis averages in many countries and weak price growth has been a signal of a lack of demand pressure in the economy. Beyond weak investment demand aggregate demand may have been persistently weak for reasons related to debt overhang and wealth loss remaining from the financial crisis. Families firms and in some countries governments saw a significant run-up in debt prior to the financial crisis as well as a loss of wealth from falling asset and home prices and high levels of insolvency during the crisis itself. Even several years later they may hold back on spending and investment as they try to deleverage and rebuild their balance sheets Secular stagnation where chronically insufficient aggregate demand can not be remedied by conventional monetary policy could also play a role in weak growth in certain economies. Stagnation occurs when even a real interest rate of zero does not generate enough investment growth to fully utilize the economy s resources. A number of features of the economy could | Chapter Box : Changing Demographic Trends and Global Growth Demographics play a large role in the long-run trend of economic growth by affecting labor supply capital formation and productivity ( IMF ) A major part of any country s real GDP growth is simply its population growth as growing populations provide more workers as well as rising demand for products new homes and services. Beyond that increases in the relative size of the working-age population ( people aged to ) can also have a major impact on output per capita by directly changing the labor supply. Demographic changes also indirectly affect the amount of resources per capita through changes in household savings behavior across their life cycles. Lower dependency ratios ( the ratio of people younger than or older than to the working-age population ) can raise savings which helps finance more investments and increases output. Finally demographics indirectly affect productivity growth through changes in the quality of human capital formation and innovation. Nevertheless the reverse is also true. Demographic changes can act as a drag on economic growth ( Kohshaka ) Global demographic trends are at a turning point. Population growth is slowing and after increasing for the previous five decades the proportion of the population that is working-age peaked at percent in This proportion is projected to decline steadily for the next century. This slower growth in the working-age population or outright contraction will continue to be a drain on global growth for the foreseeable future. Stark differences at the country level lie beneath this global trend. As seen in Figure 3-i working-age populations are now shrinking in Europe and in East Asia broadly not just as a share of the population but in raw numbers. In North and Latin America working-age populations are projected to flatten out over time while Southern Asia and Africa will continue to see an increase. Collectively these regional demographic trends signal additional risks to future global economic growth Over the next years half of the world s population will live in Africa and Southern Asia ; global population growth will be driven by their high fertility and relatively young populations. As a result the bulk of new workers in the global economy will be added in economies that have lower levels of education technology and capital implying those workers will not be as productive if current circumstances continue. By the number of people joining the working-age population from Sub-Saharan Africa and Southern Asia will exceed that from the rest of the world combined. This means both South Asia and Africa will be increasingly important to global growth. It will be necessary to build The Global Macroeconomic Situation | Figure 3-i Actual and Forecasted Working-Age Population by Region Millions of People Aged Africa Southern Asia Eastern Asia Latin America Europe North America Source : United Nations World Population Prospects institutions and economies that can lead global growth in these places ( IMF 2015c ) The other half of the world s population will experience slowdowns in population growth with rising shares of the elderly. Substantial aging is projected in Europe and East Asia ( see Figure 3-ii ) By the Figure 3-ii Actual and Forecasted Dependency Ratios by Region Number of Dependents per People Aged Latin America Africa Southern Asia World North America Europe Eastern Asia Note : A dependent is less than or more than years of age Source : United Nations World Population Prospects | Chapter regions are forecasted to have dependents ( people younger than or older than ) for every working-age persons Aging populations can put pressure on public budgets with fewer workers supporting more pensions and generally supporting slower growth. These dangers have materialized in Japan. Economic growth in Japan is stagnant ( and forecasted to remain so ) in large part because growth in the working-age population has lagged behind growth in the total population for the last years ( M hlesisen and Faruqee ) The U.S. economy grew almost twice as fast as Japan s from to However simply controlling for population by comparing growth of GDP per capita leads to much more similar growth rates ( percent versus percent ) Even more striking is that when examining GDP per working-age person Japan had slightly faster growth than the United States ( Figure 3-iii ) This highlights that even if a country is doing reasonably well conditional on its demographics as Japan has it still means slow growth over time if too few workers enter the labor force And even if income per capita is rising slow overall growth due to slow population growth can greatly increase the challenges associated with government debt and financing future government commitments ( Karam Muir Pereira and Tuladhar ) These issues are now coming to the forefront of the global economy Demographics is not just the exogenous result of developments outside of public policies it also depends on those policies. In some countries for example pro-natal policies have raised birth rates and Figure 3-iii Real GDP Growth and Demographic Trends 25-Year Average Annual Growth Rate United States Japan Real GDP Real GDP per Capita Real GDP per Working-Age Population Note : Working-age population is defined as those aged to Source : U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Cabinet Office of Japan ; OECD Data The Global Macroeconomic Situation | affected the demographic trajectory ( Kalwij ; Wong Tang and Ye ) In the United States immigration reform would expand the working-age population and reduce the ratio of children and elderly relative to prime-age workers. In addition even for a given demographic structure steps that facilitate work and raise the labor force participation rate will increase economic growth lead to this result ranging from falling population growth that provides fewer consumers and shifts investment demand to rising inequality that concentrates spending power in the hands of people who have higher propensity to save. Secular stagnation is likely not an appropriate way to describe the overall world economy or the United States today but it may be a useful way to think about some pockets of weakness or risks that could be faced if the zero lower bound becomes more constraining in dealing with future recessions. In some countries like Japan and possibly the euro area the combination of a low equilibrium real interest rate low inflation expectations emanating from weak demand and unfavorable demographics makes it very hard for monetary policy alone to stimulate the economy The current account balance provides another way to examine relative strengths and weaknesses in demand in the global economy. Countries that produce more than they consume and invest ( net exporters ) may have weaker aggregate demand more demand-related slack than those whose demand exceeds production ( net importers ) Despite substantial progress in reducing the current account deficit to a 14-year low in the United States still runs a larger current account deficit than its sustainability target as estimated by the IMF ( see Figure ) ; in part reflecting the relative strength of U.S. demand compared with the rest of the world. China Japan and the euro area especially Germany all have larger current account surpluses than either their most recent IMF sustainability targets current account norms or both In short various parts of the world economy are growing slowly and likely too slowly. U.S. economic performance has clearly been stronger than the rest of the world and has left it with less demand-related slack in the economy. Still the U.S. economy is not a large enough share of the world economy nor can it grow fast enough to solely support world growth. Even with relatively pessimistic projections for China and emerging markets those countries are projected to provide the bulk of growth in the world economy over the coming decades. If they slow more than expected global growth could fall further. though has been a difficult year for many emerging markets ( IMF and 2015d ) | Chapter Figure Current Account Balance as a Share of GDP Percent of GDP Current Account Balance ( Q3 : ) IMF Sustainability Target Germany Japan Euro Area China United States Brazil Note : The IMF Sustainability Target is the current account balance necessary to stabilize the nonfinancial account ; targets as of Source : International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) ; National Sources via Haver Analytics Developments in In contrast to the broader lack of demand affecting the global economy brought a more acute set of challenges for some emerging markets. Over the past year countries experiencing the biggest downward revisions in IMF forecasts were emerging markets and commodity producers ; Argentina and India had the only upward revisions among emerging markets in the G-20. Advanced economies have fared slightly better relative to forecasts in part because expectations have not been high. The European Union and Japan were not expected to grow rapidly and had only small revisions ( IMF and 2015d ) Euro area Recovery from the financial and sovereign debt crises in the euro area remained uneven but gained some momentum in The euro area manufacturing sector rebounded in expanding in December at its fastest pace in months. In addition all major euro-area nations experienced positive growth in output and job creation in December for the first time since April Domestic demand in the euro area remains below its pre-crisis peak driven by weak investment but growth in real GDP across Greece Ireland Italy Portugal and Spain ( GIIPS ) as a group increased ( see Figure ) although Greece contracted by percent at an annual rate The Global Macroeconomic Situation | over the first three quarters of Nonetheless the level of output relative to before the crisis remained much lower for the GIIPS than in the rest of the euro area especially Germany. ( See Figure and Box on growth across advanced economies. ) Unemployment rates tell a similar story : they have improved in the past year but many countries in the euro area are still suffering high levels of joblessness. The unemployment rate fell to percent by December for the euro area as a whole a full point lower than a year before. The rate either declined to or remained within the low range of to percent in Germany Austria and Luxembourg. In contrast it remained above percent in Slovakia ; Italy ; Portugal ; Cyprus ; and France which saw a record number of jobless workers in October. In Spain and Greece the unemployment rate was still above percent. This huge range in unemployment rates across the euro area ( from percent in Germany to percent in Greece ) stands in contrast to the range across U.S. states ( from percent in North Dakota to percent in New Mexico ) While output expanded in nearly all euro-area countries weak domestic investment and demand abroad has weighed down growth in the euro area. Investment remains subdued in both the GIIPS ( as a group ) and Germany as a fraction of GDP relative to other euro-area countries in Euro area real GDP growth slowed to percent at an annual rate in the third quarter of primarily due to a slowdown in export growth To some degree the euro-area economy is still struggling with the vestiges of the euro crisis. Uncertainty over global and regional conditions for instance the path of monetary policy regional political issues or foreign demand conditions may be one cause of the subdued level of investment The Greek situation is one example of such uncertainty. Greece experienced a sharp upswing in sovereign borrowing rates in the first half of the year ( from around percent in January to a peak of over percent in July ) as failure to implement reforms required by lenders resulted in a lending freeze raising tensions that peaked in a referendum in July where voters rejected the conditions of international lenders. Fears arose that Greece would have to exit from the euro area s currency union when partner countries cut off credit to banks through the euro system with Greece imposing strict currency controls and rationing cash withdrawals from banks. However in late summer Greece reached an agreement with euro-area partner countries to receive additional financing from the European Union. The Syriza government in Greece under the leadership of Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras followed the agreement with domestic votes on economic and fiscal reforms The measures calmed investor fears of a Greek exit from the euro area ( see Figure ) Greece s manufacturing sector remained in a severe downturn | Chapter Figure Real GDP Index ( : Q1 = ) United States ( : Q4 ) United Kingdom ( : Q4 ) Germany ( : Q3 ) Euro ex Germany and GIIPS ( : Q3 ) GIIPS ( : Q3 ) Note : GIIPS includes Greece Ireland Italy Portugal and Spain Source : National Sources via Haver Analytics throughout though its rate of contraction eased late in the year following the resolution of the acute problems in July with financial support from the European Union other euro-area members and accommodations from the European Central Bank ( ECB ) coinciding with progress on reforms Euro-area inflation was low in despite the labor market recovery in some countries further evidence that domestic demand remains weak. Figure shows that euro-area inflation remains well below the ECB s goal for the inflation rate of close to but not exceeding 2-percent As inflation continued to slow the ECB increased its monetary stimulus in purchasing billion euro in sovereign bonds each month ( quantitative easing ) and lowering a key policy rate of interest to minus percent Despite the ECB s additional stimulus a key challenge remained that interest rates were highest in countries where unemployment was highest The inability to target monetary stimulus limits the ECB s ability to help countries with the greatest economic slack and may prevent convergence across regions. Thus monetary policy alone is not sufficient to address the challenge of weak demand One reason that the United States has recovered more quickly than other advanced economies is its combination of accommodative monetary policy quick action to recapitalize the financial sector and aggressive demand management through countercyclical fiscal policy. In contrast The Global Macroeconomic Situation | Percentage Points Figure Euro Area Sovereign Interest Rate Spreads Over Germany Draghi : " Whatever it takes " ( Jul-2012 ) Greece Spain Dec-2015 Italy Source : Bloomberg Professional Service France Portugal Figure Core and Overall Inflation in the Euro Area 12-Month Percent Change CPI Inflation Target Dec-2015 Core CPI Source : Eurostat ; Haver Analytics | Chapter some euro-area countries are constrained by fiscal rules and were unable or unwilling to pursue stronger countercyclical measures. The Federal Reserve pursued several large-scale asset purchase programs from to dramatically expanding its balance sheet. In contrast the ECB s balance sheet ( as measured by the asset side ) grew more slowly in the crisis and after a brief surge in late and early was allowed to contract between mid-2012 and mid-2014 as euro-area banks repaid the ECB long-term loans taken out during the crisis. The ECB reversed course and began large-scale asset purchases in January Although the ECB voted in December to extend quantitative easing until at least March and to augment it with other measures markets appeared to have expected more forceful monetary stimulus : the euro jumped percent producing the largest one-day appreciation of the euro since March United Kingdom Real GDP growth in the United Kingdom has oscillated somewhat since mid-2014. Real GDP grew percent at an annual rate in down from percent in which was the highest rate since U.K. real GDP in the fourth quarter of was percent above its trough in the second quarter of The labor market recovered further in with unemployment falling to percent in the three months to November the lowest rate in at least years. The slowdown in U.K. GDP growth in the third quarter was largely accounted for by a large decline in net exports with exports declining amidst growth in imports. While the annual rate of core ( excluding energy and unprocessed food ) CPI inflation averaged percent below its inflation target the Bank of England held the policy rate steady throughout Japan Japan continued to face longstanding economic challenges in but experienced some signs of renewal. Japan s economy contracted in the second quarter of but rebounded in the third quarter and the economy is showing more fundamental signs of longer-term recovery. Periodic recessions have plagued Japan since a financial crisis in and may in part be a byproduct of the country s declining population which weighs on both potential GDP growth and aggregate demand. When looking at real GDP per working-age population rather than real GDP for example Japan has recovered from the global financial crisis almost as robustly as the United States. Japanese real private domestic final purchases ( PDFP ) which excludes volatile components of GDP like net exports inventories and government spending has been growing ( see Box in the Economic Report of The Global Macroeconomic Situation | the President for a discussion of the merits of PDFP as a predictive measure of real activity in the United States ) The spring shunto labor negotiations gave the biggest wage increases since ; as a result real wages have grown this year. The Japanese economy has grown at an average annual rate of percent over the first three quarters of faster than the average annual pace of approximately percent experienced over the last five years Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has pursued a package of structural reforms aimed at jumpstarting growth in the Japanese economy in addition to campaigning for monetary stimulus and advocating for flexible fiscal policy. To address the economic burdens of a population that is both aging rapidly and shrinking the Abe administration has pursued new policies that have led to an increase in the female labor force participation rate and the overall share of working-age adults who are employed. Nonetheless the aging population presents fiscal challenges and weighs on workforce participation weakening domestic demand. To provide further support for domestic demand the Bank of Japan ( BOJ ) expanded its monetary stimulus voting various times over the course of to continue targeting growth in the money supply at an annual pace of trillion yen ( about $ billion ) Despite these efforts inflation has fallen precipitously since late mostly on declining energy prices hitting zero in the second half of While this raises concerns that the struggle with deflation is not yet over measures of inflation that exclude energy are trending upward : the BOJ s recently emphasized alternative core core inflation metric which strips out fresh food and energy increased from percent year-on-year in January to percent year-on-year in September October and November closer to the BOJ s 2-percent target Emerging markets Buffeted by both global and country-specific factors many emerging markets have experienced slowdowns in growth this past year. Emerging markets generally led world growth coming out of the crisis. They generated percent of world growth from but just percent of world growth in based on IMF estimates. To highlight their importance to global growth the World Bank estimates that a percentage-point slowdown of growth in Brazil Russia India China and South Africa slows growth in other emerging-market countries by percentage point in newer frontier markets by percentage points and global growth by nearly half a percentage point ( World Bank ) In addition though changes in expectations of growth or financial stability have spilled over into global markets ( see Box for more discussion of financial spillovers ) Often direct trade linkages may understate the transmission of shocks if sharp nonlinear contagion | Chapter takes place in financial markets. At various points in and early financial volatility in China seemed to spill into many markets around the world Real GDP in Brazil and Russia contracted over the first three quarters of Others including Indonesia and Malaysia grew more slowly between the first and third quarters of than during the same period in In South Korea growth ticked up slightly but remained below the average annual growth of real GDP from through Many emerging markets experienced both currency depreciation and declining official reserves during especially Malaysia Turkey Indonesia South Africa and Russia China is in the midst of rebalancing from an investment- and exportdriven economy to an economy driven more by household consumption Total ( public plus private ) investment accounted for percent of GDP by the end of This is in contrast to advanced industrialized economies where total investment accounts for roughly percent of GDP or other major emerging markets like Brazil India Mexico South Korea and South Africa where it tends to range between and percent of GDP. Between and China s private consumption share of GDP rose percentage points while its investment share of GDP fell percentage points reflecting a slow shift in the composition of the economy. Rebalancing has become more a necessity than a choice as a large economy can not both grow much faster than the world and be export-led. If it did it would begin to crowd out the entire world market. For China to maintain strong growth and a constant export share of GDP exports would have to rise from roughly percent of total world exports to as much as half of world exports over the next years an unlikely occurrence. Even at a more moderate growth rate keeping the same export contribution to growth would require China to take a very large share of world exports Thus reforms that rebalance growth will be crucial to sustained and balanced growth in China and the rest of the world. China s economy is slowing from double-digit growth rates over the past decade ( percent on average from to ) to still-rapid but more moderate rates between and percent. According to statistics based on official data Chinese real GDP grew percent in down from percent in but close to the government s target of percent. The extent of slowing in was unevenly felt in the economy. While service sector growth has picked up consistent with a shift toward more consumption Figure shows various measures demonstrating slowing across industrial sectors especially those related to construction The Global Macroeconomic Situation | Box : Market Volatility in the Second Half of Markdowns in expectations for global growth and commodities prices have at times in generated substantial swings in global financial markets. Beyond any direct effects from slower global growth some of the potential acute risks for the U.S. economy come through spillovers from global financial markets. It can be possible for a large event or change in perceptions such as an actual shift in policy or an abrupt rethinking of the growth prospects in a major economy to shift investors risk sensitivities in a dramatic way. Equity prices across major markets moved in a highly correlated fashion on average in the fall of and the early weeks of which could signal that changes in risk sentiment are moving rapidly from one country to another The summer and early fall were marked by gyrations in global asset markets. The degree and potential impact of the slowing of China s growth rate uncertainty over changes in advanced-country monetary policies the future of Greece s membership in the euro area and the implications of declining commodity prices for commodityproducing countries and firms contributed to unease among investors accompanied by market volatility. The VIX a common measure of investor uncertainty spiked in August and September ( see Figure 3-iv ) and correlations in equity prices across markets rose The period did see a considerable dive in equity prices as investors reacted strongly to even small changes in emerging data like U.S. jobs Price Figure 3-iv U.S. European and Chinese Volatility Indices Euro Stoxx Volatility Index CBOE China Volatility Index Source : Bloomberg Professional Service | Chapter VIX 12/31/2015 numbers or Chinese real GDP growth. Although markets in a number of countries did finish down for the year the stock market in the U.S finished roughly even and in Germany and Shanghai finished up on the year despite the dramatic fluctuations in the summer Finance theory suggests that correlation in investor behavior can occur if investors are focusing on the same economic fundamentals to decide on trades or when investors are just more uncertain about what will happen to economic fundamentals ( Scharfstein and Stein ; Brunnermeier ; Veldkamp and ; Bacchetta and van Wincoop ) Some financial markets exhibited heightened correlation during this period of volatility. This heightened comovement has occurred again in the early weeks of It is important to note that markets are not always correlated and not every shock from abroad affects U.S. markets. During the substantial run-up of the Chinese equity market in the spring and then crash in the early summer of U.S equity markets barely moved at all. But in both late August and early January Chinese European and U.S. markets all moved together ( see Figure 3-v ) The elevated correlations could have been due to shocks that have a global reach ( exchange rate policy changes in China for example ) or common shifts in perception ( changing views of global demand or commodity market prospects ) but it can also represent spillovers from one market to the next as investors act in a herd-like manner or losses in one market force asset sales in another. This suggests the Figure 3-v U.S. European and Chinese Stock Markets Index ( 1/5/2015 = ) Shanghai Composite Euro Stoxx Index S&P 12/31/2015 Jan-2015 Apr-2015 Jul-2015 Source : Bloomberg Professional Service Oct-2015 Jan-2016 The Global Macroeconomic Situation | potential for rapid spillovers between even apparently unrelated markets should investors shift their views more than usual due to an unexpected piece of news. Swings in global finance and investor attitudes can have important impacts on the world economy ( Borio ) This box surveys recent trends in leverage commodity prices and policy that may relate to the way movements in global growth expectations can feed through into financial markets Leverage. Rising leverage especially in some emerging markets may have made financial markets fragile right now. Credit growth enables output growth as it allows consumers corporations and the government to borrow against the future GDP but large expansions of leverage across many emerging markets leaves them vulnerable to not just the slower growth that a debt overhang sometimes prompts but also to a sharper crash. Surveys of history have found that large credit booms result in a financial crisis about one-third of the time and often are followed by a growth slowdown even if there is no crisis ( Jorda Schularick and Taylor and ) An example of how these risks come together is the current degree of corporate debt in some emerging markets especially the debt in foreign currency. The IMF recently labeled it a principal risk in its latest Global Financial Stability Report. Based on IMF data emerging market corporate debt has grown from under percent of GDP prior to the crisis to nearly percent today. Even in countries with lower overall leverage this can be problematic as particular firms may be overly indebted leading to defaults. Even if debt levels are manageable if their home currency depreciates against the U.S. dollar ( the principal foreign currency in which there has been borrowing ) then the real burden of that debt rises for these firms again pushing them towards bankruptcy and default. saw a rise of emerging market corporate defaults and some key downgrades in sovereign debt ratings Still foreign currency borrowing in emerging markets may not be as problematic as two decades ago. First many of the firms that are borrowing have U.S. dollar revenues because they are exporters. In that sense even if their home currency depreciates they are still earning revenues in dollars and as such can pay their debt. To the extent that these firms are commodity exporters they may face problems from reduced earnings but the foreign currency borrowing itself may not be the key risk. In addition countries overall have much stronger currency balance sheets than they did two decades ago ( Benetrix Lane and Shambaugh ) Many countries expanded their foreign currency reserves saw an increase in private foreign assets and took more liabilities in local currency debt FDI and equity. These developments may insulate some | Chapter countries from downside risks in turbulent financial times. This has helped some emerging markets weather swings in exchange rates that previously would have involved substantial valuation losses. The IMF recommended in its January WEO update that emerging markets in particular continue to build resilience to volatile capital markets Commodity Prices and Nonlinear Effects. Many models assume a supply generated shock to world oil prices is a net positive for the world economy. Many oil producers most notably Saudi Arabia have substantial wealth buffers that smooth their spending across oil price changes while oil consumer countries are often more liquidity constrained. But price declines that are deep enough can cause substantial changes in global capital expenditures on oil investment and even deeper price changes can threaten corporate or sovereign borrowers. In the United States eleven oil and natural gas producers with over $ million in liabilities filed for bankruptcy in defaulting on a combined $ billion of debt. This compares to when only one bankruptcy involving a firm with more than $ million in liabilities occurred Market expectations of default ( measured by CDS spreads ) also show a sharp increase for energy firms especially those in the United States In both August and in December of oil prices and major equity markets appeared to take cues from one another. The comovement of oil prices and equity returns may have reflected a common response to changing expectations of future global growth. However an ongoing concern is that oil prices could potentially decline below some threshold that would result in substantial increased number of bankruptcies by oil producers. Although increased oil-sector bankruptcies would have some modest negative effects on the economy the chief risk is that the resulting oil-sector bond defaults could raise bond investors concerns about credit markets more broadly which in turn would depress aggregate economic activity. This is an example of nonlinear effects in asset markets where movements of a price or economic data may be harmless or even positive for the economy within a certain bound but outside that bound if there are highly leveraged players in the market it can have negative effects on financial markets Policy. A crucial caveat to the potential financial risks is the extent to which financial systems are more robust than during financial crises over the past years. First U.S. investors do not have large exposure to emerging market corporate assets. Even with respect to broader volatility regulations adopted under the Dodd-Frank Act have significantly reduced the exposure of large financial institutions in the United States to risk associated with recent bouts of instability in equity and other asset markets. Financial institutions stock of capital serves as a cushion to The Global Macroeconomic Situation | absorb unexpectedly high losses. Increased capital requirements under Dodd-Frank increase the size of this cushion. Measures from the New York University Volatility Institute suggest banks are better armed to weather market turbulence than they were even just a few years ago. In addition some rules have made it more costly for banks to engage in speculative trading : the Volcker Rule implemented in July also limits the kinds of risks that banks can take when they invest their stock of capital before raising alarms with regulators. Finally some financial institutions that were previously able to exploit regulatory loopholes have been brought under the regulatory umbrella The rules that have helped push the industry in this direction are not unique to the United States but have been part of a broader push in the Basel III agreement and discussions within the euro area. The designation of crucial global institutions as globally systematically important financial institutions has placed extra capital requirements and rules on some firms and established resolution authority for these institutions making the likelihood that a major failure generates a Lehman shock smaller. It requires great hubris to assume that the financial markets are bulletproof but they may now be able to better withstand shocks than a decade ago China s demand for imports from many trading partners also has slowed considerably since such that weakening demand is also being felt in some global commodity markets where China is an important consumer ( see Box ) For instance according to the World Steel Association China accounts for nearly percent of the world s apparent steel consumption. Estimates based on available data suggest that China s demand for steel may have fallen by as much as million tons or more in an amount close to percent of total steel exports by the top steel exporters. This reduced demand for a variety of commodities has had a significant impact on world markets as China is a leading export destination for numerous countries China s currency policies also underwent noteworthy changes in China maintains a narrow trading band with respect to the U.S dollar. Market pressure forced the renminbi ( RMB ) toward the weak edge of its trading band during much of and the first half of ( see Figure ) On August the People s Bank of China decided to adopt a new scheme in determining its reference rate basing it on the RMB s previous closing and allowing a plus or minus a percent trading band accompanied by a depreciation of the RMB. This shift came amidst and may have contributed to global market volatility in August. Between August and the end of | Chapter Figure Measures of Industrial Activity in China 4-Quarter Percent Change Exports Cement Production Volume Steel Production Volume Real GDP : Q4 Industrial Electricity Consumption Rail Freight Traffic Note : Industrial electricity consumption is " secondary industry " consumption. Real GDP is year-toyear percent change Source : China National Bureau of Statistics ; State Administration of Foreign Exchange ; China Electricity Council ; Haver Analytics Figure China 's Foreign Exchange Rate and Trading Band Renminbi per U.S. Dollar April Trading Band Increase March Trading Band Increase 12/31/2015 Market Close Renminbi Appreciation Daily Reference Rate Source : Bloomberg Professional Service The Global Macroeconomic Situation | Box : Commodity Prices and Inflation in the Global Economy The drop in commodity prices seen in Figure 3-vi resulted in part from weakness in the world economy including slowing demand from China which is a large consumer of many commodities in the global marketplace. The slowdown in the Chinese construction and manufacturing sectors contributed to a drop in demand for commodities that has been felt worldwide and some of the most precipitous drops in commodity prices hit during the summer amid growing market concerns about China s economy. Slower global growth has implied lower demand for various commodities ; for example Figure 3-vii shows that the rise and fall in world industrial production growth in recent years coincided with sharp movements in commodity prices. The most-recent significant drop in commodity prices occurred alongside a relatively small decline in global industrial production which suggests that to some degree it is driven by weak demand. Still the commodity price drop seen in was much steeper than the fall in industrial production likely reflecting shifts in supply or re-evaluations of long-term demand prompted by the summer s financial market turbulence. Whatever the underlying reason the drop in commodity prices has caused economic turbulence in a number of commodity-exporters especially in emerging markets The decline also may be contributing to an interesting contrast in countries experiences with inflation. Global inflation in is on pace to be at its lowest rate since and barring its lowest rate Figure 3-vi Change in Commodity Futures Prices June to December Percent Change Energy Industrial Metals Precious Metals Grains Note : RBOB is reformulated blendstock for oxygenate blending. WTI is West Texas Intermediate Source : Bloomberg Professional Service | Chapter Figure 3-vii World Industrial Production and Commodity Prices 12-Month Percent Change 12-Month Percent Change World Industrial Production ( right axis ) Nov-2015 Commodity Prices ( left axis ) Source : Netherlands Bureau of Economic Policy Analysis ; Bloomberg Professional Service since at least Out of the G-20 economies ( including of the G-7 countries ) had four-quarter inflation rates below percent in the third quarter of and three of them with rates below zero. All of the world s major advanced economies had rates below their target. While advanced economies are confronting the challenge of very low or even negative inflation some major commodity exporters like Brazil and Russia have faced rapid currency depreciation and high inflation rates ; in part because currency depreciation makes imported goods more expensive to domestic consumers. Other emerging markets like Mexico and South Africa where commodity exports are and percent of GDP respectively have also experienced currency depreciation but lower inflation rates ranging between and percent still above those of a number of European countries Japan and the United States the cumulative depreciation in the spot rate was percent against the dollar. Since August the authorities have sold foreign exchange to support the RMB as the market was surprised by the sudden depreciation exchange rate expectations reset and private capital outflows continued. The end of and start of has also seen renewed discussion of the value of the RMB versus a basket of currencies not just the U.S. dollar as well as greater volatility in the exchange rate. Clear communication by China of its policies and actions to the market as it makes an orderly transition to a market-determined exchange rate will help guide market expectations The Global Macroeconomic Situation | In November the IMF voted to include the RMB as the fifth currency used to underpin the IMF Standard Drawing Right ( effective October ) which globally serves as an important unit of account. Despite many steps toward financial liberalization and openness continuing controls on cross-border flows of capital and RMB trading pose many questions regarding the future path of its integration into the global economy Brazil is one of the countries hit hardest by the recent collapse in commodity prices in combination with other domestic challenges with GDP contracting more than percent at an annual rate over the first three quarters of The currency lost roughly a third of its value against the dollar in the year after December Although it has fueled domestic inflation currency depreciation has generated a rebound in exports ( both in real local-currency-denominated terms and as a fraction of GDP ) and in the current account in which narrowed considerably from a deficit of percent to about percent of GDP ( see Figure ) The IMF has espoused flexible exchange-rate regimes like Brazil s for weathering commodity-price downturns under fiscal constraints As a group the low-income economies ( LICs ) defined as economies with gross national income ( GNI ) per capita of $ or less by the World Bank or a group of countries identified as low-income by the IMF were a bright spot in global economic growth in recent years. Real GDP growth in low-income economies had risen from just over percent on average in the period to about percent in However both the World Bank Global Economic Prospects and the IMF report that GDP growth in LICs fell to between and percent in Depending on how one defines the category between a half and two-thirds of LICs are commodity exporters. The commodity price decline is taking a toll on public finances current account balances and economic growth in these countries making them more vulnerable to both domestic challenges and external shocks such as global financial turbulence Not every emerging market has seen disappointing growth. India for example experienced strong GDP growth in with estimates for growth continuing at roughly percent in and ( projected ) India along with Argentina were the only G-20 countries estimated to have grown faster in than the IMF had predicted a year earlier. Its status as an important player in service industries as opposed to commodity or manufacturing exports has likely helped its continued growth and a pickup in investment may come as a result of recent policy reforms Still the slower growth around the globe has had spillovers to the U.S. economy. Weaker growth abroad than in the United States tends to put | Chapter Percent of GDP Figure Brazil 's Current Account Balance : Q3 Source : Banco Central do Brasil ; Haver Analytics upward pressure on the U.S. dollar and downward pressure on exports both of which were observed in U.S. Trade The U.S. nominal trade deficit in goods and services narrowed slightly from to percent of GDP in as measured in the national income and product accounts. The trade deficit in levels widened slightly from $ billion in to $ billion in as goods exports fell faster than goods imports and trade in services remained almost stable reflecting the global headwinds discussed above. The trade balance shrank as a share of GDP as output grew faster reflecting the strength of the domestic economy relative to the rest of the world. Figures and show these balances calculated according to the balance of payments method. U.S. services exports continue to grow relative to U.S. goods exports as they have since the start of the digital revolution in the 1990s Services make up percent of our exports but only percent of our imports ( see Figures and ) Four out of every five American jobs are in the service sector. The Department of Commerce estimates that services exports supported million U.S. jobs in The Global Macroeconomic Situation | Figure U.S. Trade in Goods Billions of U.S. Dollars Dec-2015 Imports Exports Trade Balance Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Census Bureau Billions of U.S Dollars Figure U.S. Trade in Services Dec-2015 Exports Imports Trade Balance Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Census Bureau | Chapter Automotive Vehicles Parts Engines % Figure Composition of U.S. Exports Consumer Goods % Other Goods % Services % Capital Goods ex. Autos % Industrial Supplies and Materials % Foods Feeds Beverages % Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Census Bureau Figure Composition of U.S. Imports Consumer Goods % Services % Automotive Vehicles Parts Engines % Other Goods % Capital Goods ex. Autos % Foods Feeds Beverages % Industrial Supplies and Materials % Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Census Bureau The Global Macroeconomic Situation | U.S. exports are percent of the size of U.S. GDP much higher than years ago ( see Figure ) They peaked at nearly percent of U.S GDP in and Until very recently real exports were consistently increasing so the decline demonstrates that our economy is growing faster than global demand for U.S. goods another manifestation of the headwinds discussed above Beyond the simple demand component of GDP exports provide many benefits to the economy. Exports support nearly million U.S. jobs according to estimates by the Department of Commerce a fact that is more important given that exporters pay as much as percent higher wages on average than non-exporters ( see below for more detailed discussion ) Growing exports can help generate productivity growth as higher productivity sectors and firms expand with access to a larger market. This allows them to employ a higher share of the labor force in these high-productivity firms In addition a rich literature discussed in Chapter documents incentives that access to global markets give for firms to innovate Trade is important both for U.S. firms and for supporting high-paying jobs. Between mid-2009 and the end of exports of goods and services accounted for more than a quarter of U.S. economic growth. As of ( the most recent data available ) more than U.S. companies were engaged in exporting the vast majority of them small and medium-sized businesses Research published by the U.S. Census Bureau illustrates the strikingly high-quality jobs these companies support. Non-exporting firms employed an average of workers apiece at payrolls averaging $ per worker while exporting firms employed an average of workers each at payrolls averaging $ per worker ( Census ) Other research by Riker ( ) and Riker and Thurner ( ) confirms the existence of an exporter wage premium showing that workers at exporting firms earn up to percent more on average than non-exporting firms. Riker ( ) provides updated estimates in a similar range with exporting firms paying premiums of up to percent for blue collar workers and percent for white collar workers. Fajgelbaum and Khandelwal ( ) estimate that trade openness has increased the purchasing power of American consumers in a progressive way. According to their calculations households in the lowest third of the income distribution gain more than half of their purchasing power from U.S trade and middle-income households gain more than a quarter of their purchasing power from U.S. trade. See Box for a further discussion on how trade can promote innovation and economic growth. About half of U.S exports go to emerging markets demonstrating our interdependence with economies that have increasingly experienced challenges to growth during ( see Figure ) | Chapter Figure Exports as a Share of GDP Percent : Q4 Note : Shading denotes recession Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis Other % Figure Destinations of U.S. Goods Exports Euro Area % Developing Asia % Other TPP Countries % Middle East and North Africa % Sub-Saharan Africa % Latin America % Other Advanced % Mexico % Canada % Note : Reflects data through September. TPP denotes the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement Source : International Monetary Fund The Global Macroeconomic Situation | Box : The Importance of the Trans-Pacific Partnership ( TPP ) for the U.S. Economy The complicated global economic environment underscores the importance of the President s trade agenda in opening new markets and ensuring a level playing field for U.S. firms. The centerpiece of that agenda is the Trans-Pacific Partnership ( TPP ) a comprehensive and high-standard trade agreement with other countries including of the United States largest trading partners in one of the most dynamic fastest-growing regions of the world. With percent of the $ billion in U.S. exports of goods and percent of the $ billion in U.S. exports of services going to TPP countries in no previous free trade agreement has covered such a large share of U.S. trade U.S. exports to TPP countries supported an estimated million U.S jobs in more than a third of the million U.S. jobs supported by exports to the world The TPP will make it much easier to sell American goods and services to this rapidly growing market. It will eliminate over tariffs on U.S. goods exports. It locks in zero-tariffs on percent of goods traded not just eliminating tariffs but ridding businesses of the uncertainty that tariffs might suddenly rise in a market they serve. For example tariffs up to percent on machinery and up to percent on fresh fruit industries where it can take time between investing in expanded capacity and when producers start earning revenues would be phased out or eliminated enabling producers to invest upfront without worrying that tariffs might later arbitrarily be revived. It promotes expanded digital and services trade with safeguards for privacy and security. It makes important strides to help small- and medium-sized businesses including streamlining trade barriers like complicated standards and technical regulations which make it hard for small businesses to access new markets providing only one set of rules to export their goods rather than separate standards for each of the countries. It reduces a slew of customs frictions allowing e-filing of customs forms and advance valuation and ensuring that goods can pass through ports expediently with special provisions for the express deliveries so important to many smaller firms Under the TPP the United States will help set the standards for free and fair trade in the Pacific Basin. The TPP is part of a new generation of agreements going further than any prior agreement to advance the wellbeing of workers and firms in the United States and the region as a whole. Under TPP partners have agreed to adhere to labor standards of the International Labor Organization including the right to unionize and commitments to enforce prohibitions on child and forced labor. For | Chapter instance Vietnam s and Malaysia s workers will for the first time gain the freedom to form independent unions lifting decades-old restrictions. TPP will also require Malaysia to fully implement recently passed amendments to the country s Anti-Trafficking law taking an important step to address human trafficking issues. The TPP has enforceable provisions to prevent illegal wildlife trafficking discourage subsidy programs that increase pressure on fisheries stocks and help prevent illegal logging. The labor and environmental standards will be enforceable with dispute settlement and trade sanctions if necessary helping improve quality of life in the region and avoid unfair competition. In dispute settlement it offers improved transparency includes opportunities for public comment in dispute settlement and reaffirms each country s right to regulate in the public interest for national security health safety financial stability and environmental reasons. It levels the playing field with strong rules to help make sure that governments can not give unfair advantages to their state-owned enterprises and companies can not gain a competitive advantage by undermining worker protections and environmental regulations which is a high risk if trade integration continues in the region without U.S. involvement Research suggests substantial positive impacts on both U.S. exports and incomes if TPP is put into force. One prominent study by Petri and Plummer ( ) from the Peterson Institute predicts a significant gain for the United States an additional percent in real annual income with the majority of the benefit going to labor in the form of higher wages including an expansion of U.S exports by more than percent relative to a world without the agreement. It also predicts large gains for even the poorest among the TPP countries. Although the authors note that tariff reductions were more ambitious than many anticipated roughly half of the economic benefits arise from reductions in non-tariff barriers. Another study released recently by the World Bank concurs that TPP would deliver significant benefits to the U.S. economy boosting income and exports by tens of billions relative to a world without TPP Delay or failure to implement TPP risks substantial costs. Exporters may watch new opportunities to expand delayed or missed a cost which Petri and Plummer ( ) estimate to be $ billion if implementation is delayed by even just one year. At the same time China the European Union Japan and other economies are negotiating preferential agreements whose effect in the absence of TPP would be to create or exacerbate tariff differentials that put U.S. exports at risk and may reduce incentives for goods-producing industries to invest in the United States The Global Macroeconomic Situation | The challenging environment for U.S. exports is an important motivation for the President s trade agenda including the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement which was closed in October and submitted to Congress soon afterward ( discussed in Box as well as in Chapters and ) and the Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership negotiations currently in progress as well as a number of other initiatives Conclusion Slower global growth in was both a product of longer-term supply slower productivity growth and slowing labor force growth and demand factors weak investment growth and longer-term demand slowdowns. In addition though continued cyclical weakness in many areas of the world combined with a sharp emerging-market slowdown produced the slowest global growth rate since the recovery from the global financial crisis began. The United States has been a relative bright spot in the world economy gradually approaching full employment levels of output and generating substantial portions of global demand. It will be crucial that the world economy not return to a model prevailing prior to the crisis where too much of the global economy relied on the U.S. consumer. Still forecasts are for these global headwinds to continue to weigh on U.S. growth in the near future which is why both strengthening the U.S. economy to ensure it is more resilient while working with partners abroad on their growth is a key priority for the President | Chapter C H A P T E R INEQUALITY IN EARLY CHILDHOOD AND EFFECTIVE PUBLIC POLICY INTERVENTIONS Introduction E conomic research has established that investments in children s health education nutrition and income support have large benefits both for individuals and for society as a whole. For example public provision of K-12 education has long been viewed as essential for promoting equality of opportunity and for fostering a productive workforce. More recently however research has shown the critical importance of investments made in the years before children enter school Many measures of abilities and skills that contribute to future productivity referred to by economists as human capital were once considered by many to be hereditary. Yet a growing body of research at the intersection of economics neuroscience and developmental psychology has shown that early indicators of a child s potential are often highly responsive to changes in environment and to the actions of parents and caregivers. In turn improvements or deficits in early investments can perpetuate themselves in part by enhancing or reducing the efficacy of later childhood investments Indeed at the time of school entry the characteristics of a child and his or her family explain much of the variation in later educational achievement and even in subsequent earnings and employment. Further gaps that exist at school entry tend to remain stable or even widen as children progress through school The persistence of these early childhood disparities has profound consequences for the life chances of those born into poverty and disadvantage Comparisons of early health and human capital measures across different groups in society reveal large gaps by household income and by race/ethnicity geography and family structure. These gaps are mirrored by gaps in a variety of parental characteristics and inputs as well as by differences in the child s environment. Despite the high potential returns many families lack the resources time and opportunities to make essential early investments in their children Opportunity gaps among young children have important implications for public policy. Researchers have studied a broad set of policies that provide investment in early childhood and found significant and wide-ranging benefits for parents and children.1 Public investment that improves the inputs in a child s early years can help to close critical achievement health and development gaps and can lead to benefits such as higher earnings that accumulate over a lifetime. In fact some researchers argue that closing the gaps in early childhood is the easiest and most cost-effective way to reduce inequality in later-life outcomes.2 Closing these gaps is not just about education but also about more broadly alleviating the budget constraints facing families of younger children Importantly the benefits of early investment accrue not only to individual children and their families but also to society. The public benefits include : higher tax revenue from a more productive workforce ; lower rates of criminal activity ; reduced inequality ; and reductions in public spending on medical care remedial education,3 incarceration and transfer programs This chapter surveys the research on the benefits of early childhood investment with an emphasis on the role of public policy. The first part of the chapter begins with an overview of the main theories explaining why early investments may have especially high returns. It then presents evidence on the early appearance of large gaps by socioeconomic status ( SES ) including gaps in measures of early health and human capital in a variety of parental characteristics and inputs and in other environmental factors The first part concludes by presenting the main economic arguments on why government policy is crucial to ensuring an optimal level of investment in early childhood especially for children from disadvantaged households In the second part the chapter surveys existing Federal policies and programs that invest in early childhood health development and education and reviews the most rigorous research on the impacts of these policies on children s short- and long-run outcomes. The broad range of policies and programs considered here operate through multiple mechanisms. These include : direct investments in early education such as high-quality child care Chapter Four of the Economic Report of the President The Economics of FamilyFriendly Workplace Policies and CEA s January report The Economics of Early Childhood Investment discuss the benefits that early childhood education can have for parents. This chapter focuses on the benefits for children See for example Cunha et al. ( ) Encompasses both special education and additional education required by students that are held back | Chapter and preschool ; direct investments in health such as children s health insurance and home visitation to help new parents keep infants healthy ; nutrition programs that supplement families food budgets ; and income transfers and other near-cash transfer programs that offer more flexible assistance to low-income families. This overview analyzes the benefits to the individual and to the public and assesses the role of policy in promoting economic opportunity for all children The Economics of Investing Early and the Consequences of Early Life Disadvantage Pathways for Returns to Early Investments Researchers have outlined several theories that help explain why early childhood is a particularly important time to invest in children. First investments made when children are very young will generate returns that accrue over a child s entire life. Since the benefits are realized over a longer time horizon the earlier in life they are made the more likely early childhood interventions are to generate substantial benefits both to the child and to his or her community.4 A second reason that early childhood investments benefit children s development may be that the flexibility and capacity for change in cognitive functioning and brain development is the greatest for young children and these changes can have lasting effects on behavior throughout life ( Knudsen et al. ) Research shows that characteristics that are often assumed to be innate like cognitive skills can be influenced by environmental factors in early childhood ( Jensen ; National Scientific Council on the Developing Child ) Under this model not only do earlier investments generate benefits over a longer time period but also each dollar invested produces greater impacts since children s brains are developing most rapidly when they are young Related developmental theories imply that a child s environment in utero has a large impact on the health of the child and indicate that even investments made before birth can have long-lasting consequences. The fetal origins hypothesis posits that adverse conditions in the womb can strongly influence whether a child develops metabolic issues such as diabetes and heart disease throughout their lives ( Currie and Rossin-Slater ) and can even translate beyond physical health to mental health ( Persson This is a central tenet of the human capital model in economics ; see Becker ( ) and BenPorath ( ) Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | and Rossin-Slater ) These adverse conditions can also affect cognitive and economic outcomes including test scores educational attainment and income ( Almond and Currie ; Lavy Schlosser and Shany ) The academic literature on the long-term health impacts of stress and nutrition in utero provides support for this theory and support for intervening even before birth Third early investments can have large impacts if early skills serve as a multiplier or prerequisite for later skills ( Cunha et al. ; Cunha and Heckman ) For example it may be that the extent of skill acquisition in early elementary school depends on the degree of skills attained before entering kindergarten and skills learned in adolescence depend on mastery of these elementary skills. Under this skill-begets-skill model early investments in child development can enhance the productivity of future investments in human capital. Since early education may serve as a complement for later skills gained in high-quality elementary and later education it is important to reinforce children s learning throughout their schooling years to maximize the benefits of early education. A continuum of high-quality education ensures that early investments can be strengthened and built upon in later years ( Currie and Thomas ) These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive as there is evidence to support each and they may work together to produce the large benefits of early investments Inequality in Early Health and Human Capital Investments Comparisons of early health and human capital measures across different groups in American society reveal large gaps by household income and by race/ethnicity and family structure. On nearly every measure of school readiness children born into low-income households enter school at a substantial disadvantage relative to their higher-income peers. For example Figure shows that income-based gaps in math skills attention and social skills are well-established by kindergarten and that these achievement gaps persist ( and if anything tend to widen ) through fifth grade The barriers faced by young people who grow up in disadvantaged settings are compounded over time and may be exacerbated by unequal treatment in the educational and disciplinary systems later in childhood By the time youth who have experienced these challenges reach adulthood See also the large epidemiological literature connecting in utero exposure to famine and the onset of mental illness ( Susserr and Lin ; Susser et al. ; Neugebauer et al. ; McClellan et al. ) and evidence that mental illness can be traced to brain abnormalities that may be related to fetal environment ( Berquin et al. ; Stoner et al. ; Liu et al ) | Chapter Figure Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills SES Gaps are Mostly Established by Kindergarten Gap in Standard Deviation Units Kindergarten Fifth Grade Math Attention and Engagement Antisocial Behavior Note : SES refers to socioeconomic status. Calculations by Duncan and Magnuson ( ) based on data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Kindergarten Cohort. Kindergarten test scores were measured in ; fifth grade test scores for the same students were measured in Source : Duncan and Magnuson ( ) they are less likely to have the educational attainment and labor market skills critical to success in today s economy. As a result they tend to participate less often in the labor force experience higher rates of unemployment when they do participate and earn less when they find work Recent research on the intergenerational transmission of wealth suggests that the close connection between family resources and children s adult outcomes is in large part due to differences in environment rather than genetics ( Black et al. ) Research also points to specific pathways through which poverty can be detrimental for young children s immediate and long-run outcomes including inequality in resources directed toward building human capital. Growing up with a lack of familial resources means there are simply fewer resources available to support health and education. In addition to restricted monetary investment due simply to a lack of resources several other factors associated with poverty such as low parental health and human capital food insecurity stress and neighborhood factors like school quality can have negative impacts on children s physical and mental health cognition and socio-emotional and behavioral skills This section examines the evidence on gaps in early childhood health as measured by birth weight and other physical health indicators and in early human capital measures including both cognitive skills as measured by school achievement and non-cognitive skills as measured by socio-emotional and behavioral skills. Research has demonstrated that these Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Figure Official Poverty Rate for Households with Children by Householder Characteristic Percent Below Federal Poverty Level Race/Ethnicity Education Marital Status Source : CPS ASEC ( ) ; CEA calculations measures are both mutable and strong predictors of long-run outcomes Evidence is also presented on the parallel gaps in a variety of parental characteristics and inputs as well as other characteristics of children s environments that likely contribute to the gaps in early outcomes Here and throughout this chapter the focus is on income-based gaps and disadvantages associated with poverty. While poverty is strictly defined in terms of income it is important to note that poverty can also serve as a proxy for many other forms of disadvantage that may also stifle investment in early childhood. Poverty is unevenly distributed by race/ethnicity and family structure. In million children lived in poverty in the United States an overall child poverty rate of percent. But youth of color were disproportionately impoverished including percent of African-American youth and percent of Hispanic youth. Young children of single mothers were also disproportionately impoverished with over one-half of all related children under age in households headed by a female in poverty ( Census Bureau ) Finally as Figure shows children whose households are headed by individuals who are non-White less-educated and/or single are especially likely to experience poverty ; as a result they are more likely to experience deficits in early health and human capital inputs and in later-life outcomes | Chapter Disparities in Early Health Prenatal neonatal and post-neonatal health ( through the first year of life ) are crucial early determinants of later-in-life health and academic success. Good health and nutritional baselines are directly linked to better health in childhood. Early health outcomes carry over into adult health outcomes and even connect to non-health outcomes such as cognition which can continue into adulthood. Even before birth children born into lower socioeconomic status households face disadvantages in the area of health Individuals of lower socioeconomic status experience higher levels of stress than more advantaged individuals. As such the link between maternal stress and child physical and mental health outcomes puts children born into poorer households at higher risk of adverse health outcomes ( Persson and Rossin-Slater ; Thompson ; Kunz-Ebrecht et al. ; Cohen et al. ; Aizer Stroud and Buka ) Health disadvantages continue throughout children s earliest years in the form of food insecurity stress and cognitive overload ( an accumulation of concerns to the point that the stress becomes overwhelming and impairs cognitive functioning ) The stress and concerns associated with living in poverty can affect cognition and health into adulthood. Children born to lower-income mothers are also less likely to receive early and adequate prenatal care. Rates of first trimester prenatal care increase with educational attainment from only percent of mothers with less than a high school diploma to percent of mothers with a bachelor s degree or higher ( Health Resources and Services Administration ) As a result of exposure to these adverse early childhood health conditions children growing up in poverty may experience more physical and mental health problems throughout their lives. Researchers have shown that maternal stress during pregnancy depresses birth weight ( Persson and Rossin-Slater ; Black Devereux and Salvanes ) and can increase the risk of hospitalizations in the first five years of life ( Persson and RossinSlater ) The impacts of maternal stress during pregnancy can even be traced to educational attainment ( Aizer Stroud and Buka ) and adult mental health ( Persson and Rossin-Slater ) Children growing up in poverty tend to do worse across a spectrum of important early health outcomes. They are nearly twice as likely to be born at a low or very low birth weight and are four times more likely to have poor overall physical health ( Figure ) Birth weight is one early indicator of health that can be highly predictive of later-life success. Studies of birth weight find that it is not only a good predictor of short-term health and mortality but also of longer-term health and human capital variables Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Figure Likelihood of Scoring Very Low on Early Health Measures Percent Scoring Very Low Below % of Federal Poverty Level Above % of Federal Poverty Level Physical Health at Age Birth Weight Note : Data are from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Birth Cohort and for children born in Very low physical health defined as at least one standard deviation below the average.Very low birth weight defined as below pounds Source : Isaacs ( ) including school achievement and earnings ( Black Devereux and Salvanes ; Figlio et al. ) Poor children are also much more likely to experience food insecurity or the lack of resources necessary for consistent and dependable access to food which can compromise early nutrition and lead to worse short- and long-term outcomes. Overall about percent of households with children including million children experienced food insecurity in ( ColemanJensen et al. ) Rates of food insecurity are much higher among certain vulnerable populations including poor households and households headed by single women and minorities ( Figure ) Food security and access to good nutrition are critical in utero and in the early years of life setting up a child for physical and mental health throughout their lives. For example the type of nutrition young children receive can shape the architecture of the brain and central nervous system in a variety of ways ( Georgieff ; Rosales Reznick and Ziesel ) Maternal malnutrition can impair fetal development with effects that carry into childhood and adulthood physical and mental health ( Almond and Mazumder ; Adhvaryu et al. ) Parental and child stress can also be contributors to inferior mental and physical health outcomes for poor children. Parents living in poverty are more likely to experience cognitive overload meaning that the stress See also Persson and Rossin-Slater ( ) for a review of this literature | Chapter Figure Household Food Insecurity Rates Percent Food Insecure Household Composition Poverty Race/Ethnicity Note : FPL refers to the federal poverty level Source : Coleman-Jensen et al. ( ) and concerns associated with living in poverty can become overwhelming to the point that it affects cognitive functioning which can further perpetuate poverty ( Mani et al ) Mothers living in poverty are also more likely to be depressed and in poor health and to smoke during pregnancy ( Figure ) When children live in poverty they may also experience chronic stress and cognitive overload which can harm cognition in adulthood ( Evans and Schamberg ) Children in poor households are disproportionately likely to be exposed to adverse childhood experiences including neglect and abuse which can lead to poorer health and human capital outcomes later in life ( Hillis et al. ; Felitti et al. ; Campbell Walker and Egede ; Flaherty et al. ) All of these differential inputs and experiences contribute to gaps in early physical and mental health Disparities in Early Human Capital Insufficient family financial and non-financial resources mean that children from low-income families are less likely to have access to activities and materials that promote learning and wellness such as high-quality early education and enriching home environments. These factors and others associated with poverty ( such as higher health risks food insecurity and increased stress ) contribute to the disparities between these children and their higher-income peers in school readiness. In turn the disadvantage Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Percent Figure Disparities in Underlying Factors Behind Outcome Gaps Below % of Federal Poverty Level Above % of Federal Poverty Level Note : HS stands for high school Source : Isaacs ( ) these children face upon school entry has long-lasting consequences for academic achievement and behavior throughout their schooling years ( Duncan Magnuson and Votruba-Drzal ; Duncan Ziol-Guest and Kalil ) A child s early years beginning in infancy are a period of profound advances in reasoning language acquisition and problem solving Importantly a child s environment can dramatically influence the degree and pace of these advances. By supporting development when children are very young early childhood development and education programs can complement parental investments. Children who enter school at higher levels of readiness have higher earnings throughout their lives. They are also healthier and less likely to become involved with the criminal justice system Early Gaps in Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Outcomes Socioeconomic disparities in cognitive social behavioral and health outcomes are evident in children as young as months of age and these gaps tend to widen as children grow older. At just months infants and toddlers from low-income families score lower on cognitive assessments are less likely to be in excellent or good health and are less likely to receive positive behavior ratings than their counterparts from higher-income families ; by months the cognitive and behavioral gaps have at least doubled ( Halle et al. ) By the time children enter school around age children in poor households are nearly times more likely to score very low on assessments | Chapter Figure Likelihood of Scoring Very Low on Measures of Cognition at Age Percent Scoring Very Low Below % of Federal Poverty Level Above % of Federal Poverty Level Math Skills Reading Skills Note : Very low is defined as more than one standard deviation below average on academic measures Data are from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Birth Cohort. Test scores were measured in fall of or Source : Isaacs ( ) of math skills and over times more likely to score very low on reading skills than children in more well-off households ( Figure ) These gaps tend to follow children throughout their school careers putting impoverished children at a substantial academic disadvantage that can be hard to overcome. As shown in Figure most of the income achievement gap emerges before age and it remains relatively constant through the beginning of high school suggesting that achievement gaps in later years are established in the earliest years of childhood. Some researchers argue that these gaps have grown over the past years as overall income inequality has grown and as the relationship between income and achievement has become stronger ( Reardon ) Family income is an increasingly important determinant of children s future earnings suggesting that parental income inequality can have a long-run impact on educational and labor market inequality as their children age ( Duncan Kalil and Ziol-Guest ) Children experiencing poverty are also more likely to exhibit behavioral problems and to perform worse on non-cognitive skills tests. As shown in Figure at age children in poor households are nearly percent There is some disagreement on the comparability of achievement gaps across studies over time. While some studies suggest gaps in test scores across socioeconomic groups stabilize from primary school ( Reardon ; Heckman ) others argue that differences in academic achievement based on standardized test scores are not comparable over time ( Nielsen ) Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Figure Achievement Gap is Largely Set by Age Test Scores in Standard Deviations Parent Income in the Highest Quartile Parent Income in the Lowest Quartile Age Note : IQ scores are available through age After age math test scores are shown. A three year moving average is used for math scores Source : U.S. Collaborative Perinatal Project from Fryer and Levitt ( ) ( through age ) ; NLSY79 Child and Young Adult Supplement from Cunha et al. ( ) ( after age ) ; CEA calculations more likely to exhibit learning-related behavioral issues such as not paying attention in class and more than percent more likely to exhibit externalizing behavioral problems. These findings are likely attributable to a host of stressors that these children face including less-safe neighborhoods increased exposure to trauma insufficient resources to address their physical and mental health needs and having parents with unmet physical or mental health needs In addition to cognitive skills non-cognitive skills or socio-emotional and behavioral skills are also strong predictors of educational attainment and therefore of longer-term human capital accumulation employment and wages. For example teacher-rated social adjustment is a strong predictor of educational attainment and employment ( Carneiro Crawford and Goodman ) Social and behavioral skills in childhood have also been shown to be strong predictors of physical health and engagement in risky behaviors later in life. Indeed non-cognitive factors can be even stronger predictors than cognitive factors of risky behaviors and their consequences including smoking participation in illegal activity and incarceration ( Heckman Stixrud and Urzua ) This means that children from disadvantaged backgrounds who have had less support in their socio-emotional and behavioral development from their earliest years are at a higher risk of engaging in unhealthy and harmful behavior | Chapter Figure Likelihood of Scoring Very Low on Behavioral Indexes at Age Percent Scoring Very Low Below % of Federal Poverty Level Above % of Federal Poverty Level Learning-Related Behaviors Externalizing Behaviors Note : Very low is defined as more than one standard deviation below average on behavioral measures Data are from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Program Birth Cohort. Test scores were measured in the fall of Source : Isaacs ( ) Gaps in Resource and Time Investment As discussed above these large gaps in cognitive and non-cognitive skills may be due in part to large differences in inputs including both parental inputs and formal high-quality early learning opportunities Today inequalities in parental inputs such as time resources earnings and education are higher than in the past. Parents in the top fifth of income earners now spend seven times more on enrichment activities and materials for their children such as books computers summer camps and music lessons than families in the bottom fifth ( Duncan and Murnane ) Moreover as income inequality has grown so has inequality in child-related expenditures Higher-income parents generally have more time to spend with their children and the amount of time they spend has been increasing at a faster rate than among lower-income parents ( Figure ) This may reflect in part that higher-income workers are much more likely to have access to paid time off and workplace flexibility which they can use to spend quality time with young children ( CEA 2015b ) This additional time particularly time spent playing and engaging in a child s development is important for early cognitive and socio-emotional development. For example research demonstrates that reading to children is crucial for early language acquisi8 See Ramey and Ramey ( ) and Bianchi ( ) for further details Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Hours per Week Figure Mother 's Time Spent on Child Care by Educational Attainment CollegeEducated Less-Educated Note : Estimates are for mothers aged Source : Ramey and Ramey ( ) tion and communication skills ( National Research Council and Institute of Medicine ; Tamis-LeMonda et al. ) This inequality during early childhood creates an income-based advantage in educational outcomes early in life and leads to inequality in adult outcomes one reason suggested for the persistence of income levels across generations ( Solon ) For instance when mothers obtain more education it improves birth outcomes for their children ( Currie and Moretti ) This may be due to the increases in marriage use of prenatal care lower fertility reduction in smoking or other factors that are correlated with higher levels of maternal education The gap is also reflected in the total time spent with children and in activities that engage children. In particular high-income parents spend more time on educational activities with their children ( Figure ) creating an income-based advantage in educational outcomes in the first few years of life Highly educated parents are also spending more time on child-care activities such as playing with young children and helping with children s activities ( Ramey and Ramey ) For example highly educated parents spend more time on developing their children s reading and problem-solving skills in preschool and on extra-curricular activities for older children ( Kalil ) In contrast less-educated parents are less likely to adapt their time-use patterns with children to developmental stages ( Kalil Ryan and Corey ) Gaps in children s vocabulary can reflect these differences in | Chapter Figure High-Income Parents Spend More Time on Educational Activities with their Children Hours per Week Mothers Fathers High-Income Low-Income High-Income Low-Income Note : High-income refers to top quartile while low-income refers to bottom quartile. Includes time spent helping with homework attending school meetings reading to or with children and other activities assosicated with children 's education Source : American Time Use Survey ( ) time use by parents educational attainment : highly educated mothers tend to engage in more complex talk with their children and spend more time reading and at years old their children have more expansive vocabularies than children with less exposure to books and language ( Vernon-Feagans et al. ) These disparities in early childhood development can be exacerbated by later gaps in formal early schooling opportunities as demonstrated by an extensive literature on the positive impacts of preschool on cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes. Children s enrollment in formal learning environments is especially affected by socioeconomic status. About percent of and 4-year olds whose mothers have a college degree are enrolled in preschool compared to about percent of children whose mothers did not complete high school ( Figure ) Although preschool attendance has increased for all maternal education groups since the 1970s children of lesseducated mothers are still less likely to attend preschool in part due to the significant cost burden of high-quality early childhood care. Lower-income families are less likely to be able to afford care : among families with childcare expenses and working mothers families below the Federal Poverty Level pay an average of percent of their income in child-care costs compared with percent among non-poor families ( Laughlin ) Since formal early childhood education is less affordable for children who grow up in disadvantaged settings inequalities in achievement Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Percent Figure Preschool Enrollment by Mother 's Education Less than High School High School Graduate Some College or Bachelor 's Degree or Associate 's Degree More Note : Excludes children in kindergarten Source : Current Population Survey October Supplement ( ) ; Census Bureau calculations ; CEA calculations that appear within the first few years of life continue to grow as children from disadvantaged families fall behind. Federal State and local programs help fill the socioeconomic status gap in the availability of early childhood education. For example Head Start and Early Head Start provide formal high-quality learning environments for children from low-income families Gaps in Quality of Environmental & Neighborhood Factors Around million poor children grow up in high-poverty neighborhoods ( Rawlings ) The health and human capital inputs that are available to poor children because of where they live are considerably worse than those available to children in more advantaged neighborhoods. A large body of literature confirms that neighborhood characteristics such as accessibility and quality of learning social and recreational activities support networks and the presence of physical risk ( such as violence victimization and harmful substances ) affect later-life outcomes ( Leventhal and Brooks-Gunn ) For example school quality varies enormously with the level of poverty in a neighborhood. Access to high-quality schools with good teachers has been proven to improve later-life outcomes such as earnings potential ( Chetty Rockoff and Friedman ) However because most public schools serve students within attendance district boundaries children from low-income neighborhoods often lack access to high-quality schooling | Chapter Black ( ) shows that school quality is capitalized in housing prices meaning that houses in neighborhoods assigned to high-quality schools may be too expensive for low-income families to afford. Moreover students in high-poverty school districts too often receive less investment than their peers in low-poverty districts since local revenues account for a large fraction of school revenue ( percent in ) ( National Center for Education Statistics ) In States districts serving the highest percentage of students from low-income families are spending fewer State and local dollars per pupil than districts that have fewer students in poverty ( U.S Department of Education ) In addition to inadequate resources and support and the voluntary nature of the early childhood system differential expulsion and suspension can also reduce disadvantaged students access to early learning. Children from disadvantaged backgrounds may face biases that create barriers to their education especially since children of color are overrepresented in low-income populations. For example children of color particularly boys are much more likely to be suspended or expelled from early learning settings ( see Box for further discussion of differential outcomes by gender in early childhood ) In African-American students represented percent of preschool enrollment but percent of preschoolers suspended more than once ( Office for Civil Rights ) This type of discipline can detract from learning especially when children are removed from school and temporarily denied a formal learning environment Although traditional neighborhood school quality can be lacking in disadvantaged areas there may be opportunities for government intervention to address barriers to quality schooling in these neighborhoods Research shows that policies to expand disadvantaged students access to quality schooling like busing or charter schools can improve educational attainment and close achievement gaps ( Billings Deming and Rockoff ; Dobbie and Fryer ) Additionally traditional public schools see marked improvement when they adopt best practices identified in alternative schooling policies. A study by Fryer ( ) shows that public schools in Houston experienced sizeable increases in student math achievement of to standard deviations per year when they adopted five best practices from charter schools Other characteristics of low-income neighborhoods can also inhibit healthy child development. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) reports that children living at or below the poverty line who inhabit older housing are at greatest risk for lead poisoning which impairs brain development. Although much progress has been made in reducing rates of poisoning ( CDC ) the effects of lead persist through a child s life Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Box : Gender Differences in Early Outcomes and Responses to Investment Early investments are critical for both boys and girls but parental and environmental inputs can differ for children of different genders leading to disparate outcomes. Boys in low-income households tend to do worse on a myriad of health and human capital outcomes than similarly situated girls ranging from educational attainment to test scores to crime involvement ( Autor et al. ) A new working paper by Chetty et al. ( ) shows that these gender gaps in the impact of childhood disadvantage may be sustained through adulthood. Men who grew up in high-poverty high-minority areas work significantly less than women from similar backgrounds with the worst outcomes concentrated among men who grew up in low-income single-parent households Researchers have found that environmental rather than biological factors drive this relationship. Autor et al. ( ) show that though children born into families of low socioeconomic status ( SES ) have worse health than higher-SES newborns birth outcomes are similar between low-SES siblings of different genders. The authors suggest that the gaps that emerge between low-SES male and female siblings later in childhood are due to differences in their environment after birth or differential response to that environment Influences from both inside and outside of the home environment may lead both genders to be more sensitive to certain aspects of disadvantaged upbringing. Autor et al. ( ) suggest that gender gaps in outcomes between low-SES siblings where boys tend to do worse are related to home environment partially through a lack of same-sex role models ( fathers are more likely to be absent than mothers ) and relatively smaller parental time investments as a result. They also posit that factors outside of the home but that are associated with low-SES status including worse schools and neighborhoods can have disproportionately negative impacts on boys. For example a new working paper by the same authors shows that males on average benefit more from cumulative exposure to high-quality schools than their female siblings ( Autor et al ) Additionally the stress associated with poverty appears to have more serious effects on males than on females ( Bertrand and Pan ) This may be in part because boys coping strategies tend to involve more aggressive behavior and less interaction with prosocial adults ( Coleman and Hendry ) These differences in coping strategy may lead to different outcomes for the genders in different types of early intervention As a consequence the effects of policies that support investment in children may vary for girls and boys. The policy section of this chapter examines how and why program impacts may differ by gender | Chapter Differences in early life investments and adaptation behaviors between genders can affect the efficacy of childhood policy interventions. These disparities not only highlight the complexities in childhood development but also the need to invest early. The earlier an intervention occurs the fewer baseline gaps and maladaptive behaviors there are to overcome Besides diminished cognitive function lead poisoning can manifest in behavioral problems as a child pregnancy and aggression as a teen and criminal behavior as a young adult ( Reyes 2015a,b ) Children from lowsocioeconomic-status families are also more likely to be exposed to higher levels of pollution in their neighborhoods making them more likely to be hospitalized with asthma complications ( Neidell ) Exposure to pollution in a child s first year of life can also have negative long-term impacts on labor market outcomes such as hours worked and earnings ( Isen RossinSlater and Walker forthcoming ) Recent studies document large differences across counties in intergenerational economic mobility ( Chetty et al. ) and find that these differences directly affect children s future outcomes ( Chetty and Hendren ) About percent of U.S. counties are positive contributors to intergenerational economic mobility meaning that living in those counties during youth positively impacts the future income of children in low-income households.9 Importantly the duration of exposure to a better environment also matters suggesting that the future benefits are greater when a child moves at an earlier age. For a child with parents at the 25th percentile of the income distribution each year a child spends in DuPage Illinois ( which has the highest mobility of the largest counties in the United States ) raises that child s future earnings by percent ( Chetty and Hendren ) In contrast every year of childhood spent in Baltimore City Maryland ( the worst of the largest counties ) reduces their future earnings by percent Place also matters because segregation both by race and by income has negative implications for those who grow up in these neighborhoods Living in a high-poverty neighborhood reduces access to jobs and career networks ( Spaulding et al. ) Racial segregation has also been shown to have adverse effects on educational achievement and attainment employment earnings single parenthood and health ( Cutler and Glaeser ; Causal effects on mobility based on Chetty and Hendren ( ) Online Data Table : Preferred Estimates of Causal Place Effects by County. http : //www.equality-of-opportunity.org/ index.php/data Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Card and Rothstein ; Dickerson ; Subramanian et al. ; Acevedo-Garcia and Lochner ) The Role of Public Investment in Early Childhood Early childhood investments can result in significant benefits for children parents and society. However children from disadvantaged households often do not receive the investment they need to ensure their healthy development and success in school because optimal investments are resource-intensive and must happen early while the benefits are realized over a long time horizon. Indeed the challenges inherent in investing in children may be experienced by all parents ; however these obstacles can be especially daunting for parents with limited resources First the need to invest early presents a challenge. Because many of the benefits which include future earnings health and life satisfaction are delayed and accrue to children in adulthood children rely on parents and others to recognize these future returns on investment and to invest on their behalf Second the gains these investments produce require significant upfront costs. This can be difficult for families to afford on their own particularly for low-income households since they lack sufficient time and financial resources or access to affordable credit to make these early investments Third among factors that determine the quality of investment in young children neighborhood quality and other environmental factors can be as important as family income. Many aspects of a child s environment can be difficult for parents to change on their own. Children from disadvantaged households face additional risks as a result of their environment and public investments can improve these environmental inputs and supplement existing investments made by the family and community Finally because many of the benefits accrue to society over a long time period individuals lack the incentive to invest at the level that would achieve the highest social return. Indeed the research surveyed later in this chapter suggests that the societal benefits are potentially large and wide ranging and that these societal benefits often exceed the benefits received by the children themselves. These benefits include : reductions in crime ; lower expenditures on health care remedial education and incarceration ; and increased tax revenue and lowered public assistance expenditure due to higher earnings In light of these challenges well-designed public investments can play a crucial role in closing income- and opportunity-related gaps that affect short- and long-run outcomes of children ( see Box for a discussion of the design of public investment ) Public policy can also be key to ensuring that | Chapter Box : Types of Public Investment Policies to improve investment in early health and human capital can take several forms. Income and in-kind transfers to families direct investments in the health and human capital of young children and investments that improve parental inputs can all help to compensate for underinvestment in their learning and development that stems from poverty. These various policies operate through different mechanisms but all support children s well-being in their formative years when it is easier to close gaps and influence children s lives Direct investments in early childhood health and human capital services : These investments provide direct access to early learning and care to promote healthy child development and prepare children for school. These programs include Head Start child-care services and State-funded preschool among others. Access to these services can improve children s short- and long-term health and human capital outcomes and can have huge positive spillover effects for society as a whole Indirect investments through improved parental and home inputs : Many of the programs reviewed later in this chapter such as the Nurse-Family Partnership Home Visiting Program and Head Start involve parental engagement. Some programs such as the READY4K ! texting literacy intervention are aimed entirely at improving children s home environments through parental behavior modifications. The goal of these investments whether standalone or embedded in other initiatives is to improve the quantity and quality of parental time with children In-kind transfers : Transfers in the form of health insurance or food help families to meet basic medical and nutritional needs while at the same time freeing up money for other types of consumption or investment. Examples include Medicaid which helps parents afford health care for themselves and their children and nutrition programs like the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women Infants and Children ( WIC ) and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) which provide food and nutritional guidance Income transfers : Transfers in the form of cash provide flexible support to low-income families and can help parents invest in their children by alleviating resource and credit constraints. Examples include Temporary Assistance to Needy Families ( TANF ) which provides a temporary cash benefit to the poorest families and two others only available to those with earned income the Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) and the low-income portion of the Child Tax Credit ( CTC ) With regard to children s outcomes the impact of these programs ( as well as other programs that effectively increase disposable income ) may Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | depend on how parents choose to invest the extra income. Further these programs may have additional impacts on children through the work incentives ( or disincentives ) that they create for parents investments made now are large enough to pay off in the future and realize the gains shown by research including numerous public benefits Underinvestment in children s health and human capital in their earliest years can become more costly for society later in children s lives Societal efforts that attempt to intervene later in life for example through remedial education or the juvenile justice system tend to be less cost-effective than interventions that help children get and stay on the right track in the first place. For example the cost of incarceration is substantially higher than investing in education or other programs to increase opportunity even before one takes the returns to the investments into account. The annual cost of incarceration for a single juvenile is over $ more than three times the average tuition and fees at a four-year non-profit private university and more than times as expensive as an average year of Head Start ( Figure ) Evidence suggests that investments in early childhood education may reduce involvement with the criminal justice system. Lower crime translates into benefits to society in the form of lowered costs of the criminal justice system and incarceration as well as reductions in the costs of crime to victims ( Heckman et al. ; Currie ; Reynolds et al. ) Likewise these improvements in children s development may also reduce the need for special education placements and remedial education.10 For example studies of preschool programs for low-income children have found benefitcost ratios of $ to $ for every $ spent in the form of higher participant earnings lower remedial education costs reduced transfer payments and reduced crime ( Heckman et al. ) Some early childhood investments such as Early Head Start Head Start and home visitation programs which offer access to immunizations health services and/or parenting education have improved not only socialemotional and cognitive outcomes but also the health of program participants ( Dodge et al. ; Kilburn ) These health improvements result in lower societal expenditures on emergency care and health care Finally public investments in young children such as preschool public health care and income transfers have been shown to improve children s Anderson ( ) ; Reynolds et al. ( ) ; Belfield et al. ( ) ; Heckman et al. ( ) ; Carneiro and Ginja ( ) | Chapter Figure Annual Cost of Juvenile Incarceration vs. Other Youth Investments U.S. Dollars $ $ Youth Tuition and Incarceration Fees at Fourfor Months Year Private University Non-Profit $ Tuition and Fees at FourYear Public University Out-of-State $ $ Public School ( K-12 ) Head Start Source : American Correctional Assocation ; College Board ; National Center for Education Statistics ; CEA calculations long-term earnings potential ( Brown Kowalski and Lurie ; Chetty Friedman and Rockoff ; Barnett and Masse ) When the children who receive these investments grow up they pay more in taxes and are less likely to receive public assistance. As a result making these early investments would actually increase government revenue and reduce government expenditure over time Policy Interventions That Improve Children s Outcomes The evidence surveyed thus far overwhelmingly shows that compared with their higher-income peers children born into lower-income households receive fewer investments in their early health and education. They enter school at a substantial disadvantage on multiple measures of health cognition and non-cognitive skills. Mounting theoretical and empirical research also suggests that early investments in children can have especially large economic returns. Yet despite these returns parents with few resources face several challenges to investing in their children Public policy has an important role to play in ensuring that highreturn investments in early childhood are realized and in preventing and closing opportunity gaps. Nevertheless the relationships between early childhood experiences and long-run outcomes are complex and mediated Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | by many factors which makes it difficult to isolate the impact of any given policy. Research that demonstrates and measures the causal links between interventions and outcomes is crucial for guiding effective policy This section reviews the most rigorous research on the impacts of specific policy interventions that improve investments in early childhood ( see Box for a list of major Federal early childhood policy interventions ) Attention is limited to studies that plausibly identify and measure the causal impacts of these policies on outcomes rather than documenting correlations. The section first presents the evidence on policies that provide direct investments in early childhood health and education programs that aim to improve parental inputs and in-kind transfers such as health insurance and food assistance programs. It then turns to the research on programs that provide more flexible assistance to low-income families such as income transfers and housing assistance. A wide range of outcomes is considered including measures of short-run health and human capital ( such as infant and child mortality birth weight nutrition test scores and behavior and emotional skills ) as well as long-run outcomes such as adult health employment earnings and involvement in the criminal justice system On the whole the research evidence confirms that policy interventions ranging from preschool provision to income transfers have large and sustained impacts on children s health and human capital accumulation The evidence shows that these policies not only help children from disadvantaged families stay on pace with children from better-off families ; they also lead to large benefits for society as a whole Direct Indirect and In-Kind Investments in Early Health and Human Capital The evidence discussed earlier in this chapter documented the existence of large gaps in health outcomes between children based on their mother s socioeconomic status. However even as many measures of inequality have been rising in the United States key measures of infant health such as low birth weight show a steady decline in the socioeconomic gap in health over the past years ( Figure ) Recent research suggests that a range of successful public policy interventions targeted at improving maternal and infant health have played a key role in this trend. This section discusses some of the most successful policies aimed at improving early health | Chapter Figure Low Birth Weight by Maternal Socioeconomic Status Percent Low Socioeconomic Status High Socioeconomic Status Note : Low socioeconomic status ( SES ) is defined as African-American less than a high school degree and unmarried. High SES is defined as White college-educated and married Source : Aizer and Currie ( ) Policy Interventions in Early Health Home Visitation Several types of public investments target child development from before children are born and throughout early childhood. Home visitation programs including those that are Federally funded by the Maternal Infant and Early Childhood Home Visiting program rely on trained professionals including nurses teachers or social workers to visit families during pregnancy and shortly after a baby is born to provide a range of health development and parenting information. Depending on the model this may include parental observations and instruction nutrition and wellness education and psychological consultations. The goal of home visitation programs is to ensure a healthy safe and supportive environment in the first years of a child s life. The programs tend to be targeted toward children who are most at risk of receiving insufficient prenatal and antenatal health care including children of first-time low-income less-educated and/or unemployed mothers These programs which were expanded through new grants to States under the Affordable Care Act of ( ACA ) have shown promise in reducing mortality among infants between weeks and year of age born to mothers of low socioeconomic status. Poverty has been a major contributor Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Box : Federal Early Childhood Programs : An Overview1 Various Federal programs help to close gaps in early investments in health and education as well as family resources and improve later-life outcomes. Millions of children benefit from this funding often in the form of grants to States each year. In many cases Federal policies and investments complement enhance and expand State and local investments and policies Child Care and Development Fund : Assists low-income families in obtaining child care so they can work or attend training/education The program which is administered through block grants to States also improves the quality of child care and promotes coordination among early childhood development and afterschool programs. In FY this $ billion fund served about million children each month Head Start : Promotes school readiness of and 4-year-old children from low-income families through education health social and other services. Teachers facilitate individualized learning experiences to promote children s readiness for school and beyond. Children also receive health and development screenings nutritious meals oral health and mental health support. Additionally parents and families are supported in achieving their own goals such as housing stability continued education and financial security. Together with Early Head Start this $ billion program served approximately million children and pregnant women in FY through grants to local entities Early Head Start : Provides early continuous intensive and comprehensive child development and family support services to lowincome infants and toddlers and their families and pregnant women and their families. This program also includes the Early Head Start-Child Care Partnerships which provide funding to States and local communities to increase the number of high-quality early learning opportunities for infants and toddlers across the country Preschool Development Grants : Supports States in building or enhancing a preschool program infrastructure that would enable the delivery of high-quality preschool services to children and expanding high-quality preschool programs in targeted communities that would serve as models for expanding preschool to all 4-year-olds from low- and moderate-income families. This $ million grant supported States in FY and is funded at $ million for FY Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ( IDEA ) : Serves infants and toddlers through age and children ages with developmental delays or high probabilities of developmental delays. These $ million Figures for funding and number of beneficiaries are for the most recent year for which comprehensive data were available on February | Chapter Federally funded programs administered by States provided approximately million children with special education and related services in FY Many of the children are able to enter kindergarten no longer needing special education services Maternal Infant and Early Childhood Home Visiting ( MIECHV ) : Reaches pregnant women expectant fathers and parents and caregivers of children under the age of In these voluntary evidence-based programs trained health care or social services professionals meet regularly with expectant parents or families with young children to : improve health and development ; prevent child injuries abuse neglect or maltreatment ; improve school readiness and achievement ; improve family economic self-sufficiency ; and improve coordination with other community resources. Through State and Tribal grants this $ million program served approximately parents and children in FY Medicaid and Children s Health Insurance Program ( CHIP ) : Provides health coverage to millions of Americans including eligible low-income adults children pregnant women elderly adults and people with disabilities. CHIP provides health coverage to eligible children through both Medicaid and separate CHIP programs. These programs receive both Federal and State dollars and are managed by States Together Medicaid and CHIP provided health coverage to nearly million children in FY including one-half of all low-income children in the United States Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women Infants and Children ( WIC ) : Serves to safeguard the health of low-income pregnant postpartum and breastfeeding women infants and children up to age who are at nutritional risk by providing nutritious foods to supplement diets information on healthy eating and breastfeeding and referrals to health care services. In FY nearly $ billion was provided to States through Federal grants and in FY approximately million people received WIC services including roughly million children between months and age million infants under months and million mothers Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) : Provides nutrition assistance to millions of eligible low-income individuals and families and provides economic benefits to communities. Formerly known as Food Stamps recipients receive State-administered monthly benefits in the form of an Electronic Benefit Transfer ( EBT ) card which can be used to purchase foods at authorized stores. This $ billion U.S. Department of Education EDFacts Data Warehouse ( EDW ) : IDEA Part B Child Count and Educational Environments Collection Data extracted as of July from file specifications and ; Department of Education calculations Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | program served over million Americans including almost million children under the age of in FY Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) : Reduces the amount of taxes qualified working people with low to moderate income owe and provides refunds to many of these individuals. According to the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) there were $ billion in EITC claims from million tax filers for tax year Child Tax Credit ( CTC ) : Allows taxpayers to claim a credit of up to $ per child under age depending on the taxpayers income and is partially refundable making it one of the largest tax-code provisions benefitting families with children. According to the IRS there were $ billion in CTC claims for tax year The Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center ( ) estimates that roughly million families claimed credits in that year Temporary Assistance to Needy Families ( TANF ) : Provides temporary monthly cash assistance to needy families with dependent children while also preparing program participants for independence through work. Replacing Aid to Families with Dependent Children ( AFDC ) TANF now provides block grants to States and Tribes which States match with their own maintenance of effort funds to implement the program. In this $ billion program supported roughly million children though this number is approximately one-third of the peak in AFDC ( Falk ) As of FY over percent of children receiving TANF were age and under Housing and Neighborhood Programs : Increases affordable housing options for low-income families through a variety of Federal programs including public housing project-based rental assistance and the Housing Choice Voucher Program. The Section Housing Choice Vouchers Program the largest Federal housing assistance program allows very low-income families to lease or ( in a small number of cases purchase ) safe decent and affordable privately owned rental housing including housing in higher opportunity neighborhoods. The Promise Zone Initiative announced in the State of the Union Address is an innovative partnership with local communities and businesses one of the major goals of which is to increase access to affordable housing and improve public safety to the United States overall high infant mortality rate ( Chen Oster and Williams ) Home visitation programs have also been shown to improve parenting behavior and children s cognitive outcomes especially among families with low-birth-weight children ( Sweet and Appelbaum ) By | Chapter improving parental behavior and children s outcomes these programs can benefit children and parents in the long run One well-established program the Nurse Family Partnership provides first-time low-income mothers with home visits during pregnancy through their child s second birthday. A longitudinal evaluation of the program found that participants who were randomly assigned to receive home visitation services compared with women who only received prenatal and well-child clinic care waited longer after the birth of their first child before having a second child ; had lower receipt of cash transfers ; and exhibited lower rates of arrest drugs and alcohol abuse and child abuse ( Olds et al ) The children of mothers who received home visitation services were also less likely to be arrested consumed less alcohol had fewer behavioral problems had fewer sexual partners smoked fewer cigarettes and were less likely to run away compared to children of mothers in the control group ( Olds et al. ) These studies measured outcomes at age indicating that the program impacts were sustained in the medium term A more recent analysis of the Nurse Family Partnership program examined its impacts on children s cognitive abilities and found improvement by age among children whose mothers participated in the program These early cognitive gains were attributable to improvements in the home environment and in parenting behavior as well as to greater self-esteem and lower anxiety among mothers and they translated into improved language and math abilities and fewer school absences at age ( Heckman et al. ) Some home visitation programs are provided as part of the Federal Head Start preschool program ( described further below ) A recent study finds that Head Start programs that incorporated frequent home visitation were particularly effective at improving non-cognitive outcomes compared with other Head Start programs ( Walters ) Other models of home visitation programs are also showing promising results with models meeting the Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) criteria for evidence-based home visiting programs ( Administration for Children and Families ) Ongoing data collection will allow for further rigorous evaluation and help expand the knowledge base of the most effective home visitation programs Based on the mounting evidence that home visiting programs have significant positive impacts on children s cognitive outcomes Federal support for home visitation programs was introduced in and was further expanded under the Affordable Care Act two years later. This ACA expansion was extended with bipartisan support through March and the President proposed expanding and extending funding for another years in his State of the Union address. The Medicare Access and CHIP Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Reauthorization Act of signed into law by the President in April extends an annual $ million in funding for the Maternal Infant and Early Childhood Home Visiting programs through September Health Insurance Research has established that access to insurance coverage during childhood can have important benefits for educational and labor market outcomes much later in life benefits that appear to be mediated at least in part through sustained improvements in health Medicaid and the Children s Health Insurance Program ( CHIP ) provide low-cost health coverage to millions of Americans including nearly million children and covering one-half of all low-income children ( Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ) The programs are funded jointly by States and the Federal Government and are administered by States All children enrolled in Medicaid are entitled to the comprehensive set of health care services known as Early and Periodic Screening Diagnosis and Treatment ( EPSDT ) CHIP also ensures a comprehensive set of benefits for children. Most States have elected to provide Medicaid to children with family incomes above the minimum of percent of the Federal Poverty Level and all States have expanded coverage to children with higher incomes through CHIP A pair of recent studies have used the fact that States expanded access to health insurance for children through Medicaid and CHIP at different times and to different extents in recent decades to study how access to health insurance in childhood affects long-term educational and labor market outcomes. Using data that connect individuals adult earnings and tax information to their residence and family income in childhood ( ages ) Brown Kowalski and Lurie ( ) find that female children with more years of Medicaid/CHIP eligibility in childhood ( due to their State of residence and year of birth ) had higher educational attainment and higher earnings in early adulthood. They also find evidence that both men and women with greater access to childhood coverage pay more in income and payroll taxes in their young adult years potentially offsetting a substantial fraction of the cost of providing Medicaid/CHIP coverage to children. The authors estimate that a single additional year of Medicaid/CHIP eligibility in childhood increased cumulative tax payments through age by $ ( Figure ; Brown Kowalski and Lurie ) The more years a child is eligible the larger the cumulative impact Related work by Cohodes et al. ( ) examines the impact of changes in Medicaid/CHIP eligibility rules affecting children ( ages ) on educational attainment. The authors also find improvements in educational attainment at age to with individuals who were eligible for Medicaid/ | Chapter Figure Increase in Income and Payroll Taxes Paid Through Age from an Additional Year of Medicaid Eligibility in Childhood U.S. Dollars Men Women Note : Cumulative tax payments based on earnings through age Source : Brown Kowalski and Lurie ( ) All CHIP in childhood being more likely to complete high school and graduate from college. These attainment impacts were similar regardless of the age at which the child had Medicaid coverage New evidence from Miller and Wherry ( ) suggests that prenatal Medicaid receipt can also have large long-term effects on health and economic outcomes. Like some of the other studies discussed above Miller and Wherry also examine variation in Medicaid and CHIP eligibility rules across States and over time but focus on eligibility for pregnant women rather than children. Children whose mothers gained Medicaid coverage while pregnant had lower rates of obesity and fewer hospitalizations related to endocrine nutritional metabolic diseases and immunity disorders between the ages of and The effects for children whose mothers gained Medicaid between birth and age ( as opposed to in utero ) were generally insignificant suggesting that receipt in utero is particularly important for these health outcomes. Health gains for children whose mothers received Medicaid while pregnant were also accompanied by improvements in educational and economic outcomes including higher high school graduation rates higher income and lower SNAP receipt The literature on desegregation of health care facilities also demonstrates that access to health care during childhood can have large impacts on children s long-term outcomes. Almond Chay and Greenstone ( ) Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | document that desegregation of hospitals during the 1960s resulted in increased hospital access for African-American families dramatic improvements in infant health for these families and large declines in the racial gap in infant mortality in the 1960s. Chay Guryan and Mazumder ( ) show that these improvements in access to health care at birth and health soon after birth led to large student achievement gains for African-American teenagers in the 1980s contributing to a reduction in the racial test score gap. The researchers estimate that each additional early-life hospital admission made possible by desegregation raised test scores by between and standard deviation an effect that implies a very large impact on lifetime earnings Nutrition Programs WIC The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women Infants and Children ( WIC ) is an assistance program that supports the health and nutrition of low-income pregnant and postpartum women infants and children under the age of More than million people received WIC services in FY including roughly million children between months and age million infants under months and million mothers. WIC services include health care referrals nutrition education and the provision of nutritious foods to supplement the diets of both mothers and their children There is a robust literature on the impact that this comprehensive set of WIC services has on participants. Earlier studies comparing birth outcomes of women who participate in WIC to those of other low-income women with similar characteristics document that participants give birth to healthier babies as measured along several dimensions ( Bitler and Currie ; Joyce Gibson and Colman ) More recent studies using rigorous methods confirm that WIC participation leads to improved birth outcomes. One such study focuses on the program s initial roll out which was implemented in stages at the county level between and Hoynes Page and Stevens ( ) compare birth information from the Vital Statistics Natality Data among children who were born at similar times but in different counties and therefore had different in utero exposure to WIC. These results suggest that access to WIC increased birth weight among children born to mothers who participated in WIC from the third trimester by around percent and effects were largest among mothers with low levels of education Other work uses more recent data on local access to WIC. In some States like Texas clients must apply for WIC in person and distance to a clinic can present a barrier to access. Rossin-Slater ( ) examines data from the Texas Department of State Health Services on WIC clinic openings | Chapter Figure Effects of WIC Participation on Birth Outcomes Percent Change % % % % Low Birth Weight Gestation Less than Weeks Small for Dates Low Weight Gain Source : Currie and Rajani ( ) which include operating dates and ZIP codes for all clinics in the States and birth records that include information on birth outcomes and maternal characteristics. The author compares birth outcomes between siblings where one child was born when a clinic was open nearby but one sibling was born without a clinic to separate the effect of WIC access from genes and upbringing. This work shows that proximity to a WIC clinic increased weight gain during pregnancy birth weights and the likelihood of breastfeeding upon hospital discharge Another recent paper by Currie and Rajani ( ) uses birth records from New York City to look at birth outcomes controlling for fixed and time-varying characteristics of mothers that might affect selection into the WIC program. The authors find that WIC reduced the probability that the mother gained too little weight during pregnancy improved receipt of intensive medical services and reduced the incidence of low birth weight even among full-term infants ( Figure ) Overall the literature shows that WIC has led to substantial gains in many of the most important indicators of early health helping to close the gap in early health outcomes by socioeconomic status SNAP The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program or SNAP is the cornerstone of the U.S. policy to address food insecurity it is the largest and most universal of a set of Federal food and nutrition programs designed Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | to alleviate hunger by supplementing the food budgets of low-income households. SNAP is broadly available to most low-income households with eligibility based primarily on income and assets. Over million Americans including almost million children under the age of received SNAP in FY as well as the elderly working families and individuals with disabilities Eligible households generally must have a gross monthly income below percent of the official poverty guideline for their family size and a net income that falls below the poverty line ( USDA ) SNAP benefits are distributed to eligible households on a monthly basis in the form of an electronic benefit transfer ( EBT ) card which can be used to purchase eligible foods at authorized retail stores. The level of SNAP benefits is intended to fill the gap between a household s cash resources that are available to spend on food and the amount needed to purchase a nutritious diet at minimal cost The latter amount is calculated using a model-based market basket of foods known as the Thrifty Food Plan ( TFP ) which is adjusted for household size but not for other factors such as local prices. The benefit formula assumes that households can contribute percent of their net income to purchase food. A household s SNAP allotment is thus equal to the TFP-based measure of need which gives the maximum allotment for that household s size less percent of the household s net income SNAP plays an important role in reducing poverty in the United States and has been shown to be highly effective at reducing food insecurity. In SNAP benefits directly lifted at least million Americans including million children over the poverty line. Research has also shown that among households who receive SNAP food insecurity rates are up to percent lower than they otherwise would be with impacts for children that are at least this large ( Council of Economic Advisers 2015c ) A growing body of high-quality research shows that SNAP and its functionally similar predecessor the Food Stamp Program have led to significant improvements in the health and wellbeing for those who receive food assistance as young children. Almond Hoynes and Schanzenbach ( ) study the impact of the early Food Stamp Program on birth outcomes by studying the initial rollout of the program across US counties between and Using county level variation in the timing of implementation they find that a mother s access to Food Stamps during pregnancy led to increased birth weight with the greatest gains at the lower end of the birth-weight distribution Related recent work uses similar cross-State variation and longitudinal data on children who received food stamps before birth and in the first few years of life following them throughout their adolescence and into | Chapter Figure Impact of Food Stamp Exposure on Metabolic Syndrome by Age of First Exposure Metabolic Syndrome Index ( Exposure at Ages = ) to to to to to to to to Full Exposure Partial Exposure No Exposure Age of First Exposure to Food Stamps Source : Hoynes Schanzenbach and Almond ( forthcoming ) Figure Long-Term Impacts of Exposure to Food Stamps as a Child Percentage Point Impact * Standard Deviation Impact * Good Health ( left axis ) * * Metabolic Syndrome ( right axis ) Economic Self Sufficiency ( right axis ) Note : * denotes statistically significant result. Estimates are for a high-impact sample where the head of houshold had less than a high school education Source : Hoynes Schanzenbach and Almond ( forthcoming ) Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | adulthood ( Hoynes Schanzenbach and Almond forthcoming ) They find that increased exposure to food stamps in utero and in early childhood led to a significant reduction in the incidence of metabolic syndrome including a percentage-point drop in the likelihood of being obese as adults for the children of less-educated parents ( Figure ) Turning to the program s impact on economic success and selfsufficiency the authors find that early access to food stamps led to an percentage-point increase in the likelihood of completing high school among disadvantaged adults. Finally their results show even broader impacts for women who benefitted through significant improvements in overall health and economic self-sufficiency including increased educational attainment increased earnings and reduced participation in public assistance programs ( Figure ) Policy Interventions in Early Education Investments in early childhood education can take a number of forms and can benefit children through multiple channels. Policy interventions include preschool programs for children in the year before entering kindergarten ; child-care programs that provide a stimulating environment for infants and toddlers ; and programs that provide information and support services to parents and caregivers. Formal preschool and child-care programs typically aim to improve early human capital including both cognitive and non-cognitive skills through services provided directly to children. Yet these programs may also benefit children indirectly ; for example by helping parents to increase their labor force participation and raising household income. Other interventions affect children s outcomes indirectly by providing services to the parent or caregiver that improve the quality of their interactions with the children. Such caregiver interventions may be standalone or may be coupled with formal child-care and preschool programs ( see Box for examples of how technology can be used to supplement formal early learning settings ) The United States has over the past half-century made tremendous strides in expanding investment in formal early childhood education. Head Start established as part of the War on Poverty in and Early Head Start established in collectively provide comprehensive educational and health services including formal schooling health and development screenings meals and family support services for approximately million low-income children annually. States and localities are also making The study measures metabolic syndrome as an index that puts equal weight on five related components : high blood pressure heart disease heart attack obesity and diabetes. The results show that among these components Food Stamp exposure had the largest impact on obesity but all five components showed improvement | Chapter Box : Technological Innovation that Stimulates Learning during Out-of-School Time Sesame Street & Early Childhood Education Massive open online courses ( MOOCs ) have the potential to enhance children s experiences in early education by extending low-cost early education materials to large numbers of young children. One of the earliest examples of such innovation is the educational program Sesame Street A recent study on Sesame Street in its earliest years showed that preschool-aged children who lived in areas where Sesame Street was available were more likely to advance age-appropriately through school. The results were particularly pronounced for boys for children in economically disadvantaged areas and for students from disadvantaged backgrounds including non-Hispanic African-American children Although the long-term outcome results were inconclusive the authors of the study suggest that the potential impacts of the program on advancing through school as appropriate coupled with the very low cost for each student ( $ a child annually ) and the enhanced impact for students from disadvantaged backgrounds show promise for MOOCs to supplement early childhood education for low-income children ( Kearney and Levine ) It is important to note that the National Research Council and the Institute of Medicine ( ) agree that children learn best through enriching social interactions with adults and peers in their lives including teachers and families. Sesame Street and other educational programs are not intended to replace formal high-quality early education or high-quality adult-child interactions in the earliest years ; rather they can serve as a supplement to the learning that happens in early learning settings and with families at home by providing an opportunity to spend out-of-school time learning This low-cost delivery of an effective curriculum continues to be important for disadvantaged children today since the costs of early childhood care and educational activities have risen so rapidly in recent years putting high-quality education out of reach of many low-income families. Low-cost supplements to early education like Sesame Street can help low-income children gain some of the out-of-school educational experience received by higher-income children Texting to Improve Parental Inputs Text messaging is another promising delivery method that can improve parental behavior at low cost. Most American adults ( percent ) have cell phones and can receive texts ( Zickuhr and Smith ) which have a 95-percent open rate ( Mogreet ) READY4K ! an eight-month-long text messaging program designed to help parents Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | of preschoolers support their child s literacy development outside of the classroom significantly improved literacy during a pilot program in San Francisco. The text messages sent to parents suggested simple concrete actions that could be taken at home to build on children s classroom learning like suggesting specific ways to work on children s literacy skills during bath time. The intervention significantly increased positive parental behaviors and school involvement and improved children s literacy scores by up to standard deviation. There is some evidence that these impacts were larger for the children of African American and Hispanic parents ( York and Loeb ) More READY4K ! pilots are underway across the country significant investments in early childhood education. Today States and the District of Columbia have in place State-funded preschool programs serving more than one-quarter of all 4-year-olds in the school year To further increase opportunities for all children to begin kindergarten school-ready the Obama Administration has proposed expanding highquality preschool for all low- and middle-income 4-year-olds expanding access to affordable high-quality child care for low- and moderate-income families and making effective home visitation programs for new parents more widely available. Since President Obama put forth his Preschool for All proposal in the State of the Union Address the Federal Government has invested $ million in high-quality early childhood programs through the Early Head Start-Child Care Partnerships for infants and toddlers and Preschool Development Grants. In addition the Every Student Succeeds Act which President Obama signed into law in December includes a new version of the Preschool Development Grant program building on the Administration s commitment to expanding and establishing Statesupported high-quality preschool Child Care and Early Education Leading Up to Preschool High-quality care for young children before they are eligible to attend preschool can provide direct and indirect benefits for both children and parents. Specifically high-quality child care may benefit children by ensuring that they are in safe stimulating and nurturing learning environments while away from parents ( Havnes and Mogstad ) By increasing the probability that parents are working child-care access may also benefit children by supplementing family resources thereby reducing financial hardship and possibly related stressors Parents are best able to work when they have access to stable highquality affordable child-care arrangements allowing them to better support | Chapter their children through wages. Studies generally find that improving the affordability of child care increases employment for parents particularly mothers. For instance a universal subsidy that lowered the cost of child care to $ a day in Quebec increased maternal labor force participation by about percentage points ( Baker et al. ; Lefebvre and Merrigan ) Similarly an evaluation of a near-universal U.S. child-care program during the 1940s found that it substantially increased maternal employment ( Herbst ) More recently research showed that U.S. child-care subsidies that reduced the cost of child care by percent increased employment among single women by percent ( Herbst ) Evidence on the lifetime benefits of programs targeted to very young children comes from studies that have tracked participants in such programs into adulthood. One well-known program the Abecedarian Project provided poor children born in North Carolina between and with a full-time high-quality educational intervention from infancy through age The project which was funded through both Federal and State grants used a randomized design to allocate spots in the program and collected detailed longitudinal data on child and family outcomes. Although the program served a relatively small number of children ( ) it is a landmark study for its rigorous design and for establishing credible causal evidence that educational interventions at a very early age can affect participants over their lifetimes Children s gains from the Abecedarian Project persisted through adolescence and adulthood. Beginning at months program participants had higher scores on tests of various cognitive skills and scored higher on math and reading achievement tests and these achievement gains persisted through ages and ( Ramey and Campbell ; Campbell and Ramey ; Campbell et al. ) In addition participants had higher high school graduation and college attendance rates as well as more years of schooling These achievement gains translated to large earnings gains as participants entered the labor force. At age participants had income gains of over percent relative to the control group ( Campbell et al. ) The benefits of Abecedarian also accrued to parents as the program increased maternal earnings by about $ over the mother s career approximately double the estimated earnings gains for participant children based on their higher levels of educational attainment ( about $ ) ( Barnett and Masse ) Between and the Infant Health and Development Program ( IHDP ) expanded the Abecedarian model to eight U.S. cities targeting a sample of low-birth-weight premature infants. IHDP significantly improved cognitive outcomes among a diverse group of students during the Each of these figures is in dollars with a percent discount rate Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | program and up to years after completing the program ( Brooks-Gunn et al. ; Gross et al. ; McCarton et al. ; McCormick et al. ) Low-income children benefited the most from the program and projections suggest that either a universal or income-based program similar to IHDP would essentially eliminate income-based gaps in IQ at age and would substantially reduce IQ gaps at ages and ( Duncan and Sojourner ) In the Head Start program which was established in for preschool-aged children ( mainly or years of age ) expanded access to younger children through Early Head Start. Early Head Start provides services for at-risk pregnant women new mothers children ages zero to and their families and focuses on positive parenting and home environments and children s developmental outcomes. Over children ages and younger were enrolled in Early Head Start in FY ( Office of Head Start ) The impacts of Early Head Start have been studied through the Early Head Start Research and Evaluation Project which randomly assigned children to receive Early Head Start services and tracked children s performance through elementary school. Children who participated in Early Head Start showed less aggressive behavior greater vocabulary and language development and higher cognitive skills upon the program s completion These gains were especially pronounced among African-American children Parents who received Early Head Start services showed greater engagement during play and greater support for language and learning development at home ( Love et al. ) Other studies of Early Head Start have found similar results for cognitive development and language acquisition ( Vogel et al ; Vallotton et al. ) as well as for home environments ( Green et al ; Love et al. ) While most research on child care has focused on specific targeted interventions like Abecedarian and Early Head Start some studies have shown that government provision of child-care subsidies can also improve children s outcomes. Two studies from Norway demonstrate that child-care subsidies can improve children s academic performance ( Black et al. ) and later in life increase educational attainment decrease receipt of cash transfers and increase labor-market participation ( Havnes and Mogstad ) In the United States evidence on the impact of child-care subsidies comes from a study of the Lanham Act of which funded the provision inexpensive and universal public child care through wartime stimulus grants between and A recent study examining outcomes of adults who were children during these years finds that growing up in a State that spent heavily on child care under the Lanham Act led to increased educational attainment and earnings capacity making children more likely to graduate | Chapter from high school earn a college degree and work full-time. For each $ increase in spending on the program participants average annual earnings in adulthood rose by percent. These benefits proved largest for the poorest children served ( Herbst ) To be sure the quality of child care is important for children s outcomes and higher-quality child care is associated with better social skills cooperation and language development. Important aspects of high-quality care may include the use of evidence-based curricula longer program duration high teacher effectiveness and parental involvement and productive and complementary use of out-of-school time ( Council of Economic Advisers 2015a ) Low-quality care may explain why some studies have found that universal $ a day child care in Quebec adversely affected children s behaviors and why some studies of U.S. child-care subsidies also find negative effects on child achievement and behavioral outcomes ( Baker et al. ; Baker et al. ; Bernal and Keane ; Herbst and Tekin ) These disparate results underscore the importance of efforts to enhance not only the quantity but also the quality of child-care programs Preschool A large body of literature demonstrates that preschool can benefit children s school readiness and increase earnings and educational attainment later in life by improving both cognitive and non-cognitive skills Preschool is one of the most studied early childhood human capital interventions with an unusually deep research base beginning with randomized evaluations of well-known but small Federally supported programs like Abecedarian ( described above ) and Perry Preschool ( described below ) that began in the 1960s and whose participants outcomes have been tracked well into adulthood. Much of what we know about the effects of larger-scale preschool programs comes from Head Start the most widely available public preschool program for lower-income children. However there is growing evidence from a number of new preschool programs including State preschool programs in Georgia and Oklahoma and local initiatives in Chicago and Boston. Researchers have also collected results from numerous studies of smaller programs and used meta-analysis to discern general tendencies in impacts thereby drawing more general conclusions from a large number of analyses The High/Scope Perry Preschool Program which operated in Ypsilanti Michigan during the 1960s provided preschool education for low-income African-American children who were at high risk of failing in school. Perry is one of the most well-known preschool interventions in part because it was evaluated using a randomized trial yielding highly credible results and also because data on its participants were collected more routinely and over Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | a longer period than is true of most other program evaluations of any kind ( Schweinhart et al. ) Participants in Perry Preschool were randomly assigned to either a treatment group who attended preschool at ages and or to a control group that received no preschool program. Researchers have examined how these two groups fared on a wide range of outcomes through the ages of to Perry increased IQ scores at school entry and other gains persisted through school and into adulthood ( Schweinhart et al. ) Participants demonstrated higher motivation placed a higher value on schooling did more homework and demonstrated higher achievement through age ( Schweinhart and Weikart ) The program group scored better on several cognitive and academic tests through age ( Barnett ; Schweinhart ) In addition to performing better on cognitive tests educational attainment and labor market outcomes also improved among program participants. High-school graduation rates rose by about percentage points and when participants entered the workforce they had earnings about percent higher than their control group counterparts through age ( Heckman et al. ) Other observations of Perry participants later in life found similarly large increases in earnings ranging from percent to nearly percent ( Bartik ; Karoly et al. ) While evidence from narrowly targeted programs like Perry provide valuable evidence that early interventions can have large and sustained benefits an important policy question is whether larger-scale programs can provide similar benefits. One larger-scale early childhood education intervention for which research has found positive impacts in both the short term and long term is the Chicago Child-Parent Centers ( CPC ) Since the CPC have provided comprehensive early childhood education and family supports to low-income children and parents. At kindergarten entry studies show that CPC preschoolers cognitive readiness improved by about three months of learning and math and reading achievement gains persisted through sixth grade ( Reynolds ) Later evaluations found that participation in the CPC preschool program led to higher high-school graduation and college attendance rates ( Temple and Reynolds ) and that participants in turn saw increases in annual earnings in their late 20s of about percent ( Reynolds et al. ) Additional evidence on the effectiveness of large-scale and long-running preschool programs comes from modern evaluations of the Head Start CEA calculations based on the percent increase in earnings of students in the program relative to similar students who were not in the program CEA calculations based on the percent increase in earnings of students in the program relative to similar students who were not in the program | Chapter program. The Head Start Impact Study ( HSIS ) followed a nationally representative sample of nearly children who were or years old in ( Puma et al. ) One-half of these children were randomly assigned to a group that was allowed to enroll in a Head Start program and the rest were assigned to a control group who did not receive access to Head Start but could enroll in another early childhood program. The study which examined children s cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes through third grade found positive impacts on children s language and literacy development during the first year of the program especially for students whose scores were initially at the bottom of the distribution. These gains were generally attenuated over time as measured by tests in elementary school though the gains persisted through at least first grade for some Spanish speakers ( Bitler Hoynes and Domina ) Studies of Head Start have generally found positive but somewhat smaller impacts on test scores than the impacts found by studies of earlier programs like Perry. However several factors are important for understanding these differences. One is that the early narrowly targeted programs like Perry and Abecedarian were more intensive and more costly than Head Start and might therefore be expected to yield a higher return. A second issue highlighted by a growing number of researchers is that early education programs may have long-run benefits even when the program effect on test scores appears to fade out in elementary or middle school and a study by Deming ( ) suggests that this is true for Head Start.15 This study compares long-run outcomes of siblings who differed in their program participation and finds that despite a fadeout of test score gains children who participated in Head Start are more likely to graduate from high school Looking at a summary index of young-adult outcomes the study finds that Head Start participation closes one-third of the gap between children with median family income and those in bottom quarter of family income and is about percent as large as model programs such as Perry. The finding of long-run benefits despite elementary school test score fadeout may also apply to other public preschool programs such as Tennessee s Voluntary Pre-K program where researchers found evidence of test-score fadeout but where long-term outcomes can not yet be measured ( Lipsey Farran and Hofer ) Yet another reason why modern program evaluations such as HSIS are likely to produce smaller measured effects than earlier studies of programs like Perry is simply that the outcomes of children in the control group of these studies which provide a baseline for comparison are likely Other studies such as Heckman et al. ( ) also find evidence of long-term benefits despite short-term fadeout Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | to be higher today than in the past. As highlighted in a new study by Kline and Walters ( ) children in earlier control groups typically received no formal education if they were not assigned to the program being studied while children today including those in the HSIS are much more likely to attend an alternative preschool program. Kline and Walters ( ) also show that benefits of Head Start are larger for children who would not otherwise attend preschool suggesting that further expansion of program access would yield significant gains In addition to the large positive impacts on cognitive skills and labor market outcomes recent research also shows that the benefits of high-quality preschool programs like Perry Abecedarian and Head Start can extend to improvements in health and non-cognitive outcomes. Ludwig and Miller ( ) examining the effects of technical assistance provided to some counties to develop Head Start funding proposals that led to increased Head Start funding in the late 1960s and 1970s find that access to Head Start at the age of or had significant implications for child mortality between the ages of and Their results indicate that for children living in the poorest U.S. counties a to percent increase in Head Start funding reduced mortality rates from relevant causes enough to essentially close the gap between these counties and the national average. A new study examining the Perry Preschool and Abecedarian programs shows that these programs affected health and risky behavior over the long run in part by reducing the likelihood of smoking as an adult for some participants ( Conti Heckman and Pinto ) Similarly Campbell et al. ( ) find that participation in the Abecedarian Project led to better adult health outcomes such as lower blood pressure Interestingly the impacts of some early education initiatives appear to differ by gender though the gender differences are not always consistent across studies and their underlying causes are not always well understood Anderson ( ) finds larger impacts of three preschool programs on longterm outcomes for girls possibly because girls respond differently to schooling interventions. Compared to boys girls participating in the programs saw sharper increases in high-school graduation and college attendance rates along with positive effects for economic outcomes criminal behavior drug use and marriage. These results are consistent with Oden et al. ( ) who find that Head Start participation in Florida significantly raises high-school graduation rates and lowers arrest rates for girls but not boys. On the other hand Conti Heckman and Pinto ( ) find that the long-run health benefits of Perry and Abecedarian are larger for boys In addition to the studies highlighted above numerous other studies have rigorously evaluated the impact of preschool programs since the 1960s | Chapter A meta-analysis by Duncan and Magnuson ( ) examines the distribution of impacts for more than programs including Head Start Abecedarian and Perry as well as dozens of other preschool programs. Overall across all studies and time periods early childhood education increases cognitive and achievement scores by standard deviations on average or more than one-quarter of the kindergarten math test score gap between the highest and lowest income quintiles ( Duncan and Magnuson ) The estimated impacts in the studies considered in Duncan and Magnuson ( ) are illustrated in Figure with bigger circles generally corresponding to studies that enrolled more children. Figure shows that the vast majority of programs benefit children s cognitive development and achievement at the end of the program The downward slope of the line in Figure suggests that the effect sizes of early childhood education programs have fallen somewhat over time. However as discussed above a new study by Kline and Walters ( ) suggests that this pattern does not reflect declining program quality but may be driven in part by an improving counterfactual for students not enrolled in the program being studied One likely source of the improving academic outcomes for children who are not enrolled in Head Start or other more narrowly targeted programs is the recent expansion of large State-run public preschool programs Wong et al. ( ) examine five State-run preschool programs and find positive impacts on achievement test scores. Gormley et al. ( ) evaluate Oklahoma s preschool program in Tulsa and find that children s kindergarten achievement significantly improved. While it is too soon to directly estimate these programs long-term effects since the oldest participants have not yet entered the labor force Hill Gormley and Adelstein ( ) find evidence of a persistent improvement in the Tulsa program s impacts through third grade for some students. Recent evaluations find positive cognitive outcomes at fourth grade of Georgia s State-run preschool program ( Fitzpatrick ) and some persistent though smaller effects of Georgia and Tulsa s programs through eighth grade ( Cascio and Schanzenbach ) These studies also show that even when some participating children switch from private programs ( a phenomenon often referred to as crowd-out ) there can still be gains in achievement for these children who would have otherwise been in private programs perhaps because families can use the savings from switching to a public program to make other positive investments in their children. A new working paper has also found evidence of the nonacademic impacts of universal preschool on criminal activity. Oklahoma s universal preschool program lowered the likelihood that African-American Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Figure Most Early Childhood Programs Have Positive Cognitive and Achievement Impacts Average Effect Size in Standard Deviations Head Start Non-Head Start Note : Circle sizes reflect the inverse of the squared study-level standard error. of studies showed positive effects and CEA estimates that roughly percent of estimates were statistically significant at the percent level. The dashed line is a weighted trendline Source : Duncan and Magnuson ( ) ; Weiland and Yoshikawa ( ) ; CEA calculations participants were charged with a misdemeanor or felony in their late teen years ( Smith ) Students who attended State-run preschool such as those in Georgia and Oklahoma are not yet old enough to directly measure earnings ; however researchers have used achievement gains to estimate that adult earnings for these children will likely increase by to percent ( Cascio and Schanzenbach ) Other studies also project large positive effects on lifetime earnings ( Bartik Gormley and Adelstein ; Duncan Ludwig and Magnuson ) Although studies find that early childhood education yields a large return the payoff may take time to materialize as benefits are realized through behavior or earnings changes over an individual s lifecycle. When a child attends an early education program an upfront cost is incurred. Some benefits are realized immediately for example parents who choose to reenter the labor force or increase their work hours are able to increase their earnings right away. However the majority of benefits from reduced crime to higher earnings for participants accrue later in life. In the case of Perry Preschool evidence on long-run outcomes including increases in earnings and savings from education and social program utilization suggests Studies generally use increases in test scores to predict the future increase in earnings using estimates from Chetty Friedman and Rockoff ( ) or Krueger ( ) | Chapter Figure Net Benefit Per Child of Perry Preschool Rises Over the Lifecycle U.S. Dollars Social Program Savings Education Savings Earnings Gain Program Cost to Age Note : Estimates based on Heckman et al. ( ) using undiscounted dollars converted to dollars using CPI-U-RS. Additional costs and benefits such as education beyond age vocational training savings from crime reduction health benefits and maternal earnings have not been quantified in this chart Source : Heckman et al. ( ) ; CEA calculations that benefits continue to rise throughout participants lives ( Figure ; Heckman et al. ) Although it took time for the benefits of Perry Preschool to appear Heckman et al. ( ) estimate that the benefits quickly outweighed the initial cost and that the net benefit increased over the course of participants lifetimes. The timing of benefits for modern universal programs will likely follow a similar lifecycle pattern. When the savings from crime reduction are also included the estimated total discounted benefits of Perry are almost percent higher.17 Estimates based on the substantial earnings gains alone indicate that investing in early childhood education would boost GDP in the long run If all families enrolled their children in preschool at the same rate as highincome families enrollment would increase by about percentage points.18 If the earnings gains per student were similar to the estimated gains from CEA calculation based on Heckman et al. ( ) discounted lifetime benefits from earnings crime reduction K-12 and other education up to age and social program use with a discount rate of percent In about percent of four-year-olds from families with income of $ or more were in preschool but only percent of the overall population was enrolled ( Current Population Survey October Supplement ; CEA calculations ) Thus about percent of each cohort would be affected Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | the preschool programs in Georgia and Oklahoma the total gains resulting from the increase in enrollment would raise the level of GDP by to percent a year after years when higher levels of enrollment would be fully reflected in the labor force. This is equivalent to adding between approximately $ and $ billion a year based on GDP.19 This estimate does not include the gains to GDP that would result from earnings gains for parents and the many non-earnings benefits of quality preschool education including expanded economic activity due to reduced crime and possible spillovers to other workers who did not directly benefit from the program as children Income and Other Near-Cash Transfer Programs In addition to providing direct investments or in-kind transfers to disadvantaged children and their families public policy can also provide more flexible support to low-income families in the form of income transfers. Programs like the Earned Income Tax Credit the Child Tax Credit and Temporary Assistance for Needy Families are targeted mainly at families with children and can benefit children by helping their families to invest more resources in their early development. Similarly housing programs also provide flexible and multi-faceted support to low-income families and can produce especially large benefits for poor families with young children Programs like the Housing Choice Voucher program not only free up a family s income so that more of it can be invested in their children but can also improve children s living conditions in ways that can be highly beneficial to their development A large body of literature shows that a boost to income can vastly improve young children s health and human capital attainment. An influx of income in children s earliest years may provide a particularly large boost to short-term and long-term health and human capital outcomes ( Duncan Magnuson and Vortuba-Drzal ) For programs that are not targeted solely at young children the academic literature does not always distinguish between impacts in the first few years of life from impacts throughout childhood as a whole ; where the evidence exists this chapter presents evidence showing the impacts of income in children s earliest years ( see Box for discussion of sustaining these impacts in later childhood years ) Cascio and Schanzenbach ( ) estimate that these programs increase earnings by to percent per year. After years the labor force would fully reflect the higher levels of enrollment ; hence percent of each cohort s earnings would increase by to percent per year yielding an increase in aggregate earnings of percent to percent. Using GDP as of February ( $ trillion ) this yields an increase of $ to $ billion per year | Chapter Box : Nutrition and Income Programs Help Sustain Human Capital Development throughout Childhood While policies that address inequities in nutrition and family resources are critical for preventing and closing gaps in human capital before children enter school these policies also help to sustain the gains from early childhood investments and to close gaps in children s cognitive and non-cognitive development once they enter school Two recent studies demonstrate a link between Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) benefits and children s performance in school by showing how student outcomes vary with the timing of benefit receipt. SNAP benefits are distributed on a monthly basis and many low-income families see their food intake reduced over the course of each month as their budgets are depleted ( Shapiro ; Hastings and Washington ; Todd ) Gassman-Pines and Bellows ( ) analyze test scores of students in grades through in North Carolina and find that for children in households receiving SNAP but not for students from higher-income households test scores fall at the end of the month when food budgets tend to be depleted. They find also that scores recover gradually after the next month s benefits are received suggesting that a steady diet is a prerequisite for optimal learning and test performance. A related study of fifth through eighth graders in the City of Chicago School District suggests that disruptions in food budgets also lead to disciplinary problems in school. Gennetian et al. ( ) find that disciplinary incidents rise toward the end of the month especially for students in SNAP households. This pair of findings suggests that food assistance programs like SNAP are important complements to educational investments. They also suggest that for many families additional support to help sustain food budgets throughout the month would lead to further improvements in children s academic performance and would help close achievement gaps Other studies have shown that children s performance in school responds to increases in their family s income due to policies such as the Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) or the Child Tax Credit ( CTC ) Under both the EITC and the CTC the transfer a family is eligible to receive depends on household income ; both policies offer a flat subsidy in a certain range that is phased out at higher incomes and the EITC also has a phase-in range at very low incomes. Chetty Friedman and Rockoff ( ) use these changes in the tax rates to identify the extent to which benefit receipt improves academic performance. Linking data from a large school district on children s test scores teachers and schools from grades through with administrative tax records on parental earnings they find that a credit of $ increases elementary- and middle-school Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | test scores by to percent of a standard deviation. Similar effects are found in related work by Dahl and Lochner ( ) who examine the impact of EITC expansions in the late-1980s and mid-1990s on math and reading test scores using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Their study finds that an additional $ in family income raises children s test scores by about percent of a standard deviation with larger effects for children under years of age Income Transfers : EITC CTC and AFDC/TANF The Earned Income Tax Credit provides a refundable tax credit to lower-income working families. As of percent of EITC dollars went to families with children ( Falk and Crandall-Hollick ) and an earlier estimate suggests that approximately one-quarter of children receiving EITC benefits are under the age of ( Gothro and Trippe ) A family s credit amount is based on the number of dependent children and its earnings. A large and robust literature shows that the EITC increases labor force participation among single mothers ( Eissa and Hoynes ; Eissa and Liebman ; Meyer and Rosenbaum ) The low-income portion of the Child Tax Credit which is partially refundable has a similar structure to the EITC and could therefore be expected to have proportionally similar positive impacts on low-income families. Together the EITC and the refundable portion of the CTC directly lifted million children over the poverty line in ( Short ) and the additional work incentives and associated earnings may have amplified this effect. Empirical work on the EITC s impacts tends to compare families that became eligible for a larger credit with families with similar observable characteristics that were ineligible for a change in their credit The EITC has been expanded in every Administration since ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Most recently under the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of the EITC was expanded for families with three or more children the marriage penalty was reduced and the refundable portion of the Child Tax Credit was expanded all on a temporary basis. These changes were made permanent by Congress last December. Examining the and reforms which expanded the amount for which some families were eligible particularly families with multiple children Hoynes Miller and Simon ( ) use Vital Statistics data covering all births from to These data provide information on birth weight and birth order as well as some maternal demographic information. Since families with a first second or third and higher-order birth experience a different EITC schedule the authors compare birth outcomes | Chapter for single mothers across these groups and find that an additional $ in EITC receipt lowers the prevalence of low birth weight by to percent ( Hoynes Miller and Simon ) Using information on doctor visits during pregnancy and from birth certificate records on smoking and drinking during pregnancy they speculate that one channel for health improvements is through better prenatal care and health Researchers also find impacts of Federal and State EITC receipt as a young child on educational attainment later in their school years. In these studies the impacts are concentrated among students who received the EITC as young children suggesting a particularly important role for income in early years. Michelmore ( ) finds that a $ increase in the maximum EITC for which a child is eligible based on the State they live in is associated with a one percentage-point increase in the likelihood of college enrollment and a percentage-point increase in the likelihood of receiving a bachelor s degree among year olds. The attainment benefits of EITC receipt were almost entirely driven by children who were or younger when their State implemented the EITC with a percentage-point impact on college enrollment. Using a similar method Maxfield ( ) finds that an increase in the maximum EITC of $ increases the probability of high school completion at age by percentage points and the probability of completing at least one year of college by age by percentage points Like in the Michelmore ( ) paper Maxfield ( ) finds that the magnitudes of these impacts decrease as the age at which children became eligible for the EITC increases. A $ increase in the maximum EITC available to a preschooler increases high school completion by percentage points versus a percentage-point increase for a middle schooler. Altogether the studies show that EITC receipt as a young child can have profound impacts on educational and labor market outcomes later in life In a study of a similar kind of income transfer but without a work requirement Aizer et al. ( forthcoming ) examine the Mothers Pension a cash assistance program in effect from to and a precursor to AFDC and TANF. The authors use data from World War II enlistment records the Social Security Death Master File through and Census records on men to compare mortality of children of any age ( ) who benefited from the program to similar children of the same age living in the same county whose mothers applied but were denied benefits. They find that the program reduced mortality through age among recipient children ( Figure ) and that the lowest-income children experienced the largest benefits Census and enlistment records suggest that these improvements may be at least partly due to the improvements in nutritional status ( measured by underweight status in adulthood ) educational attainment and income in Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | Figure Increase in Probability of Survival Past Age Among Mothers ' Pension Recipients Percent Age Age Survival Age Age Note : Based on specification that includes individual controls and county and cohort fixed effects Increase in survival calculated as a percent of the average survival rate of rejected applicants Source : Aizer et al. ( ) early- to mid-adulthood. Documenting that the most common reason for rejection was insufficient need the authors argue their results provide a lower-bound estimate of the program s effects The positive impacts associated with the EITC may operate through multiple channels. Most obvious is the increase in income that families experience. A less obvious channel for the positive impacts could be through increases in maternal labor supply that resulted from EITC expansions or via other policy changes that occurred at the same time as those expansions ( Nichols and Rothstein ) It may be that at least some of the effects captured in the studies operate through the less obvious channels. Studies that use variation based on EITC expansions over time may be especially likely to capture some effects associated with other policy changes. For example the EITC expansions coincide with an increase in the minimum wage and the expansions coincide with welfare reform Some studies suggest that EITC impacts may differ somewhat by gender since a lower baseline level of health and human capital among young boys may make income targeted toward these investments in them particularly impactful. For example a study of Canadian child benefits finds that increases in benefits lead to larger improvements in education and physical health variables for boys ( Milligan and Stabile ) | Chapter Figure Average Annual Earnings in Adulthood Among Children Younger than When Their Family Participated in MTO U.S. Dollars ( % Increase ) ( % Increase ) Control Section Note : MTO stands for the Moving to Opportunity experiment Source : Chetty Hendren and Katz ( ) Experiment Housing and Neighborhoods Moving to a lower-poverty neighborhood as a child can have a profound impact on multiple health and human capital outcomes both in the short term and long term. These impacts are driven in part by changes in the availability of health and human capital inputs reviewed earlier in this chapter and in part due to related changes in peer effects crime safety and other environmental factors Compelling evidence that the opportunity to move to a better neighborhood can dramatically impact children s lives comes from a randomized controlled trial conducted in the mid-1990s known as the Moving to Opportunity program ( MTO ) MTO allowed researchers to evaluate the impact of both conventional Section housing vouchers which do not place any geographic restrictions on where recipients can live and experimental vouchers that required families to move to lower-poverty neighborhoods for at least one year A new study by Chetty Hendren and Katz ( forthcoming ) which is the first to look at adult outcomes for children whose parents received housing vouchers finds remarkably large benefits especially when voucher receipt was contingent on moving to a low-poverty neighborhood. Among children who were younger than when their families moved Section vouchers increased adult earnings by percent and experimental vouchers Inequality in Early Childhood and Effective Public Policy Interventions | increased earnings by percent ( Figure ) Moreover the earnings gains were largest when children s parents moved in their earlier years and fell with the age when children moved suggesting that the cumulative impact of exposure to a better environment is highest when children move in early childhood The authors also find that children whose families received vouchers when they were young were ultimately percent more likely to attend college and among those who attended college the voucher recipients went to higher-quality schools. While the program did not have a significant effect on birth rates girls whose families received vouchers were more likely to be married between the ages of and and those whose families received experimental vouchers were more likely to have the father present when they did have children. Importantly these positive outcomes were limited to individuals who moved at younger ages and did not accrue to those who moved past the age of again suggesting that neighborhood quality is especially influential in a child s most formative years CONCLUSION When we invest in young children it is not just children and their families who benefit. The research highlighted here suggests that the investments we make in children today could benefit our economy in the long run by expanding our skilled workforce and increasing their earnings as well as by improving health and wellness. This means society reaps the benefits of a better-educated higher-earning and healthier population in the future including lower transfer payments reduced involvement with the criminal justice system lower health care costs and a larger tax revenue base. Expanding access to high-quality programs that support children in their earliest years is a win-win opportunity for participating children their parents and society as a whole. It is time to build on demonstrated successes of programs that invest in young children and broaden their scope to boost opportunity for more American children | Chapter C H A P T E R TECHNOLOGY A ND IN NOVATION P roductivity growth is critical to the well-being of the American economy its workers and its households. Growth in labor productivity means American workers generate more output for a given amount of work which can lead to higher living standards via higher wages lower prices and a greater variety of products.1 Labor productivity growth in the United States has come down from its highs in the middle of the 20th century ( see Figure ) though less dramatically than in other advanced economies that had experienced a surge in productivity in the immediate aftermath of the second World War. Between and U.S. labor productivity growth rebounded. However over the last decade even though the United States has led other advanced countries in labor productivity growth achieving robust measured productivity growth has been a substantial challenge.2 Labor productivity growth measured as output per hour comes from three primary sources : increases in capital improvements in the quality of labor and total factor productivity ( TFP or what the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics formally refers to as multifactor productivity ) The first source the accumulation of physical capital fuels productivity growth through investments in machines tools computers factories infrastructure and other items that are used to produce new output. The second source labor quality upgrades comes from greater education and training of the workers who operate these machines tools and computers as well as manage factories and infrastructure to produce output. Rapid increases in capital accumulation or educational attainment can increase the output per hour of an economy and potentially improve living standards. There are however generally limits to the extent of productivity gains that can result The Economic Report of the President specifically Chapter entitled Fostering Productivity Growth through Innovation and Trade covers this point in further detail It is possible that some of the recent decline in productivity growth is due to measurement issues because official estimates do not count free online media and open-source software Box in Chapter discusses these issues in more detail Figure Labor Productivity Growth 10-Year Centered Moving Average of Annual Percent Growth in Output per Hour Italy Japan United Kingdom France Germany United States Canada Source : Conference Board Total Economy Database ; CEA calculations from simply piling more resources ( physical or human capital ) into the production process The most important source of productivity growth overall is the third factor total factor productivity. TFP can be thought of as the way that labor and capital come together to produce output. For example imagine taking the same workers and the same equipment and changing the way that the workers use the equipment to get more output. Over one-half of the growth in productivity between and came from exactly such changes Variations in TFP also explain most of the variations in productivity growth over longer periods as the contributions of capital and labor quality have been roughly constant over time. More recently however the contribution from capital has decreased significantly.3 When TFP increases a country experiences higher levels of output even when both the returns to and the amount used of capital and labor remain constant. Such TFP improvements happen when innovators entrepreneurs and managers create new products or make improvements to existing products often in response to market incentives. This improvement might happen for example if a firm reorganizes the layout of its factory in a new way so that production lines run more smoothly. Or it might happen For more detail see pages to of Chairman Jason Furman s July speech entitled Productivity Growth in the Advanced Economics : The Past the Present and Lessons for the Future. | Chapter if an inventor uncovers a new method for producing the same output at a lower cost. Either way it should be noted that these types of innovations typically require significant effort and resources Sometimes these innovations can be relatively incremental such as waste-reducing technology that improves soccer-ball production in Pakistan ( Atkin et al. ) or management practices that improve quality and reduce inventory in Indian textile plants ( Bloom et al. ) Even though each one is small many such incremental innovations can lead to substantial aggregate TFP growth. A recent paper by Garcia-Macia Hsieh and Klenow ( ) estimates that much of the aggregate TFP growth in the U.S. manufacturing sector from to came from incremental innovations such as product improvements rather than the creation of entirely new products. Other times innovations can have such profound effects on productivity growth as was the case with steam and electricity that their adoption becomes all but imperative for a firm. In such cases the innovation approaches the status of a de facto industry standard. Whether incremental or transformative technologies and innovations are critical to ensuring that the United States maintains and expands on its recent growth Competition from new and existing firms plays an important role in fostering this growth. Startups are a critical pathway for the commercialization of innovative new ideas and products. Startups or the possibility of entry by a startup also create incentives for established firms to innovate and reduce costs which in turn drives growth. However these productivityenhancing channels may be weakening as the rate of new firm formation has been in persistent decline since the 1970s as have various measures of worker mobility and job turnover. The share of patenting by new firms has also been in decline. At the same time there are signs of increasing concentration across multiple industries. These trends point to the importance of removing barriers to entry for inventors and entrepreneurs This chapter describes the state of technology and innovation in the United States including recent trends challenges and opportunities. The chapter begins by reviewing the recent trajectory of the rate of business dynamism and labor market dynamism. It then reviews trends in research and development ( R&D ) spending and patenting. Finally it describes in detail two promising areas that can help the United States to boost TFP growth in the future robotics and digital communications technology as well as potential challenges posed by these innovations Technology and Innovation | Competition and Dynamism Play a Critical Role More than years ago the Nobel Prize-winning economist Kenneth Arrow ( ) argued that a monopolist may have relatively weak incentives to innovate since its innovations do not allow it to steal business from competitors. Competition pushes firms to invest in new technologies that help to lower costs and also to invest in innovations that can lead to quality improvements of existing products.4 Competition can arise in multiple ways. An incumbent firm can face competition from other incumbents within the same market that have come up with a new way to produce a good or service or that have invented a new product that siphons off existing customers. Or competition can come from firms new to the market which include both startups and established firms. Entry can occur by established firms in a different product market in the same geography as happened when black cars ( that is limousine and town car services ) entered the taxi industry in many U.S. cities or it could involve a firm in a similar product market but from a different geographic location ( Rawley ) The latter case is often what happens with both domestic and international trade ( see Box on Trade ) The Role of Startups Startups are vital to productivity growth in the United States. Startups are often the way in which a new product or service is first brought to market. A case in point is the small company that Bill Hewlett and Dave Packard founded in a garage in Palo Alto in which commercialized an early version of an electronic oscillator a vital component in electronic devices Hewlett and Packard s inventions along with those of multiple other electronics inventors helped spur the information technology-fueled productivity rebound in the mid-1990s which saw average labor productivity growth jump more than a percentage point to percent a year ( Jorgenson and Stiroh ; Oliner and Sichel ) Academic research finds that entrepreneurship can lead to long-run productivity growth ( e.g. King and Levine ) much in the same way that Hewlett and Packard s entrepreneurial vision ultimately led to productivity gains decades after they founded their company. Notably though personal computers were becoming widespread in the 1980s and 1990s there was a lag until these innovations translated into a meaningful uptick in productivity As noted by many researchers while some competition is better than none when it comes to stimulating innovation there is evidence that too much competition can be detrimental. This so called inverted-U shape of the relationship between competition and innovation has been observed across multiple industries ( Aghion et al. ) | Chapter Box : Trade Domestic and international trade are of critical importance to the economy overall but also to innovation. Trade promotes innovation and associated productivity growth in two ways : ) by increasing the efficiency of the innovation process thus helping bring more innovations to market faster and at lower prices ; and ) by increasing the rewards that an innovator realizes when his or her new idea succeeds Domestic trade measured by commodity flows between geographies in the United States is an important driver of U.S. gross domestic product ( GDP ) and productivity growth. Infrastructure is important to domestic trade because it provides the means by which a firm can efficiently ship its products from one location to another. Chapter of this Report covers the preconditions for and consequences of improving the quality and quantity of U.S. transportation infrastructure in greater detail as well as how the interstate highway long-distance freight rail and air transportation systems are particularly important to productivity. These infrastructure assets also facilitate international trade International trade is also an important driver of innovation and productivity growth. In the words of Nobel Prize-winning economist Robert Solow ( ) [ r ] elatively free trade has the advantage that the possibility of increasing market share in world markets is a constant incentive for innovative activity. One recent review of the evidence calls the relationship between globalization and productivity growth a robust finding ( De Loecker and Goldberg ) International trade can drive productivity growth in several ways When U.S. firms sell abroad they can sell more products per firm and this increase in scale may in some cases lead to lower costs and higher productivity. International trade allows companies to access a larger market which results in greater revenues and potentially higher profits for a given level of innovation and therefore raises the incentive to innovate. For example recent economic research by Aw Roberts and Xu ( ) finds that firms with experience in foreign markets have a greater probability of R&D investment. Trade can also generate a positive effect on aggregate productivity through reallocation. When firms are able to grow and expand to meet demand from consumers in other countries these firms become a larger part of the economy and employ a larger share of workers. Hence the reallocation of labor and production toward more productive firms as they expand after trade liberalization generates higher aggregate productivity in the economy as a whole ( Melitz ) Moreover trade can expose both exporters and importers to new ideas and novel tools materials or techniques that make them more productive. Some of this learning is simply copying as when a firm Technology and Innovation | adopts pre-existing technology or know-how. At the same time since roughly one-half of all U.S. imports are inputs into the production process imports can actually reduce firms costs by making a greater variety of goods available at lower prices and such growth can lead American businesses to expand production and employment as highlighted in the academic literature. Romer ( ) shows that a country s gains from international trade are multiplied substantially when the benefits of cheaper more varied imported inputs and commodities are taken into account. Halpern Koren and Szeidl ( ) also find that access to a wider variety of imported inputs following trade liberalization increases firm productivity. Amiti and Wei ( ) find that imports of service inputs had a significant positive effect on manufacturing productivity in the United States between and A recent paper by Boler Moxnes and Ulltveit-Moe ( ) demonstrates that improved access to imported inputs promotes R&D investment and thus technological innovation Finally trade can also increase competition which can spur innovation and productivity growth. Sutton ( ) argues that one of the pathways through which developed economies benefit from international trade is that entry by competitors at the low end of the productivity distribution induces innovation in firms at the high end of the productivity distribution. Aghion et al. ( ) studied U.K. firms from to and also found large gains in TFP for incumbent firms in response to entry by foreign competitors The Trans-Pacific Partnership ( TPP ) the trade agreement between the United States and other Pacific Rim countries opens the world s fastest-growing markets to U.S. goods and services. The expanded opportunities for trade created by the TPP will help the most productive U.S. firms expand make other U.S. firms more productive and drive innovation and ultimately American productivity. Similarly the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership ( T-TIP ) a trade agreement currently under negotiation between the United States and European Union will help further drive innovation and productivity growth. Research also tells us that institutions that protect property rights that ensure the availability of affordable credit from healthy financial intermediaries and that promote the rule of law have historically been important ingredients for fostering private-sector economic activity and entrepreneurial success ( Acemoglu Johnson and Robinson ; North and Weingast ) Entrepreneurial success ultimately translates into improvements in quality of life and in productivity growth ( King and Levine ) | Chapter In addition to commercializing new technologies startups provide jobs. In startups accounted for over million new jobs compared with established firms that accounted for over million new jobs.5 However as discussed below the birth rate of startups has been declining over time ( see Figure ) While many startups fail those that remain in business tend to grow creating demand for new jobs. Thus a healthy environment for startups sets the stage for current and future job growth Most startups rely on a mix of debt and equity financing ( Robb and Robinson ) meaning that a healthy competitive financial system is vital to ensuring that startups can find the financing they need. Venture capital investments both in number of deals and in dollars provide two indicators of the health of financial markets for new firms. While such investments continue to lag historical highs from the dot-com boom these indicators have improved greatly since the financial crisis in ( see Figure ) Average quarterly venture capital investment dollars ( scaled by GDP ) in were at a level not seen since indicating that access to capital for entrepreneurs and inventors is improving though capital for innovative startups remains predominantly available in certain geographies making high-growth business creation a challenge outside of a handful of metro hubs Not only do startups help to commercialize many innovative new ideas but also startups or even the threat of entry by a startup help to motivate established businesses to innovate continuously to improve their existing products ( Seamans ) This result suggests that an important function of startups is not only to innovate and commercialize new products but also to push established firms to do so as well. In fact there do not need to be many startups that actively enter into an industry before the incumbent firms in that industry undertake many changes to enhance productivity or improve consumer welfare. For example Seamans ( ) shows that the mere possibility of entry by a city-owned cable system is enough to induce product upgrades by incumbent cable systems. Thus this dual role of startups helps to improve consumer welfare and spur innovation and productivity growth Declining Business Dynamism While startups are vital to the commercialization of new ideas and productivity growth entry by startups has been declining in the United States since the late 1970s. With exit rates relatively constant this trend means that the average age of U.S. firms is increasing while the number of firms is declining. Business dynamism the so-called churn or birth and death rates of firms has been in persistent decline in the United States since These data come from the U.S. Census Bureau s Business Dynamics Statistics Technology and Innovation | Figure Quantity and Volume of Venture Capital Deals Number Percent of GDP Total Investment Amount ( right axis ) Number of Deals ( left axis ) : Q4 Source : PWC/NVCA MoneyTree Report ; Thomson Reuters the 1970s ( as shown in Figure ) Moreover whereas in the 1980s and 1990s declining dynamism was observed in selected sectors notably retail the decline was observed across all sectors in the 2000s including the traditionally high-growth information technology sector ( Decker et al. ) This trend likely has some relationship to contemporaneous declines in productivity and innovation though the direction of that relationship is not so clear. A decline in innovation and productivity may be leading to fewer entrants and successful challenges to incumbents or some exogenous factor for example a business environment that limits competition or erects barriers to entry ( see Box on Occupational Licensing below ) may be driving lower rates of new firm formation that then result in lower levels of innovation. Lower rates of firm entry may be reducing the kind of competition among firms that usually leads them to innovate and improve their efficiency thus weighing on total factor productivity growth. The reasons for declining firm entry rates are not well understood but the trend has been downward for nearly four decades. A partial explanation is that barriers to entry have increased in many industries. For some industries these barriers could be in the form of occupational licenses ( see Box on Occupational Licensing ) In other cases these barriers could be in the form of Federal State or local licenses or permits. Oftentimes these | Chapter Figure Firm Entry and Exit Rates in the United States Percent Firm Entry Firm Exit Source : U.S. Census Bureau Business Dynamics Statistics licenses and permits are designed to ensure that businesses comply with important consumer safety rules. For example restaurants in New York City are required to have a manager who has passed a Food Protection Course.6 Such regulations add fixed costs to an entrepreneur wanting to open a new business but oftentimes serve a valuable role in protecting public well-being In other cases the barriers to entry may be related to various advantages that have accrued to incumbent firms over time. These could be political in nature ; for example existing firms could lobby for rules protecting them from new entrants as have been seen in the case of the taxi and limousine industry where Internet-based applications from new entrants have recently begun to disrupt the local ride-for-hire sector. The barriers could also be related to economies of scale whereby the incumbent has become so large that it has effectively foreclosed on the viability of entry by another firm. Some industries such as power transmission water and other utilities have natural monopolies which occur when the fixed costs are very high and marginal costs are low and approaching zero. Some newer technology markets in which network effects are important such as social media sites may come to be dominated by one firm because the network externalities in these markets tip to one provider of the network good Requirements listed at : https : //www1.nyc.gov/nycbusiness/description/ food-service-establishment-permit/apply Technology and Innovation | Box : Occupational Licensing One factor that may be contributing to the broad-based decline in the fluidity of the economy in the last several decades including declining firm entry rates less worker fluidity and less job turnover is the increasing prevalence of occupational licensing rules. This phenomenon can create barriers to entry for firms and workers in a market or geographic location thus limiting competition and potentially generating other market distortions. Work by Kleiner and Krueger ( ) charting the historical growth in licensing from a number of different data sources shows that the share of the U.S. workforce covered by state licensing laws grew fivefold in the second half of the 20th century from less than percent in the early 1950s to percent by ( Figure 5-i below ) Although state licenses account for the bulk of licensing the addition of local- and Federal-licensed occupations further raises the share of the workforce that was licensed in to percent While part of this increase in the percent of licensed workers is due to employment growth within certain heavily licensed fields such as health care and education it is primarily due to an increase in the number of occupations that require a license. Analysis by the Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) finds that roughly two-thirds of the growth in the proportion of workers licensed at the State level from the 1960s to is attributable to growth in the number of licensed occupations Figure 5-i Share of Workers with a State Occupational License Percent of the Workforce 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s Sources : The Council of State Governments ( ) ; Greene ( ) ; Kleiner ( ) ; Kleiner ( ) ; and Kleiner and Krueger ( ) ; Westat data ; CEA calculations | Chapter while a little over one-third is due to changes in the occupational composition of the workforce ( CEA et al. ) When designed and implemented carefully licensing can offer important health and safety protections to consumers and the public as well as benefits to workers. However some occupational licensing regimes can present a classic case of so-called rent-seeking behavior by incumbents whereby these individuals and firms may successfully lobby government entities to erect entry barriers to would-be competitors that result in higher-than-normal returns to capital and labor. In addition licensing requirements vary substantially by state both in terms of which professions require licenses and the requirements for obtaining a license making it more difficult for workers to move across state lines Thus it is possible that the steady increase in the number of licensed workers is contributing to the United States decades-long decrease in interstate mobility though it is unlikely that licensing is the main driver of this change ( CEA et al. ) Land use regulations and zoning can also make it more difficult for entrepreneurs to start new firms or for workers to move to more productive cities and firms. See Box in Chapter for discussion of the effects that result from overly restrictive land use regulations Whether a cause or consequence of declining firm entry rates market concentration appears to have risen over the same time period. The U.S Census Bureau s data on market consolidation tabulated in a recent paper by Furman and Orszag ( ) shows a clear trend of consolidation in the nonfarm business sector. The data show that in three-fourths of the broad sectors for which data are available the largest firms gained revenue share between and Their paper also highlights results from a number of independent studies that have documented increased market concentration across industries including agriculture upstream agricultural supply banking hospitals and wireless telecommunications To the extent that industries look more like oligopolies than perfectly competitive markets meaning that some firms dominate the market and possess certain advantages they will generate economic rents ( Furman and Orszag ) Economic rents are returns to a factor of production like capital or land which exceed the level needed to bring that factor into production ; in other words returns in excess of the level expected based on economic fundamentals. Economic rents are split between firms and their workers but firms with higher market power have greater leverage to retain rents either by charging high prices or by paying their workers less. In the absence of some countervailing public purpose such rents reflect a decrease Technology and Innovation | in consumer welfare as they erode the surplus that would otherwise accrue to consumers and workers in a competitive market ; for example through lower prices for goods or higher wages from their employees. Moreover absent entry or threat of entry by startups incumbents in these concentrated industries have less incentive to innovate leading to lower productivity growth in the long run Declining Labor Market Dynamism Business dynamism is directly connected to labor market dynamism ( or fluidity or churn ) which refers to the frequency of changes in who is working for whom in the labor market a topic that was covered in detail in Chapter of the Economic Report of the President. From the worker s perspective fluidity is measured by hires and separations ; from the firm s perspective it is measured by new positions ( job creation ) and eliminated positions ( job destruction ) ( Council of Economic Advisers 2015a ) Figure illustrates that both job creation and job destruction as a share of total employment have been in continuous decline since but that job creation has fallen faster in the last two decades. This trend can be explained in part by the decline in business dynamism. There are fewer young firms in the economy today than in the 1980s. Young firms that survive grow faster than older established firms. Having fewer young firms thus delays recovery after recessions accounting for part of the reason why job creation has fallen throughout this period. The rate of job destruction has fallen more slowly over the same timeframe in part because older firms are more resilient to macroeconomic shocks and other sudden adverse events ( Decker et al. ) Lower rates of job creation and destruction may be contributing to reduced churn in the labor market and affecting the process by which workers find jobs best matched to their skills and vice versa lowering overall productivity for all firms young and old. Workers and firms alike benefit when there is a good match between the worker s skillset and the task required of him or her by the firm. This skillset-job match leads to cost savings some of which may be passed on to consumers in the form of lower prices some of which may be enjoyed by the worker in the form of higher wages and some of which is retained by the firm via higher profits Thus existing firms can increase their productivity by hiring workers with specific know-how or technological skills or skills that better fit the jobs at a particular firm. The supply of such workers available to meet firms demand however is limited in three ways. Know-how or skills may be acquired through schools and training programs but it can take years to complete such educational programs resulting in a lag between when | Chapter Percent Figure U.S. Job Creation and Destruction Rates Job Creation Job Destruction Source : Decker et al. ( ) based on U.S. Census Bureau Business Dynamics Statistics firms first signal demand to the labor market and when individuals who have made decisions to join educational programs are ready to enter the workforce Another way high-skill workers may enter the labor market is through immigration the total volume of which is limited by the number of visas granted which is capped by legislation. Recent evidence shows that the contribution of skilled migration to innovation has been substantial. For example Peri Shih and Sparber ( ) find that inflows of foreign science technology engineering and mathematics ( STEM ) workers explain between and percent of the aggregate productivity growth that took place in the United States between and There is also abundant anecdotal evidence that the contribution of immigrants to innovation entrepreneurship and education is substantial in the United States. Immigrants accounted for about one-quarter of U.S.-based Nobel Prize recipients between and Immigrants were also among the key founders for one-quarter of all U.S. technology and engineering companies started between and with at least million dollars in sales in and for over half of such companies in Silicon Valley ( Wadhwa et al. ) These authors also report that percent of all patents originating from the United States are authored by non-citizens Technology and Innovation | Finally some workers may acquire skills on the job that then may be useful in future employment. Many firms however require their employees to sign non-compete agreements which provide another constraint on the mobility of highly skilled workers. Removing such restrictions should lead to higher levels of labor-market dynamism such that workers are better able to find jobs matched to their skills which should in turn lead to higher labor productivity. Recent studies suggest that the high concentrations of entrepreneurship in states like California are due to these states non-enforcement of non-compete agreements ( Gilson ; Marx Singh and Fleming ) The implications of reductions in labor and firm dynamism are less clear than the trends themselves. Reduced dynamism may be a sign of better matching in job markets to begin with or increased efforts by existing firms to reduce employee turnover. Yet reduced flows may be the result of real reductions in innovation by new firms which is discussed below that are driving both reduced firm and labor market dynamism. Another source of both reductions may be an expansion of non-compete clauses occupational licensing and other labor market institutions that preclude employees from switching jobs or starting their own businesses. Increased concentration in many industries may also play a role regardless of its cause Trends in R&D Spending and Patenting Innovation is difficult to measure directly but spending on research and development is a critical input into innovation and one that can be closely tracked over time. Another indirect proxy that is often used by researchers is the number of patents granted annually. This section considers both of these measures The Growth of Private R&D and Decline of Public R&D Basic research discoveries often have great social value because of their broad applicability. However because it is difficult for a private firm to appropriate the gains from basic research there tends to be underinvestment in basic research by private firms in the absence of public investment. As a result economic theory predicts that aggregate R&D investment ( comprised not only of basic research but also of applied research and experimental development ) is bound to fall short of what is socially optimal ( Nelson ) Recent empirical analyses that attempt to measure spillover effects suggest that the socially optimal level of R&D investment the amount that would produce the greatest rate of economic growth is two to four times greater than actual spending ( Jones and Williams ; Bloom Schankerman and | Chapter Van Reenen ) and that underinvestment is particularly acute in the area of basic research ( Akcigit et al. ) Investing in science and technology has been one of President Obama s priorities and these investments have included major new research initiatives such as the Precision Medicine Initiative and BRAIN Initiative ( see Box on Major Research Initiatives ) Since the President took office in private R&D spending has risen as a share of the economy reaching its highest share on record while public R&D has fallen as a share of the economy in part due to harmful budget cuts like the sequester as shown in Figure In total R&D has grown from percent of GDP in to an estimated percent of GDP in Under the Consolidated Appropriations Act of funding for Federal R&D in FY will rise by $ billion ( percent ) above FY levels according to analysis by the American Association for the Advancement of Science Private R&D investment growth has been faster during the current recovery ( post ) than in the prior economic expansion ( ) and has been especially strong in the period. As indicated in Figure private R&D investment has grown at an average annual rate of percent during the current recovery faster than the average annual pace of percent during the previous expansion between and Since the beginning of R&D has grown percent at an average annual rate Based on data available as of this writing was the best year for private R&D growth since Private business accounts for virtually all of the recent growth in R&D Nonprofit institutions like universities had a negligible impact on growth The manufacturing sector is an important driver of R&D. In and manufacturing accounted for roughly percent of R&D growth and non-manufacturing accounted for the other percent ( see Table ) Two manufacturing sectors that have notably improved relative to the pre-crisis time period ( ) are semiconductors and electronic components and motor vehicles and parts. In addition manufacturing employs percent of U.S. R&D employees and accounts for more than two thirds of total There is substantial variation in the measurement of R&D depending upon the source consulted. This chapter relies upon data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis ( BEA ) which have the advantage of being available for as of this writing. However BEA data do not include private firms outlays for software development. As a result BEA data tend to underestimate R&D s share of GDP by roughly percentage point as compared with data from the NSF with the size of the underestimate growing in recent years. There is however a significant lag in the availability of NSF R&D funding data. The Battelle forecast attempts to update the latest available data from the National Science Foundation ( ) and the Census Bureau with forecasts based on more recent micro data from other sources. The most recent forecast from the Battelle Memorial Institute projects a U.S. R&D/GDP ratio of percent in close to its all-time highs ( Grueber and Studt ) Technology and Innovation | Box : Major Research Initiatives The President s FY Budget builds on seven years worth of the Administration s science and technology priorities in a variety of policycritical domains. Specific attention in Federal R&D funding has been paid to those societal needs that are susceptible to the classic problem of private underinvestment in public goods. In other words many of the areas that the Administration has identified for concerted Federal R&D investment efforts are those in which individual firms or investors have limited economic incentive to commit resources even though the overall societal benefits of these investments would be substantial. Basic research comprises a large portion of efforts that are prone to this problem One major area of Federal focus is the effort to combat global climate change and promote clean energy technological development as outlined in the President s Climate Action Plan the U.S. Global Climate Change Research Program Strategic Plan and the Department of Energy s Quadrennial Technology Review. Detailed in these documents is the Administration s emphasis on renewable energy and electric grid modernization the potential for improved efficiency in buildings and industry investments in smart multi-modal and electrified transportation systems and technology development that would reduce greenhouse gas emissions while also improving resilience. Also relevant in this domain is an emphasis on improving our understanding of ocean and Arctic issues Another area of attention centers on the life sciences. Agencies have been instructed to prioritize research that could lead to positive impacts on health energy and food security. Chief among such priorities are the BRAIN Initiative efforts to combat antibiotic resistance and initiatives to improve our bio-surveillance capabilities. Mental healthrelated research especially that which assists our country s veterans is also of high priority. A final area of commitment is the Administration s Precision Medicine Initiative which seeks to tailor medical care to the needs of the individual patient. Accordingly investments that improve a patient s usability and portability of his or her own electronic medical records are of particular interest subject to robust privacy controls A final cluster of major research initiatives involves advanced technologies including those that bolster the Nation s security including cybersecurity and those that support advanced manufacturing. Such efforts focus on nanotechnology robotics advanced materials bioengineering and high-performance computing as well as more specific national security research priorities in the domain of data analysis hypersonics and counter-proliferation. Many of these initiatives involve investing in the industries of the future as the development and appli- | Chapter cation of these technologies may yield general purpose technologies with the potential to create entirely new industries build jobs and increase productivity Ultimately investments in these research initiatives will both improve consumer welfare and drive productivity growth in the American economy. The resultant improvements in our capacity to combat climate change the quality of the Nation s health care and the effectiveness of our national security efforts will form the backbone of an innovation ecosystem that benefits workers and consumers R&D volume in the United States. Manufacturing is also responsible for the vast majority of U.S. patents issued ( Sperling ) Federal R&D spending can be decomposed into defense and nondefense R&D spending as displayed in Figure Compared to most of the last decade both defense and non-defense R&D funding have dropped slightly as a percentage of GDP in this decade. As a result of the one-time boost from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act ( ARRA ) Federal R&D funding approached percent of GDP in fiscal years ; however subsequent Congressional appropriations have failed to maintain these gains The decline in federally funded R&D is potentially consequential because Federal and industry R&D investments should be thought of as complements and not substitutes for each other. The Federal R&D portfolio is somewhat balanced between research and development while industry R&D predominantly focuses on later-stage product development. Figure shows that the Federal Government is the majority supporter of basic research the so-called seed corn of future innovations and industries that generates the largest spillovers and thus is at risk of being the most underfunded in a private market and as such the Administration s efforts have prioritized increasing Federal investments in basic research while also pushing for an overall increase in Federal R&D investment In absolute terms the United States is the largest R&D investor in the world with a share of about percent of world R&D spending forecasted in ( though second-place China is rapidly gaining share it is only at percent ) ( Grueber and Studt ) However measured as a share of the economy the United States ranks 10th in R&D among countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( see Figure ) Unlike the United States most of the other economies in the top Technology and Innovation | Figure Federal and Nonfederal Research and Development as a Share of GDP Percent of GDP Total Federally Funded Privately Funded State and Local Government Funded Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis Figure Real Private Research & Development ( R&D ) Investment Growth 4-Quarter Percent Change Real Private R&D Investment Pre-Crisis Average ( % ) Recovery Average ( % ) Average ( % ) : Q4 Note : Shading denotes recession. Pre-crisis average defined as Q4 : through Q4 : Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis | Chapter Table Contribution to Average Annual Growth of R&D Investment Sector Total Business Manufacturing Pharmaceutical and Medicine Chemical ex Pharmaceutical Semiconductors and Electronic Components Other Computer and Electronic Products Motor Vehicles and Parts Aerospace Products and Parts Other Manufacturing Non-Manufacturing Scientific R&D Services All Other Non-Manufacturing Total Non-Business Universities and Colleges Other Nonprofits Headline R&D Growth Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA Calculations Percentage Points Average Average Change continue to expand their R&D investments from all sources not just private ones faster than their economic growth.8 Federal R&D is important not only for private firms success job creation or aggregate measures of productivity. Federally funded research leads to innovations that improve consumer welfare as well with a host of products and services being made possible by such investments be they in the area of basic or applied research investigations. From Google Earth and global positioning systems to microwave ovens and from vaccinations to photovoltaic cells discoveries and products enabled by U.S. Federal investments in innovation have touched lives across the globe in ways that are likely to be understated in official growth and productivity statistics ( see Chapter ) Investments in R&D are therefore important to the health of the American economy as well as to general welfare. The innovations that these For comparison Europe as a whole was forecast by Battelle to have an R&D/GDP ratio of percent in ; China s R&D/GDP ratio was forecast at percent but climbing rapidly South Korea Israel Japan Sweden Finland Denmark Switzerland Austria and Germany are the OECD economies ahead of the United States Technology and Innovation | Figure Federal Research and Development ( R&D ) Investment Percent of GDP Total Defense Non-Defense Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis Figure Share of Research and Development ( R&D ) by Funding Source Percent Private Federal Federal Private Other Other All R&D Basic Research Source : National Science Foundation Science and Engineering Indicators Table | Chapter Figure Gross Domestic Expenditure on Research and Development ( R&D ) Percent of GDP Note : Data for South Africa and Switzterland are not available for and so are instead displayed for the most recent available year Source : OECD Main Science and Technology Indicators ( ) investments in R&D generate help lower costs and boost productivity and the firms that these investments spawn compete with established firms further driving innovation and productivity growth ( Griliches ; Griliches ; Jones ; Jones and Williams ) Recent Trends in Patenting Although innovation is notoriously difficult to quantify patents provide one measure of innovative activity. The link between patent grants and aggregate productivity growth is tenuous because patenting can be driven by numerous factors including the budget of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office ( Griliches ) Thus while the number of new patents granted has increased over the past several decades ( Figure right axis ) the extent to which this trend is indicative of current or future productivity growth is unclear Recent academic findings at the firm level however suggest that higher levels of patenting are associated with higher total factor productivity. For example Balasubramanian and Sivadasan ( ) find evidence that a firm s productivity increases following its first patent. The U.S. Census Bureau and U.S. Patent and Trademark Office have started to link patent application data to administrative data on firms and workers. Initial research using this data indicates that most patenting firms are small and that firms Technology and Innovation | Figure Percent of Patent Applications by First Time U.S. Patenters Percent of All Patents Thousands of Patents First Time Patent Applications ( left axis ) New Patents Granted ( right axis ) Source : NBER Patent Database ; U.S. Patent and Trademark Office ; CEA calculations that patent are responsible for creating more jobs and shedding fewer jobs than non-patenting firms ( Graham et al. ) Given evidence of slowing business dynamism and lower rates of entry by new firms discussed in the previous section these new findings would then suggest that the share of patents by new firms is slowing over time. Figure ( left axis ) graphs the percent of patents by first-time patent applicants ( many of which are young or startup firms ) from to While patenting has increased over time the percent of patents by first-time applicants has been declining since the late 1980s implying at the very least that the majority of the recent increase in the overall number of patents in the U.S. economy is likely not driven by first-timers The reasons behind the falling share of first-time patent applicants are not well understood. It may be that there are economies to scale in patenting and so larger firms are patenting at a higher rate than startups. It may be that younger firms are starting to rely on trade secrets rather than patents ; indeed Png ( ) provides evidence that trade secrets may substitute for patents in some industries. It may be that costs associated with litigation disproportionately affect young firms ( see Box on Patent Litigation ) Strong institutions that protect property rights are an important ingredient for fostering economic activity and entrepreneurial success ( Acemoglu Johnson and Robinson ; North and Weingast ) But | Chapter Box : Patent Legislation While the number of annual patent grants have increased dramatically over the past several decades ( Figure above ) so too has the amount of patent litigation ( Figure 5-ii below left axis ) The rate of patent litigation defined as the ratio of the number of patent litigation cases to the number of in-force patents increased from the 1970s to mid1990s then fell from the mid-1990s to before increasing through ( Figure 5-ii below right axis ) Some of the increase in patent litigation occurred after the America Invents Act ( AIA ) took effect in Part of the increase may have been due to the AIA s change in the joinder rule that previously allowed multiple cases involving a single infringed patent to be joined. Part of the increase may have also been due to a temporary increase in false marking cases ( PWC ) Patent litigation cases are brought by both non-practicing entities ( NPEs ) and practicing entities ( PEs ) NPEs are organizations that own patents on products or processes but do not make use or sell them These include patent assertion entities ( PAEs ) that specialize in asserting patents as well as individual inventors and universities who solely license patents to others ( Lemley and Melamed ) PEs are organizations that own patents on products or processes that they make use or sell. According to research by RPX ( ; ) the percent of patent litigation cases brought by NPEs has grown over time from below Number of Cases Figure 5-ii Trends in Patent Litigation Ratio to All In-Force Patents Ratio of Lawsuits to Patents ( right axis ) Number of Patent Lawsuits ( left axis ) AIA Takes Effect ( 9/16/2011 ) Note : AIA stands for the Leahy-Smith America Invents Act Source : USPTO ; FJC ; Lex Machina ; CEA calculations Technology and Innovation | percent of all cases in to over percent in The majority of NPE cases are filed by PAEs estimated to be percent of all NPE cases by RPX ( ) Patent litigation appears to negatively affect entrepreneurship and innovation. Chien ( ) reports that patent litigation disproportionately affects smaller companies. Kiebzak Rafert and Tucker ( ) conclude that venture capital investment an indicator of levels of entrepreneurial activity initially increases with the number of litigated patents but that past a certain threshold further increases in litigated patents are associated with decreased venture capital investment. The authors also find some evidence that a similar relationship exists between patent litigation and small firm entry. Scott Morton and Shapiro ( ) develop a theoretical model to assess how patent litigation affects innovation. When they fit the model with existing data the results suggest that patent litigation hurts innovation. Feldman and Lemley ( ) find that very few patent license demands lead to new innovation but rather involve payment by the licensee to continue with its business. Galasso and Schankerman ( ) exploit the randomized assignment of judges to find that patent invalidation results in a percent decrease in future patenting over a five-year window property rights protection regimes must balance addressing valid concerns with guarding against baseless or excessive complaints. This tradeoff is particularly important as the frequency of patent litigation has risen. With this goal in mind the President has supported efforts to reform the U.S. patent system including signing the America Invents Act ( AIA ) in September Among other changes called for in the AIA there are now limits on the ability of patent holders to name ( or join ) multiple defendants in a single patent infringement lawsuit. More work is needed to reform patent litigation and better align rewards provided to patent holders with their social contribution. By instituting reforms that better protect and incentivize innovators motivate more entrepreneurial startups to enter and compete against established firms and encourage workers to seek employment opportunities that are best matched to their skillset the Administration aims to foster productivity growth New Opportunities and Challenges There are many opportunities for new technologies and business models to spur innovation and productivity growth. The range of | Chapter technologies from clean energy technology to biotechnology to 3-D printing technology is broad. This section focuses on two new opportunities that have the potential for broad spillovers into different parts of the economy. One area is the rapidly growing field of robotics. The other area involves Internet communications technology. While these areas offer much promise there are also a variety of challenges that result from their deployment and increasing role in American life. For example it is important that the resultant gains from productivity growth from these technologies are shared widely More specifically in the area of robotics this section explores concerns that increased automation in the workplace threatens to displace elements of the conventional labor force. It is important to keep in mind that while growing quickly robotics are not poised to affect every area of the economy or replace human labor. Nonetheless robotics still have the potential to be highly consequential for firms and more broadly for productivity This section also discusses two particular facets of Internet communications technology namely the on-demand economy and the digital divide The rise of the so-called on-demand economy enabled by mobile Internet applications also has the potential for productivity and welfare gains but could possibly lead to worker displacement a prospect that is examined here as well. This section also emphasizes the need to narrow what is commonly called the digital divide the gap between those who can access the Internet and those who can not so that all may share in its benefits the existence of which is well-supported by empirical findings in the economics literature Robotics One area of innovation that can help the United States to boost TFP growth in the future is robotics. The first U.S. robots were introduced into production by General Motors in and their prevalence has grown steadily over time particularly in manufacturing and the auto industry ( Gordon ) Recently the deployment of robots has accelerated leading them to contribute more to productivity as described below. However these changes potentially also create challenges in labor markets as concerns have arisen about the extent to which robots will displace workers from their jobs An economy must carefully assess these developments to encourage innovation but also to provide adequate training and protections for workers The use of industrial robots can be thought of as a specific form of automation. As a characteristic of innovation for centuries automation enhances production processes from flour to textiles to virtually every product in the market. Automation including through the use of information technology is widely believed to foster increased productivity growth Technology and Innovation | ( Bloom Sadun and Van Reenen ) In many cases mostly for higherskilled work automation has resulted in substantial increases in living standards and leisure time. The International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) defines a robot to be an actuated mechanism programmable in two or more axes with a degree of autonomy moving within its environment to perform intended tasks. This degree of autonomy makes robotic automation somewhat different from historical examples of automation such as the replacement of weavers with looms. Some of these machines can operate for extended periods of time without human control presaging the rise of a potentially paradigm-shifting innovation in the productivity process Robots like other types of automation can be either complements to or substitutes for conventional labor. For example at many of the country s biggest container shipping ports the primary gateways to and from the United States for waterborne international shipments automation has replaced longshoremen in a variety of activities from computerized cargo management platforms that allow for visualization of the loading of a container ship in real time to software that allows for end-to-end management of individual containers throughout the unloading process ( Feuer ) By contrast there are a number of smart warehouse applications that involve varying amounts of automation to complement the work done by warehouse fulfillment workers. Examples include LED lights on shelves that light up when a worker reaches the appropriate location and mobile robots that bring inventory from the floor to a central place for packaging ( Field ; Garfield ) The latter example realigns employees away from product-retrieval tasks and focuses them instead on the inventory-sorting phase of the process for which humans have a comparative advantage over machinery Robotics have also played an important role in growth over the last two decades. A recent study estimates that robotics added an average of percentage point to a country s annual GDP growth between and accounting for about one-tenth of GDP growth during this time period ( Graetz and Michaels ) This same study also estimates that robotics added percentage point to labor productivity growth accounting for about percent of labor productivity growth during this time period. This effect is of similar magnitude to the impact that the advent of steam engines had on labor productivity growth ( Crafts ) Note that the requirement for a degree of autonomy can be fulfilled with anything from indirect interaction between human control inputs and the physical robot all the way up to full autonomy ( ISO available at https : //www.iso.org/obp/ ui/ # iso : std : iso : : ed-2 : v1 : en ) | Chapter Figure Estimated Worldwide Annual Supply of Industrial Robots Thousands of Units Source : International Federation for Robotics World Robotics Growth in robotics shipments has increased since suggesting that robotics may contribute even more to GDP and labor productivity growth in the future though it is too early to tell. As indicated in Figure from to worldwide shipments of industrial robotics have nearly doubled according to the International Federation of Robotics ( IFR ) Research by the Boston Consulting Group also estimates that the dollar value of these industrial robotics shipments likely doubled during this time period ( Sander and Wolfgang ) These estimates may even understate the pace of growth since the IFR defines an industrial robot by ISO standard : An automatically controlled reprogrammable multipurpose manipulator programmable in three or more axes which may be either fixed in place or mobile for use in industrial automation applications. In particular the requirement that the device be reprogrammable to be considered an industrial robot may result in an undercount compared to other robotics definitions Industrial-services robots are primarily applied to manufacturing activities. The automotive sector accounts for approximately percent of total robot shipments worldwide and has seen rapid growth in shipments since Consumer electronics is the second-largest sector comprising percent of total shipments ; other large sectors include chemical rubber and plastics metal and food processing as indicated in Figure Technology and Innovation | Figure Estimated Annual Shipments of Industrial Robots by Main Industries Thousands of Units Automotive Electrical & Electronics Chemical Rubber and Plastics Metal Food Source : International Federation for Robotics World Robotics Robotics are used in different ways across different industries. Figure depicts changes over time within several industries and in particular highlights the rapid growth within the automotive industry. Another way to compare the intensity of robot use across industries is to normalize the number of robot units in the industry by the number of workers in the industry to create a robot density. Figure compares the robot density across industries and across countries. Again the automotive industry appears to be the heaviest user of robots both in terms of absolute number of robot units ( shown in Figure ) and in terms of density of robots per worker ( illustrated by Figure ) This trend may be because the skillset of robots lends itself well to the standardization and fixed nature of the automotive assembly process. The comparison also reveals that the United States lags Japan and Germany in the number of robots per worker especially outside the automotive sector To examine the pace of innovation in robotics CEA collected data directly from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office on the total number of patents granted each year as well as the number of robotics patents from to Figure shows that the number of patents in this class Patents were counted as being robotics patents if they received the patent subclass number ( robots ) For more information see the USPTO s definition : http : //www.uspto.gov/web/ patents/classification/uspc901/defs901.htm | Chapter Figure Robot Density : Automotive vs. Non-Automotive Number of Robots per Workers Automotive Average Non-Automotive Japan Germany United States Source : Axium Solutions ; International Federation for Robotics Number of Patents China Figure Patents with Robot Class Share of All Patents ( right axis ) Percent of All Patents Granted Number of Patents ( left axis ) Source : United States Patent and Trademark Office Technology and Innovation | was relatively flat through the 2000s before starting to increase in There were close to robotics patents granted in both and as compared to an average of about in the 2000s. As also indicated in Figure the share of patents that are for robotics decreased from to before starting to increase from to CEA also conducted an analysis of patent ownership and found little evidence of concentrated ownership across industries. However robotics are used differently across industries and so it is unclear whether there is a concentration of patent ownership within different industries. Going forward it will be important to be vigilant about intellectual property related to robotics. Low concentration in upstream markets implies healthy competition which should lead to more innovation and lower prices. As a result downstream firms should be able to acquire robot inputs at competitive prices which should help to drive productivity growth even further Effect of Robotics on Workers While industrial robots have the potential to drive productivity growth in the United States it is less clear how this growth will affect workers. One view is that robots will take substantial numbers of jobs away from humans leaving them technologically unemployed either in blissful leisure or in many popular accounts suffering from the lack of a job. Most economists consider either scenario unlikely because several centuries of innovation have shown that even as machines have been able to increasingly do tasks humans used to do this leads humans to have higher incomes consume more and creates jobs for almost everyone who wants them. In other words as workers have historically been displaced by technological innovations they have moved into new jobs often requiring more complex tasks or greater levels of independent judgment A critical question however is the pace at which this happens and the labor market institutions facilitate the shifting of people to new jobs. As an extreme example if a new innovation rendered one-half of the jobs in the economy obsolete next year then the economy might be at full employment in the long run. But this long run could be decades away as workers are slowly retrained and as the current cohort of workers ages into retirement and is replaced by younger workers trained to find jobs amidst the new technological opportunities. If however these jobs were rendered obsolete over many decades then it is much less likely that it would result in largescale transitional unemployment. Nevertheless labor market institutions are critical here too and the fact that the percentage of men ages employed in the United States slowly but steadily declined since the 1950s as manufacturing has shifted to services suggests that challenges may arise | Chapter Over time economists expect wages to adjust to clear the labor market and workers to respond to incentives to develop human capital. Inequality could increase ; indeed most economists believe technological change is partially responsible for rising inequality in recent decades. Whether or not robots will increase or decrease inequality depends in part on the extent to which robots are complements to or substitutes for labor. If substitution dominates then the question becomes whether or not labor has enough bargaining power such that it can share in productivity gains. At present this question can not be answered fully largely because of limited research on the economic impact of robots. One of the few studies in this area finds that higher levels of robot density within an industry lead to higher wages in that industry ( Graetz and Michaels ) suggesting that robots are complements to labor. The higher wages however might be due in part to robots replacing lower-skill workers in that industry thus biasing wage estimates upwards The older literature on automation may give some clues about how robots will affect jobs in the future. This broader literature finds that while there is some substitution of automation for human labor complementary jobs are often created and new work roles emerge to develop and maintain the new technology ( Autor ) One issue is whether these new jobs are created fast enough to replace the lost jobs. Keynes ( ) appears to have been concerned about the prospect for what he termed technological unemployment borne out of the notion that societies are able to improve labor efficiency more quickly than they are able to find new uses for labor There has been some debate about which types of workers are most affected by automation. That is jobs are not necessarily destroyed by automation but instead are reallocated. Autor and Dorn ( ) argue that so-called middle-skill jobs are what get displaced by automation and robots These jobs which have historically included bookkeepers clerks and certain assembly-line workers are relatively easy to routinize. This results in middle-skill workers who can not easily acquire training for a higher-skilled job settling for a position that requires a lower-skill level which may then translate into lower wages. In contrast high-skill jobs that use problemsolving capabilities intuition and creativity and low-skill jobs that require situational adaptability and in-person interactions are less easy to routinize Autor Levy and Murnane ( ) point out that robots and computerization have historically not been able to replicate or automate these tasks which has led to labor market polarization. While not specifically tied to automation Goos Manning and Salomons ( ) find broad evidence of this labor market polarization across European countries Technology and Innovation | In contrast recent papers by Autor ( ) and Schmitt Shierholz and Mishel ( ) suggests that the labor market polarization seen in the 1980s and 1990s may be declining. Data from the 2000s suggests that lower- and middle-skill workers have experienced less employment and wage growth than higher-skilled workers. Frey and Osborne ( ) argue that big data and machine learning will make it possible to automate many tasks that were difficult to automate in the past. In a study specifically on robots and jobs Graetz and Michaels ( ) find some evidence that higher levels of robot density within an industry lead to fewer hours worked by low-skilled workers in that industry While robotics is likely to affect industrial sectors of the economy differently it also is likely to affect occupations within these sectors differently Two recent studies have used data on occupational characteristics to study how automation might differentially affect wages across occupations ( Frey and Osborne ; McKinsey Global Institute ) Both studies rely on the detailed occupational descriptions from O * NET an occupational data source funded by the U.S. Department of Labor to derive probabilities that an occupation will be automated into obsolescence. While the two studies have slightly different categorizations they both find a negative relationship between wages and the threat of automation To better understand the relationship between automation and wages at the occupational level CEA matched an occupation s median hourly wage to the occupational automation scores from Frey and Osborne ( ) The median probability of automation was then calculated for three ranges of hourly wage : less than dollars ; to dollars ; and more than dollars The results presented in Figure suggest that occupations that are easier to automate have lower wages. Low probability of outright automation however would seem to make an occupation a better candidate for being complemented and improved by automation in the workplace ( such as the role played by e-mail statistical analysis and computerized computation for a variety of office-based jobs ) and so are not as prone to seeing an effect on wages from increased automation These data demonstrate the need for a robust training and education agenda to ensure that displaced workers are able to quickly and smoothly move into new jobs. The bipartisan Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act which President Obama signed into law in July consolidates existing funding initiatives helps retrain workers in skills that employers are looking for and matches those workers to employers. In March the Administration launched the TechHire initiative part of which aims to equip year olds with skills necessary for jobs in information | Chapter Figure Probability of Automation by an Occupation 's Median Hourly Wage Median Probability of Automation Less than Dollars to Dollars More than Dollars Median Hourly Wage in Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Frey and Osborne ( ) ; CEA calculations technology fields including software development network administration and cybersecurity Internet and New Business Models Digital communications technology is an area that has had a large impact on TFP growth. Such technologies are what some economists call General Purpose or platform technologies meaning that improvements in communication technologies stimulate innovation across a wide variety of other sectors. This growth is expected to continue in the future as the Internet is used to connect employers to employees to connect customers to suppliers and to develop new businesses and business models that deliver products and services faster than in the past. Moreover these new businesses compete with established firms in many cases pushing existing businesses to innovate further thereby providing customers with better products and services at lower prices. Competition can therefore lead to higher living standards as customers can purchase a wider variety of products at lower prices The United States is among the world leaders in the development and deployment of cutting-edge broadband technology. Today most Americans live in areas served by fixed-line Internet services and the United States enjoys widespread availability of advanced wireless broadband Internet Technology and Innovation | services such as 4G LTE. At the same time broadband access has become a nearly indispensable component of modern life. Numerous studies show that access to broadband contributes to local regional and national economic growth. A study of Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) countries finds that a percentage-point increase in broadband penetration is associated with per capita income growth rates that are between and percentage points higher ( Czernich Falck Kretschmer and Woessmann ) Another cross-country analysis finds that a percent increase in the size of a country s Internet-using population is associated with to dollars more in GDP per capita ( Najarzadeh Rahimzadeh and Reed ) Kolko ( ) using panel data and instrumental variables approaches finds that local broadband expansion leads to local employment growth These findings parallel a broad literature linking Internet and communications technology ( ICT ) to productivity. For example Bartel Ichniowski and Shaw ( ) find that computerized numerically controlled machining centers can both lead to wider product variety and improve overall production efficiency. More generally growth in the use of computers as well as the changes in management and other organizational dynamics that ensued partially explains the recovery in TFP growth during the 1990s from its historic lows in the 1970s and 1980s ( Black and Lynch ) While the United States benefited from the integration of these technologies and management techniques other countries that also invested in ICT did not see as large a pickup in productivity. Although the United States leads most other Western economies in both the share of ICT in value added ( Figure ) and TFP growth rates some countries that lead the world in the former exhibit low levels of the latter Access to the Internet not only enables firms to increase productivity but it also provides an opportunity for entrepreneurs to experiment with innovative product ideas and new business models and scale these ideas and models up quickly and cheaply. For example on-demand economy platforms would not be possible but for the widespread adoption of Internet and wireless devices ( see Box on On-Demand Economy ) Not only do these new business models help lower costs for consumers leading to greater consumer surplus but also they may increase business productivity. For example a survey of San Francisco transportation-network company ( TNC ) riders by University of California-Berkeley researchers found that TNC wait times were dramatically shorter and more consistent than taxis ( Rayle et al. ) Shorter wait times mean that a worker is able to travel between meetings or work and home quicker than before raising the amount of time a worker is able to spend being productive. As another example entry | Chapter Figure Share of Information and Communications Technology ( ICT ) in Value Added Percent of Value Added Austria Norway Portugal Poland Iceland Belgium Spain Slovenia Greece Italy Netherlands Canada France Germany Denmark Czech Rep Slovakia OECD Finland Sweden Estonia Luxembourg United States Hungary United Kingdom Switzerland Japan Korea Ireland Source : OECD Factbook of online craft markets means that many craft artisans are able to increase exposure in multiple markets leading to increased scale and ultimately productivity growth much in the same way that higher exports from international trade leads to productivity growth. These business models also introduce new competitive dynamics into established industries The Digital Divide Challenge Broadband access has become a nearly indispensable component of modern life used for everything from engaging in personal communication to searching for a job and streaming online educational content to engaging in civic affairs ( National Telecommunications and Information Administration and Economics and Statistics Administration ) Thus access to the Internet has become an essential resource for many nascent entrepreneurs to reach potential customers. Customers who access the Internet can benefit from the array of new products and services offered by certain types of entrepreneurial new firms. However a digital divide ( for example the fact that certain groups of individuals and businesses lack access to the Internet ) means that some would-be entrepreneurs can not compete and some would-be customers can not access these new products and services Technology and Innovation | Box : The On-Demand Economy On-demand economy platforms are online and mobile platforms that match consumers to providers for the purpose of purchasing goods or services on a one-off basis. This intentionally broad definition includes the following types of platforms : Rental platforms most commonly involve homeowners renting out their homes to business and vacation travelers. Other assets can also be rented through similar arrangements such as car and bicycle rentals Craft platforms allow individuals and small businesses who produce or collect craft-oriented goods to sell these goods to consumers Financing platforms allow individuals and small firms to obtain financing from lenders in exchange for fixed payments equity or rewards Gig platforms allow individual providers to provide their labor services which might be tied to a specialized physical asset such as a car in the case of transportation-network companies ( TNCs ) or a specialized human asset such as the ability to code to individual consumers and small firms Because they are so nascent relatively little economic research has been done on these models. Moreover many of these activities can not be isolated in official economic statistics and in some cases may in fact be omitted from these statistics. At present this portion of the economy still appears relatively small estimates suggest that it represents less than percent of the working-age population and only accounts for a miniscule portion of the economy as a whole ; PricewaterhouseCoopers estimated global revenues for the on-demand economy to be $ billion in ( PWC ) However these business models are growing rapidly and McKinsey Global Institute predicts these business models will increase global GDP by $ trillion by ( Manyika et al. ) These platforms are already forcing incumbents to respond in several industries notably the taxi industry in which TNCs have rapidly gained popularity and the lodging industry. For example one independent study found that entry of an online housing rental platform led to lower hotel prices in Texas ( Zervas Proserpio and Byers ) As noted above on the dual role of startups there do not need to be many startups in an industry before the incumbents in that industry start to undertake changes to guard against business losses. These actions could take the form of innovative activity which would boost both firm-level and overall economic productivity or dropping prices which would improve consumer welfare Medallion prices in New York City and Chicago have fallen substantially since the introduction of TNCs which is indicative of | Chapter increased competition in the taxi market.1 Medallions in New York City and Chicago are treated as private assets and the total number of medallions is limited by city government organizations a practice that effectively caps the quantity of rides available. Demand for rides in these cities has previously exceeded the cap so the medallion system works to sustain city-determined artificially-high fares resulting in rents for taxi medallion owners via this rationing process. Figure 5-iii below for New York City shows that the average price for a single taxi medallion which had been increasing since started to fall in Similarly the number of taxi medallion transfers has dropped during this time. Figure 5-iv below for Chicago reveals similar trends in that prices started to fall in By the end of the average transaction price for a medallion in Chicago had fallen to $ less than two-thirds of its value of two years earlier. The number of medallions sold has also dropped during this time Consumers appear to benefit from the on-demand economy because of lower prices and a greater array of options including proFigure 5-iii New York City Taxi Medallion Transactions Number of Medallions Millions of Dollars Average Annual Sales Price ( right axis ) Annual Medallion Sales ( left axis ) Source : New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission Medallion Transfers Data on New York City taxi medallion transfers can be found at : http : //www.nyc.gov/ html/tlc/html/about/medallion_transfers.shtml. Data on Chicago taxi medallion transfers can be found at : https : //www.cityofchicago.org/city/en/depts/bacp/supp_info/ medallion_owner_information.html. CEA aggregated the data by month and year to examine the number of medallion transfers and average value of transfer Technology and Innovation | vision of services that may not have previously existed or now reach new geographic areas. While the evidence suggests that consumers benefit from competition between on-demand economy platforms and incumbent firms the effect on wages and inequality is less certain. The optimistic view is that this sector will be a source of productivity growth that will increase consumer purchasing power across-the-board as well as set an example of technological innovations complementing lowand mid-skilled workers thus putting downward pressure on income inequality. The pessimistic view is that to the degree the on-demand economy prospers because of regulatory arbitrage it will not increase productivity and could diminish social welfare. In this view the firm that is able to circumvent regulations that correct for a negative externality in the marketplace ( such as labor protection laws or safety regulations ) will lead market transaction volume to a quantity that is higher and a quality that is lower than optimal. Moreover dispersed employees will have a hard time organizing for higher wages so low- and mid-skilled workers will be hurt and certain features of the market could lead to high firm concentration. Regardless of which view prevails or which aspects of both views it remains important to balance innovative activities with appropriate protections for workers and consumers An important feature of on-demand economy platforms is the ratings and feedback mechanism that consumers use to rate providers Figure 5-iv Chicago Taxi Medallion Transactions Number of Medallions Thousands of Dollars Average Annual Sales Price ( right axis ) Annual Medallion Sales ( left axis ) Source : City of Chicago Business Affairs and Consumer Protection | Chapter and that providers use to rate consumers. Without these feedback mechanisms it would be very difficult for platform users to assess safety and propensity for fraud which are often governed by regulations in traditional businesses that do not always extend to on-demand economy firms. Ratings and feedback mechanisms do very little however to promote basic labor standards for people performing the work another important purpose of regulation. These ratings mechanisms and other user information collected by on-demand economy platforms also pose privacy concerns that are not yet fully understood As of slightly more than three-quarters of American households had adopted Internet in the home.11 Non-adopters cite cost availability in their communities and perceived relevance as reasons to forego a broadband subscription.12 There is substantial variation in broadband access across income groups. One way to visualize the digital divide is to consider the relationship between Internet use and household income across different areas of the entire United States. In Figure each dot represents a single Public Use Microdata Area or PUMA all of which are constructed by the Census Bureau so that they contain roughly residents.13 The graph displays the share of residents in each PUMA who report using Internet in the home against median household income for that PUMA.14 Figure shows a strong positive relationship between home Internet adoption and median income ( Council of Economic Advisers 2015b ) The wealthiest PUMAs tend to have home Internet adoption rates in excess of percent while the least well off PUMAs have adoption rates of percent or below. Admittedly higher income might lead to more Internet use or vice versa or there may be a third variable such as education that These data come from Census American Community Survey. The relevant question is worded such that the respondent is not asked to differentiate between wireline as opposed to wireless access. Exact question text appears below in footnote Data on the reasons for non-adoption are from the Current Population Survey as tabulated by NTIA in its Digital Nation reports series PUMAs are geographic areas defined for statistical use. PUMAs are built using census tracts and counties nest within States contain roughly residents and cover the entire United States. For more information on Figure as well as other statistics on the digital divide please see CEA s issue brief Mapping the Digital Divide available at : https : //www whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/wh_digital_divide_issue_brief.pdf The specific question used to calculate the share of households using the Internet was the following At this house apartment or mobile home do you or any member of this household access the Internet ? Thus CEA does not include householders that only access the Internet at a public location such as a school or library in our measure of Internet adoption. Following the convention that Census uses in its public reports on computer and internet use group quarters are excluded from these estimates and a household is only counted as having internet access if it reports having a subscription Technology and Innovation | Figure Household Income and Home Internet Use Percent of Households Using Internet by Public Use Microdata Area Median Household Income by Public Use Microdata Area Source : Census Bureau American Community Survey ( ) ; CEA calculations correlates with both outcomes. Keeping in mind these concerns about causal inference a linear regression suggests that doubling a PUMA s median household income is associated with a percentage-point increase in the expected rate of Internet adoption as of ( Council of Economic Advisers 2015b ) Moreover the fact that nearly all Americans live in communities where basic Internet service is available strongly suggests that income disparities play a dominant role in explaining this relationship. Thus it does not appear to be the case that telecommunications firms are systematically choosing not to offer any form of Internet infrastructure in lower-income communities. It should be acknowledged however that the quality of Internet service available varies substantially with more than one-half of the population lacking access to download speeds of Mbps or greater as of often in rural or tribal areas ( Council of Economic Advisers 2015b ; Beede ) Closing this digital divide will allow more Americans to access the opportunities afforded by the Internet such as online job search and better educational opportunities ( Stevenson ; Fairlie ) For example If home computer use is examined rather than home Internet use the overall pattern is very similar ( although average computer adoption rates are higher ( most so for the poorest percent of households ) and regression estimates suggest that doubling median household income is associated with a percentage-point increase in the probability of having a computer at home | Chapter Kuhn and Mansour ( ) find that unemployed workers who search online for work are re-employed percent faster than comparable workers who do not go online. More recent innovations such as the on-demand economy platforms require workers to be connected to the Internet either via mobile or wireline so as to sell their goods via a platform such as Etsy or Ebay or to sell their labor services via Taskrabbit Lyft or Uber. Thus reducing the digital divide not only enables more Americans to take advantage of Internet for educational health and other needs it also enables more Americans to access jobs and other employment opportunities To address these issues the Administration has undertaken multiple initiatives to make sure that all Americans can benefit from new technologies a topic that was covered in detail in Chapter of the Economic Report of the President and that has gained momentum in Since the public and private sectors have together invested more than $ billion into new broadband infrastructure. Investments from the Federal Government alone have led to the deployment or upgrading of over miles of network infrastructure. At the same time million additional Americans have adopted broadband. In January the President announced concrete steps that the Administration would take to ensure fast and reliable broadband is available to more Americans at the lowest possible cost. Chief among these efforts is the promotion of communitybased broadband which includes a call for State and local governments to roll back short-sighted regulations that restrict competition. In March President Obama signed an Executive Memorandum creating the Broadband Opportunity Council an interagency group comprised of Federal agencies and departments. The Council was tasked with promoting broadband deployment adoption and competition. On September the White House released a report from the Council outlining steps that agencies will take to make additional funds available for broadband deployment eliminate barriers and promote broadband adoption. Also in the Department of Commerce s NTIA announced its Broadband USA initiative focused on empowering communities to expand their broadband capacity by providing technical assistance. And in July the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development unveiled Connect Home a new initiative involving communities the private sector and the Federal Government designed to expand high speed broadband to more families across the country. The pilot program launched in cities and one tribal nation and will initially reach over low-income households including children. Finally the President s ConnectEd initiative is on track to connect percent of American students to high-speed broadband in their classrooms and libraries by Data show that the connectivity gap has been cut by Technology and Innovation | about half since ConnectED was launched in with million more students and million more teachers now having access to fast broadband.16 Reducing the digital divide is critical : it ensures that all Americans can benefit from new technologies and innovations ; that more Americans find jobs for which their skills are a good match ; and that more Americans are able to start new businesses and reach a larger customer base. Reducing the digital divide therefore may be one way to address the long-term downward trend in business dynamism and worker mobility. These new businesses in turn compete with established firms driving the cycle of competition and innovation that is so vital to productivity growth Conclusion Productivity growth is important for all Americans because it can lead to higher wages and a higher standard of living. Technology and innovation are key ingredients for productivity growth. New technologies and innovations help firms to produce products and services more efficiently and also lead to new products and services that are valued by consumers For these reasons this Administration has made and will continue to make increasing American productivity and innovation a top priority These initiatives take on a variety of forms including patent reform efforts to guarantee that the fruits of innovation go to their rightful recipients Additionally spectrum policies have played a key role in promoting innovation including spectrum sharing the dedication of spectrum to foster safety and mobility in next generation vehicles incentive auctions which re-allocate spectrum to its highest economic value use and the Administration s pledge in to make available up to MHz of Federal and non-Federal spectrum over years in order to enable licensed and unlicensed wireless broadband technologies. Finally international trade agreements like TPP and T-TIP also promote the flow of ideas increase access to markets promote competition and increase specialization in R&D. The Administration s entrepreneurship initiatives such as Startup in a Day are designed to lower the barriers to starting and scaling a new company for all Americans Aspects of the Administration s proposals for business tax reform would reduce the effective tax on manufacturing to no more than percent at the same time encouraging R&D and use of clean technologies. Similarly Chapter in this Report covers in more detail how the Administration s These data are available through Education Superhighway s State of the States report available at http : //stateofthestates.educationsuperhighway.org/ For more information about Startup in a Day go to : https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ blog/2015/08/04/startup-day-four-things-you-should-know | Chapter infrastructure priorities would make sure that the supportive environment for innovation is as complete as possible The Administration s latest Strategy for American Innovation released in October details three key areas of investment that the government can pursue to ensure that the United States retains its innovative edge in the decades to come by : ) continuing to invest in Federal R&D and other building blocks for future private sector scientific and technological breakthroughs ; ) advancing Federal efforts in national priority areas like precision medicine and advanced manufacturing ; and ) improving the Federal Government s capacities for innovation Promoting productivity and innovation in the aggregate however is not enough. Beyond closing the digital divide and improving education in STEM other policies such as the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) and raising the minimum wage all have a role to play as well. The ACA has the potential to allow prospective entrepreneurs the flexibility to pursue creative ideas and found their own businesses since their health care insurance is no longer tied to their employment. The EITC helps insure that low-wage workers are rewarded for their work boosting incomes of millions of American families and allowing for more Americans to share in rising prosperity. A higher minimum wage helps workers to increase their share of the productivity growth. These and other policies pursued by this Administration help insure that America will continue to enjoy high productivity growth and that all Americans will share in the gains from this growth Technology and Innovation | C H A P T E R THE ECONOMIC BENEFITS OF INVESTING IN U.S INFRASTRUCTURE T ransportation infrastructure has been a key ingredient of economic growth in this country. Ships and ports originally enabled the economic development of the U.S. colonies by fostering the export of natural resources and commodities and the import of manufactured products. Canals and systems of dams and locks on major waterways first opened up the interior of the country to global trade. Railways enabled the rapid expansion to the West providing an efficient and reliable cross-country option for moving passengers and goods. Combined with the development of automobiles and freight trucks roads and highways particularly the Interstate Highway System became the backbone of inter- and intra-state transportation offering households and businesses easily accessible and affordable transportation. Airplanes especially in this modern era of globalization have fostered the expansion of international trade the spread of new technology and the exchange of information accounting for about a third of the value of U.S. exports ( U.S. Department of Transportation 2015a ) In each of these cases investments in infrastructure not only contributed to increases in economic output but also transformed the country. The geographic and modal distribution of infrastructure more broadly affects where people live and work how we move goods from production to consumers and how much carbon we emit. This chapter explores key aspects of our Nation s infrastructure : its current quality ; the potential benefits of infrastructure investment ; why now is an opportune time to increase it ; the mechanisms through which transportation is typically funded ; and the Federal State and local roles that make all this possible Economic Principles for Infrastructure Policy Infrastructure is defined as fixed capital assets that are consumed jointly in various production processes that facilitate and support economic activity with core infrastructure referring to roads and other transportation facilities power generation facilities and distribution networks and water and sewer systems. The services provided by infrastructure are an indispensable input to the productive capacity of an economy applied in tandem with other key inputs such as labor human capital land and natural resources. Firms combine the use of infrastructure with these other inputs to produce goods and services while households employ infrastructure services in both the production of output and the consumption of leisure activities. Deficiencies in infrastructure have the potential to adversely affect economic output employment and overall quality of life. At various points in time the country has recognized the need to substantially upgrade its public infrastructure to foment economic development and has subsequently invested in new and expanded infrastructure The crucial role of infrastructure is well recognized in economic theory. Macroeconomics emphasizes the importance of infrastructure capital in fostering economic growth while microeconomics notes the private and social benefits that infrastructure services can provide for consumers businesses and entire communities. Economic theory also highlights how to achieve optimal levels of investment some forms of infrastructure may require government involvement in their provision and financing because they exhibit many characteristics of what economics defines as public goods. Pure public goods have two unique characteristics : non-excludability in supply and non-rivalry in consumption. Non-excludability in supply means that consumers can not be prohibited from enjoying the benefits of the public good ; once the public good has been provided the entity providing it can not exclude members of the general public from utilizing its services ( usually for technological reasons ) and thus can not charge anyone for its use. Non-rivalry in consumption means that any one consumer s decision to use a good does not reduce the amount available for others. One can not keep a ship from seeing a lighthouse once it is lit ( non-excludable ) and one ship seeing the lighthouse does not prevent others from seeing it ( non-rival ) Since the services they provide are both non-excludable and non-rival ( for example lighthouses and street lights ) many types of transportation infrastructure are classic examples of pure public goods. In other cases infrastructure may be excludable ( a bridge with limited access ) or rival ( overcrowded roads or bridges ) Furthermore highway and transit infrastructure often have spillovers beyond their immediate users providing | Chapter benefits to a wide set of consumers and firms thus making it difficult to identify who and how much to charge for those services. Other types of infrastructure also have positive spillovers that are difficult to monetize such as public health benefits arising from improved clean water systems. As a result individual entities both public and private may overlook projects that are not profitable for them but nevertheless provide a net benefit for society as a whole. Moreover some types of infrastructure may be characterized by economies of scale ; as such only one firm can profitably provide the service while competition with other firms would be inefficient. As a result the private sector may lack the proper incentives to invest in such capital or may not provide the amount that is socially desirable leading to market failure. These issues suggest that the government has a role to play in efficiently supplying and maintaining transportation infrastructure especially when it spans across geographic borders Role of Government The appropriate roles for different levels of government in planning and funding infrastructure investments may vary. Historically Federal investments in infrastructure have been directed toward the formation of new capital while State and local investments have been geared toward the operation and maintenance of current infrastructure. There is a clear role for Federal funding and financing for projects that benefit the country as a whole. Still many other arguments exist for a broader Federal role including policy goals such as equity safety and enhanced access for all citizens as well as safeguarding the environment. The Nation recently took a first step toward a sustained increase in Federal funding for infrastructure when the President signed into law the Fixing America s Surface Transportation ( FAST ) Act of the first law enacted in more than years that provides guaranteed long-term funding for surface transportation. The FAST Act and its impact on public infrastructure spending are discussed in detail later in this chapter Private investment can also play an important role in the provision of infrastructure through for example the formation of public-private partnerships ( PPPs ) in which the government contracts out multiple stages in the development process for new infrastructure to single private actors Through these partnerships the private sector could be responsible for some if not all of the stages in the life cycle of an infrastructure asset : design construction financing operation and maintenance. Government involvement in PPPs and the potential benefits and drawbacks associated with these partnerships are discussed later in the chapter. In any case the potential to attract private investment in specific circumstances does not diminish the The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | importance of a strong Federal role in planning and funding critical public infrastructure The State of U.S. Infrastructure Current Investment Levels Over the past half-century public spending on water and transportation infrastructure as a share of gross domestic product ( GDP ) has trended slightly downward as shown in Figure Federal State and local government spending on water and transportation infrastructure accounted for percent of GDP in percentage point below its peak share of GDP in and somewhat above the smallest annual share of GDP at percent in Most of the public spending can be attributed to State and local governments which have accounted for on average about percent of public spending on water and transportation infrastructure since The composition of public spending on water and transportation infrastructure is now measurably different than it was in the late-1950s Mass transit and rail have acquired a markedly larger share of public infrastructure funds. On average from to streets and highways accounted for just over percent of public spending on water and transportation infrastructure while mass transit and rail accounted for only about percent. By the early 1980s the former had fallen to just under percent while the latter had risen to over percent. Since then the distribution of public funds on water and transportation infrastructure has been relatively unchanged : streets and highways ( percent ) ; water transportation resources and utilities ( percent ) ; mass transit and rail ( percent ) ; and aviation ( percent ) In the United States public gross investment in new capital formation as a share of GDP which includes core infrastructure as well as other types of capital such as equipment intellectual property products and Federal defense spending has been declining over the past half-century. Public gross fixed investment is emphasized as opposed to a more narrowly defined infrastructure-specific category because it allows for a comprehensive comparison of public investment across most of the G-7 for the past years. As shown in Figure this downward trend in new capital investment is not unique to the United States. Other members of the G-7 including Japan France and Germany have experienced similar declines in their respective shares of GDP accounted for by public investment in new capital in recent decades. From through U.S. public capital investment as a share of GDP averaged percent its lowest trailing five-year average since | Chapter Figure Composition of Public Spending on Water and Transportation Infrastructure as a Share of GDP Percent Water Transportation Resources and Utilities Aviation Mass Transit and Rail Highways Source : Congressional Budget Office ( ) ; CEA calculations Transportation Infrastructure Quality The aging of U.S. transportation infrastructure has been widely recognized. The Urban Land Institute ( ) noted that road systems and water-treatment plants built with Federal grants over to years ago are now reaching the end of their life cycles. According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis ( BEA ) the average age of the net stock for different public core infrastructure assets has steadily increased over the past halfcentury as shown in Figure In the average age of public streets and highways water supply facilities sewer systems power facilities and transportation assets reached historic highs. Though this result is not that surprising given that in-place capital is constantly aging what is striking is the rapidity with which their average ages have risen of late. From to the average age of streets and highways increased years the greatest four-year change on record and more than the 2.9-year increase over the two decades prior. Water supply facilities aged on average years from to above the 0.7-year increase over the years prior. Public sewer systems and power facilities aged slightly less from to than they The average age is calculated as the weighted average of the ages of all depreciated investment in the stock at the end of the year with the weight for each age based on its value in the total net stock. Consequently an asset with a net stock consisting of a high proportion of older investment will have a high average age. Average ages are based on current or inflationadjusted asset costs The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | Percent Figure Public Gross Fixed Investment as a Share of GDP for G-7 Countries Japan United States : Q3 France Canada Germany Note : Italy is excluded because comparable data are unavailable. United Kingdom is excluded because data are unavailable prior to Source : National Sources via Haver Analytics did over the previous decade. And the average age of public transit assets increased nearly percent over the decade ended The declining quality of U.S. transportation infrastructure is also seen in global measures. The World Economic Forum releases annual ratings that gauge the quality of infrastructure throughout the world and its ratings for the United States are displayed in Figure These ratings are determined on a scale with a higher score indicating a better quality level. In the United States received a rating of for its overall infrastructure which was above the 5.4-average rating across the world s advanced economies the 3.8-average across emerging and developing Asian nations and the global average. However the overall U.S. rating for infrastructure in was noticeably below its level in the mid-2000s falling nearly percent since In comparison the overall infrastructure rating for the world s advanced economies increased about percent over the same period Ratings for U.S. air transportation ports and roads are also lower today than they were in the mid-2000s. Ratings for railroads have been historically well below that of all U.S. infrastructure and of other transportation categories. Although some recent improvements have been observed the quality of both U.S. infrastructure overall and various transportation subcategories remain either substandard or low relative to historical levels This trend of declining infrastructure quality is not uncommon among the G-7 countries as seen in Table The quality of overall | Chapter Age Years Figure Average Age of Public Structures Water Supply Facilities Power Sewer Systems Streets and Highways Transportation Note : Water supply facilities and sewer systems exclude Federal structures which account for at most percent of the value of their combined capital stock because disaggregated Federal data are unavailable Data for power and transportation fixed assets begin in because disaggregated data are unavailable for years prior to Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis Figure Quality of U.S. Infrastructure Rating Air Overall Ports Roads Railroads Note : Scale of with a higher score indicating better infrastructure quality. Rating for railroads is first available in Source : World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report Survey The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | infrastructure in for G-7 nations with the exception of Japan and Italy was lower than it was in the mid-2000s declines comparable in magnitude to that observed in the United States. In regards to specific transportation infrastructure the United States performance in relative to the rest of the G-7 was mixed : The United States had the highest rating for air transportation and along with the United Kingdom ranked highest for ports but ranked behind France and Japan for roads and was below the G-7 average for railroads Many U.S. roadways and bridges in particular are in poor condition. According to the International Roughness Index a measure of the condition of road and highway surfaces nearly percent of U.S. roadways provided a substandard ride quality in the largest share from to ( U.S. DOT 2015c ) In the number of bridges that were rated as structurally deficient was just above while the number that were rated as functionally obsolete or inadequate for performing the tasks for which the structures were originally designed was slightly below ( DOT 2015d ) The number of structurally deficient bridges has declined on average percent a year since below the 4.2-percent average annual rate of decline throughout the 1990s. The number of functionally obsolete bridges has also declined steadily since falling on average about percent a year. Combined these two groups accounted for just below percent of all bridges in the smallest annual percentage on record More investment is needed to resolve these deficiencies. The U.S Federal Highway Administration estimates that noticeably improving roadway conditions and performance rather than allowing congestion to increase further and pavement conditions to worsen would require a capital investment in roads across all levels of government of $ to $ billion annually with larger estimates corresponding to higher forecasts for the rate of growth in motor vehicle travel ( DOT ) A growing population and economy will only serve to exacerbate these deficiencies. As the number of users who depend on transportation infrastructure increases so too will the stress that is placed on these structures leading to augmented congestion and necessary maintenance. Under higher expected growth rates for motor vehicle travel roughly half ( percent ) of the aforementioned investment would be used for improving the physical conditions of current road infrastructure. The timeliness of such investment and the mechanisms through which it could occur are explored later in this chapter A substandard quality of ride is defined as having an International Roughness Index value greater than Data for and comparable data prior to are unavailable | Chapter Table Quality of Infrastructure in G-7 Member Countries Type CAN FRA DEU ITA JPN GBR USA G-7 Average Overall Overall Air Ports Roads Railroads Note : Scale of with a higher score indicating better infrastructure quality Source : World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Report Survey Congestion Individuals experience the costs of insufficient road and bridge infrastructure capacity partly through increased congestion which will continue to rise as the number of cars driving on roads increases. Table characterizes the evolution of U.S. roadway congestion over the past three decades Commuter delays translate into economic costs through lost time that could be spent at work or consuming leisure activities as well as through wasted fuel consumed by vehicles in congested traffic. In the average commuter was delayed a total of hours over the course of the year leading to an aggregate delay of billion hours for all travelers collectively a waste of billion gallons of fuel and an estimated total cost of $ billion. Since then a near 62-percent increase in the average commuter s annual delay coupled with an estimated 42-percent rise in the total amount of commuters has led to aggregate hours delayed fuel wasted and total cost more than doubling from their levels. Through the rest of the decade these congestion measures are expected to continue increasing Higher levels of congestion also lead to increased carbon dioxide emissions : Congestion mitigation strategies that smooth traffic flows could reduce carbon dioxide emissions by about to percent based on typical conditions on Southern California freeways ( Barth and Boriboonsomsin ) Clean energy transportation investments discussed in Box can lessen the impact congestion has on the environment. Increased congestion has also been associated with reduced employment growth : a 10-percent increase in congestion for a city with relatively high congestion levels could reduce long-run employment growth by as much as percent ( Hymel ) Investing in infrastructure will help alleviate congestion both in the short The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | Table Measures of U.S. Traffic Congestion Delay per Commuter ( Hours ) Total Delay ( Billion Hours ) Year Fuel Wasted ( Billion Gallons ) Total Cost ( Billions of Dollars ) Forecast obtained from source assumes that pre-recession population growth and congestion trends will persist in the near-future Source : Schrank et al. ( ) run by providing increased road capacity and easing bottlenecks to allow more fluid transportation as well as in the long run by providing enhanced travel options that can help divert traffic away from frequently congested roadways and bridges More time spent commuting can also produce individual behavioral and socioeconomic costs. Transportation congestion induces more stressful commutes which Navaco and Gonzalez ( ) note has been shown to be associated with negative mood on arrival at work negative mood at home in the evening lowered frustration tolerance cognitive performance impairments illness work absences job instability lowered residential satisfaction and lowered overall life satisfaction. Thus elevated stress from worsening commuting conditions may put downward pressure on workplace productivity as well as overall worker sentiment. Moreover increased time spent commuting implies that less time can be spent on health-related activities such as sleep and exercise. As Christian ( ) notes longer commutes are linked to behavioral patterns which over time may contribute to obesity and other poor health outcomes. Benefits of Investing in Infrastructure This section discusses the role of infrastructure in the economy highlighting the channels through which infrastructure investment can spur overall economic activity in both the short and long run. In the near term this boost occurs through the demand-side of the economy. Because investing in infrastructure requires raw materials manufactured goods and extensive labor it stimulates economic activity among firms in the supply chain and in households with members searching for employment. In the | Chapter Box : Clean Energy and Transportation Infrastructure Infrastructure investments can have wide-ranging impacts on patterns of development in a city the number of cars accessing certain areas and ultimately environmental outcomes. A sound infrastructure plan takes into account environmental impacts and can help achieve both development and climate improvement goals. Such a plan can accommodate economic growth encourage new greener fuels in transportation networks support public transit encourage more thoughtful land-use planning and reduce congestion and pollution from idling When deciding on a new infrastructure proposal it is important for Federal State and local governments to consider the overall social impact that the proposal will have. This includes not just the financial costs incurred and potential revenues raised but also indirect benefits such as improved environmental conditions better health from reduced air pollution and decreased city congestion all of which can be more difficult to monetize Public transit can often provide an effective way to achieve transportation goals while safeguarding the environment and recent innovations in green transit have served to amplify these benefits. Finishing a process that began in Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority became the first major U.S. transit agency to replace all diesel buses in its extensive Metro fleet with newer versions that operate instead on clean alternative energy ( Weikel ) The transition is estimated to have reduced the emission of greenhouse gases by roughly pounds a day and cancer-causing particulates from the city s buses by percent. Also in California an 800-mile high-speed rail system the Nation s first is in the process of being built and expected to begin operation in ( California High-Speed Rail Authority ) By the new rail system is predicted to decrease the total distance vehicles travel each day by almost million miles and reduce the number of daily flights by roughly or more. This immense project will be funded partly by a state voter-approved $ billion bond measure and partly by funds made available through the Federal Government The push toward clean automobile fuel is also well underway The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of dedicated $ billion to energy-efficient transportation : implementing tax credits for businesses that installed alternative fuel pumps funding the development of advanced vehicle batteries and subsidizing the reduction of diesel emissions ( National Resources Defense Council ) These investments helped to catalyze and accelerate the development of clean energy technologies that have begun to have broad impacts on energy industries. Higher fuel efficiency standards have also pushed auto manu- The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | facturers toward cleaner low-emissions vehicles. In through the Biofuel Infrastructure Partnership the Federal Government agreed to match funds provided by states and private partners for pumps that supply renewable fuels to motorists ( U.S. Department of Agriculture ) More than states have enrolled in the program applying for over $ million of funding $ million more than anticipated Transportation infrastructure investment can help address congestion and the subsequent pollution it produces. For example the Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Improvement Program provides funding to State and local governments for projects that will help meet requirements set by the Clean Air Act. Projects eligible for financing through this program include ones aimed toward expanding accessibility to public transit reducing harmful emissions and ameliorating traffic congestion. Included in the President s fiscal year budget is an initiative to increase Federal funding toward clean transportation infrastructure a proposal that is discussed in detail in Box medium and long term benefits materialize primarily on the supply-side Higher-capacity and better-performing infrastructure supports faster more reliable transport flows. As a result households can increase their consumption through reduced travel costs and firms can exploit economies of scale in their production processes and distribution networks. Investing in new infrastructure also increases the flow of capital services that households and firms can utilize to produce valuable commodities and services. These longer-term supply improvements enable the economy to use private capital labor energy and other inputs more productively thereby augmenting the economy s future potential growth Short-Term Demand-Side Benefits Slack in the economy refers to the underutilization of resources like labor and capital. When slack exists in the economy fiscal spending can help alleviate that slack by augmenting its contribution to public works projects In the near term public investment can reduce unemployment provide workers with disposable income and spur economic activity through the purchasing of inputs needed for implementing these projects ( see Table ) Government spending has a multiplier effect which is defined as the dollar change in output caused by a $ change in public spending. The multiplier measures the effects of government spending on overall economic activity rather than simply the impacts on businesses or households that directly receive the spending | Chapter Table Input-Output Effects of Infrastructure Investment Indirect Indirect Multiplier Direct Multiplier on Total on NonMultiplier Manufacturing Multiplier Manufacturing Industries Industries Industry Government Investment Federal nondefense State and local Passenger transit Electric utilities Nonresidential Investment Structures ( excluding commercial and farm ) Maintenance and repair Core Infrastructure Investment Highways and streets Electric power generation transmission and distribution Water sewage and other systems Note : Multipliers represent the dollar value of output that is generated from investing $ of input into the industry listed Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis Benchmark Input-Output Accounts ; CEA calculations The short-run public investment multiplier for economic output has been well-documented. The International Monetary Fund ( ) finds during times of low growth a public spending multiplier of in the same year as the investment and a slightly higher multiplier of over the next four years. When a government has clearly identified infrastructure needs an efficient investment process for identifying and directing funding toward those needs and economic slack then there is a strong case for increasing public investment in infrastructure. With nominal interest rates at or close to zero percent the effects of increased government spending can be larger than they would be during normal circumstances when interest rates are higher When the Central Bank s policy rate is set at zero which it was from through Christiano Eichenbaum and Rebelo ( ) and Eggerston ( ) find stronger effects of increased public investment producing shortrun multipliers that range between and Because of its labor-intensive nature spending on transportation is associated with even larger boosts to economic output than other government spending with a short-run multiplier of about ( Leduc and Wilson ) In addition to the degree that The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | sustained losses in economic output lead discouraged workers to drop out of the labor force for prolonged periods and make them reluctant to return alleviating these output losses in the short run can help to increase long-run output. When there is less slack in the economy or when the Central Bank might tighten monetary policy in response to fiscal spending fiscal multipliers are much lower ( Auerbach and Gorodnichenko ) As shown in Table these short-run multipliers are in line with those calculated using the Benchmark Input-Output Accounts from released by the BEA.3 The input-output calculations highlight the indirect effects that increased spending in a given industry can have on the rest of the economy. Each additional dollar spent toward infrastructure whether it is through the Federal or State and local governments ; used for highways and streets electricity or water and sewage ; or devoted to the formation of new capital or the maintenance of current infrastructure has a multiplier notably larger than The largest multiplier stems from State and local government spending on passenger transit at indicating that such an investment leads to more than triple its value in economic output. The indirect multipliers from investing in infrastructure can be especially large for the manufacturing sector ( for example for State and local government investment in passenger transit and for highways and streets more generally ) Positive impacts on the manufacturing sector likely result because constructing operating and maintaining public infrastructure relies heavily on manufactured goods. There are also substantial spillovers to non-manufacturing industries which being the largest part of the economy are affected by a general increase in economic activity Even as labor markets normalize increased infrastructure investment would provide at the very least short-run boosts to output and jobs. CEA ( ) finds that percent of the jobs created from infrastructure investment would stem from construction. According to the Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages the average weekly wage for private construction employment in was $ 7-percent higher than the privatesector average. Thus most of the employment generated from investing in infrastructure would be well-paying middle-class jobs. Although the boosts to output and employment are larger when the increase in public spending occurs during a period of greater economic slack there is still a benefit to increasing government spending on infrastructure today. Beyond the short-term boosts to demand for labor and other resources however Data from as opposed to data from a more recent year are used because is the latest year for which the BEA released a more comprehensive breakdown of the industry-byindustry input-output data providing the cross-section between industries and allowing for the analysis of more disaggregated investment categories such as those displayed in Table | Chapter infrastructure investment is crucial for supporting long-term growth by providing the necessary supply-side inputs Long-Term Supply-Side Benefits Well-targeted infrastructure investments increase the economy s long-run growth potential. Macroeconomists have closely examined the link between infrastructure investment and economic development finding that infrastructure boosts productivity and offers large socioeconomic gains Public investment in infrastructure propels future productivity growth through several channels : enabling firms to take advantage of economies of scale and increase production through reduced input costs ; lowering transport storage and vehicle maintenance costs for households and firms by easing congestion and improving the quality of roads and highways ; increasing the productivity of private capital through improved resource utilization ; and increasing workers access to labor market opportunities thus facilitating more efficient hiring matches. These effects are especially relevant today as the United States continues to experience lagging productivity growth ( see discussion in Chapter and Figure ) Increasing public infrastructure investment supports growth in labor productivity by augmenting growth in total factor productivity and by increasing the capital intensity of production throughout the economy Boosting the capital intensity of production occurs both directly by increasing the accumulated stock of public capital and indirectly because a larger stock of public infrastructure fosters increased private capital investment By increasing private-sector output and improving the productivity of private capital infrastructure spending can induce greater private spending by increasing the returns to investment on private capital.4 Larger stocks of public capital and the flow of services they generate raise the marginal productivity of other inputs to production including private capital and labor. Because more efficient input use leads to lower costs of production businesses will expand their production capacity to take advantage of these cost reductions. Through this mechanism increasing the stock of public capital investment can effectively augment the level of private investment Some research found that increasing aggregate public investment by $ can increase long-term private investment by $ ( Pereira ) However this effect was found to vary noticeably among different types of infrastructure : Pereira ( ) estimated that publicly investing $ in electric and gas facilities transit systems and airfields induces a $ rise in longterm private investment whereas an additional $ of public investment in See Nadiri and Mamuneas ( ) for an analysis of this mechanism through the highway capital stock The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | highways and streets increases private capital investment by only $ Although the effects are more muted for some types of infrastructure public investment in each amplifies private investment in the long-term. By enticing greater long-run private capital investment increased public spending spurs capital deepening and in turn raises future productivity and thus long-run potential economic growth Many studies have assessed the productivity effects of public capital investment for the United States Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development member nations and developing countries. The variability and potential biases associated with these estimates are discussed in Box A literature review of economic analyses from to suggests that on average a 1-percent increase in public capital leads to a 0.11-percent rise in output ( Bom and Ligthart ) In the stock of physical public capital relative to GDP was about percent. Given this elasticity estimate and the size of the public capital stock the marginal product of public capital is about percent. Thus given the deficiency in infrastructure described above a $ increase in the total value of the public capital stock would raise annual economic output by about $ Infrastructure s Direct Boost to Productivity Beyond the ways in which infrastructure boosts economic activity and productivity through spillovers it also raises productivity directly by increasing capital services used by industry. For example publically funded highways and airports provide capital services through the transportation of goods that are sold in the private sector. Real capital services from the public capital stock are a flow that is calculated as the sum of the real interest payments on and the depreciation of the capital stock. This definition roughly parallels that used in the calculation of the contribution of private capital to labor productivity growth. A business or government purchases a structure or piece of equipment when the expected present value of the future flow of services from that structure or equipment meets or exceeds the original price. As the capital stock is used and ages it loses its value ( depreciation ) in rough proportion to the services that it renders. Interest payments on the funds borrowed to finance the purchase should be added to this flow The growth rate of public capital services per private-sector employeehour and its contribution to nonfarm productivity growth are shown in Table Growth of capital services per hour fell from an annual rate of growth of percent during the 1947-to-1973 period to only percent a year during the 1973-to-1995 period. To derive the direct contribution to nonfarm productivity growth the growth of public capital services is | Chapter Box : Elasticity of Output to Public Capital Attempts to gauge the contribution of the public capital stock to economic output have focused on calculating the output elasticity of public capital or the percent change in output that results from a 1-percent increase in public capital.1 Aschauer ( ) was among the first to estimate the magnitude of this effect for the United States finding an output elasticity of public capital of implying that U.S. public capital investment has been an important factor in influencing historical growth in U.S. economic output. Since that time an abundance of research has been devoted to gauging the elasticity of a nation s output to its public capital stock though no consensus has surfaced as shown in Figure 6-i. While most of the estimates summarized in the Figure cluster near they have ranged from as low as to as high as The following discussion explores the reasons for the wide disparity in the estimates summarized in Figure 6-i One reason for the wide variation is that empirical estimates may vary depending upon the time horizon over which the output elasticity is calculated. Looking over the near term is likely to produce lower output Percent Figure 6-i Distribution of the Output Elasticity of Public Capital Note : Values on the horizontal axis represent medians of percentage point bins. The mean output elasticity of public capital is used from unique papers. Each analysis included incorporates a production function approach that results in a single output elasticity and assesses the capital stock using some measure of public output Source : Bom and Ligthart ( ) ; CEA calculations This calculation is different than the spending multipliers mentioned earlier. These measures look at annual changes in economic activity including the infrastructure spending itself relative to spending in a given year. The output elasticity of public capital considers the impact from the public capital stock on other economic activity The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | elasticities since short-run analyses ignore the long-term nature of public capital s effects on private investment productivity and economic growth. New infrastructure may not only take years to complete but may require years before its productivity boost to society is realized. When evaluated over the long run the output elasticity of public capital has been found to be on average nearly percentage point higher than those calculated over the near term ( Melo Graham and Brage-Ardao ; Bom and Ligthart ) Second the level of aggregation at which the analysis is conducted can heavily influence the output elasticity calculated. Given its far-reaching nature the formation of new public capital can augment production capacity not only in the areas in which structures are built but in neighboring economies as well. Consequently analyses that focus on regional data will inherently overlook spillover effects into nearby areas whereas those that use national data will naturally internalize these effects in their empirical estimates. Not accounting for these spillover impacts can put sizable downward pressure on output elasticity estimates resulting in values that are more than percentage point less than their nationaldata counterparts ( Bom and Ligthart ) Third analyses that use a production function estimated from historical data on investment and output may spuriously overstate the output elasticity of public capital. Some exercises may find relatively large output elasticities because they fail to account for common trends in the data. Given that time series for output and public capital tend to exhibit common stochastic trends estimates produced from econometric analyses of their historical levels may produce artificially high results Time-series analyses that fail to test for common time trends among the variables they employ often find output elasticities of public capital that are percentage point on average higher than those that conduct such tests and employ estimation procedures that account for these trends ( Bom and Ligthart ) Fourth to account for the spurious results that can arise from using historical levels of investment and output many studies have constructed estimates that instead rely on year-over-year changes in these variables. Although this avoids the potential aforementioned bias from using the historical levels of data series this approach is likely to understate the actual output elasticity and can produce estimates that appear to be zero though the true effect may be positive ( Hurlin and Minea ) One problem with this method is that it assumes that the impact of public capital investment on output occurs instantaneously rather than requiring a prolonged period for the effects to be felt. Because analyses that rely exclusively on year-over-year changes in investment | Chapter and output ignore potential inter-temporal long-run relationships that may exist among these variables their results may underestimate the impact that investments in public capital have on output Last studies that try to measure an output elasticity of public capital may suffer from reverse causality ( or endogeneity issues ) meaning that changes in economic output influence infrastructure investment and the stock of public capital rather than the reverse. For example higher levels of output may increase the demand for public capital or support more favorable fiscal conditions for elevating government investment. In this case the elasticity of output to public capital may be overstated since favorable business-cycle conditions are artificially strengthening this estimated relationship. Similarly increasing public investment may be used as a countercyclical measure to spur economic activity when output is depressed. As a result though the size of the public capital stock may increase economic output may remain temporarily suppressed leading to underestimates of the relevant output elasticities. Using econometric techniques that account for potential reverse causality typically lowers the estimated elasticity of output to public capital by about percentage point ( Bom and Ligthart ) When incorporating the output elasticity of public capital in an economic analysis it is important to note the time-horizon and the geographic scope of government that is being used. Although Bom and Ligthart ( ) find an average elasticity of output to public capital of about percentage point notably below that reported by Aschauer ( ) they note that the elasticity of output is heterogeneous across these dimensions. As one illustration they find that the long-run output elasticity for State and local government spending on core infrastructure is more than twice as large as the short-run output elasticity for Federal spending on total infrastructure weighted by its share in output.5 The slowdown in capital services per hour played a small role in causing the post-1973 slowdown in labor productivity growth with its contribution dropping percentage point between the two periods ( from percentage point a year to percentage point a year ) Of course the indirect effects of lower public investment could also have played an important role The growth rate of public capital services per employee-hour remained low at only percent a year during the 1995-to-2007 period. The growth rate picked up to percent a year during the 2007-to-2014 period a Although public capital services are not included in the official definition of nonfarm output the definition of nonfarm output has been rescaled so as to include the implicit contribution of public capital The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | Table Direct Contribution of the Public Capital Stock to Productivity Growth Annual Average Annual Annual Growth Rate Share of Growth Growth of Public Output at Time Rate of Rate of Capital Implicit Period Capital Employee- Services per User hours EmployeeServices Cost2 hour % % % % Contribution to Productivity Growth ( percentage points ) Annual Labor Productivity Growth in Nonfarm Business Sector % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % % Public capital services equals the sum of real depreciation plus real interest payments on the value of the net real public capital stock Public capital services as a share of nonfarm business output where nonfarm business output has been elevated by the inclusion of public capital services in that output Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Haver Analytics ; CEA calculations pickup that is fully accounted for by a dramatic slowing of employee-hours growth ( from percent a year to percent a year ) rather than a pickup in capital services growth ( which was about percent a year in both the 1995-to-2007 and the 2007-to-2014 periods ) Public capital services per employee-hour ( which accelerated in the 2007-to-2014 period ) does not account for the recent slowdown in productivity growth as it did during the slowdown from the 1947-to-1973 period to the 1973-to-1995 period. That said faster growth of public capital might have boosted recent productivity growth if suitable capital projects could have been found. Additional public capital investment might also have supported aggregate demand if it was appropriately timed Infrastructure Investment and Agglomeration As workers and firms gather in the same location the costs of transporting goods and hiring employees decline leading to lower production costs for firms. An advantageous location or access to natural resources initially attracts businesses and households to a site and as the surrounding region develops the costs of doing business there decline and the existence of a thriving business community attracts other firms and consumers. These cost advantages stem from the spatial concentration of firms and workers and are called agglomeration economies. Investing in high-capacity transportation facilities ( such as mass transit ) often fosters such agglomeration effects by enabling less-dense areas to urbanize improving access throughout an urbanized area and reducing the costs associated with transportation | Chapter Thus ideas are exchanged workers with specific skills are available and supply systems can flourish. The benefits of reduced travel costs and more free-flowing universal access redouble throughout the region. Workers can find jobs that take full advantage of their specialized skills enabling firms to operate more efficiently and thus spurring other firms and workers in the economy to produce more efficiently. As a result agglomeration effects can accentuate the impact that infrastructure investment normally has on productivity growth Spillover Effects While investing in infrastructure generates direct benefits in the form of increased employment and higher productivity benefits that may be magnified through agglomeration effects it can also offer spillover benefits for neighboring economies. Road and highway infrastructure in particular has led to marked spillover effects ( see Box which highlights the spillover effects that stemmed from the formation of the Interstate Highway System ) Output in the agricultural sector in particular has benefited through spatial spillovers from road investments. One study finds that a 1-percent increase in outlays on roads in a state is associated with a roughly 0.03-percent expansion in agricultural output in that state and an average increase of percent in adjacent states and their neighbors ( Tong et al ) The magnitude and structure of the spillover effects vary based on the location of the state and the paths available for the spillover effect. These effects are especially pronounced in the agriculturally concentrated central United States relative to less agriculturally intensive regions Improvements in airport infrastructure offer both direct and spillover gains which can be geographically extensive because of the network nature of air service ; that is improving an airport in one location results in faster and more reliable connections with many other areas. Investments in air transportation can effectively reduce travel time and promote more reliable flights enhancing worker productivity and shipping efficiency. Directly a 10-percent increase in passenger enplanements in a metro area has been found to raise employment in service industries which account for almost percent of total private employment by about percent ( Brueckner ) Indirectly the expansion of airport infrastructure has been associated with cost savings in manufacturing production not only in states in which the airports are located but in other states as well. A 1-percent increase in state airport infrastructure stock defined as airport capital expenditures for construction land structure and equipment has been found to correspond to a decrease in manufacturing costs of about percent within that state and between and percent within other states with higher The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | Box : The Interstate Highway System What has been called the greatest public works project in history the Interstate Highway System remains one of the largest investments in infrastructure by the U.S. Government ( DOT 2015e ) President Dwight D. Eisenhower recognized the social and economic importance of constructing a highway system in his State of the Union Address highlighting that it was needed for the personal safety the general prosperity the national security of the American people ( Public Broadcasting Service ) The 47,000-mile highway system spanning all contiguous states was a project commissioned by the Federal Aid Highway Act of The project pushed public spending on highways to historic highs in the late-1950s and throughout the 1960s. From to public spending on highways averaged about percent of GDP and accounted for roughly percent of public spending on water and transportation infrastructure ( Congressional Budget Office ) Highways remain a major part of infrastructure investment. From to public spending on highways averaged just above percent of GDP and represented about percent of public spending on water and transportation infrastructure. From increased trade and job growth to more free-flowing and accessible transportation the construction of the Interstate Highway System demonstrates the potential gains that large-scale infrastructure projects can offer and remains a powerful example of our past investment in infrastructure development When drivers switch from a traditional road to a wider straighter interstate highway travel costs are substantially reduced. Savings are estimated at $ a mile for automobiles and $ a mile for trucks stemming from reduced travel time accidents and vehicle operating costs ( Thompson and Chandra ) This effect combined with decreased travel distance between cities has been shown to have a positive impact on trade by for example allowing for the transportation of heavier goods ( Duranton Morrow and Turner ) Rural counties that became connected by the Interstate Highway System experienced as much as a 10-percentage point increase in trade-related activities per capita ( Michaels ) Moreover a 1-percent increase in the highway capital stock per capita in a given northeast metropolitan area measured using Federal State and local government expenditures on highways was found to be associated with a 0.05-percent rise in annual economic output per capita both in that region and in its nearest neighbor ( Chen and Haynes ) Beyond the gains from trade investing in highways has been found to have boosted employment as well : a 10-percent increase in a metropolitan statistical area s stock of interstate highways ( measured as | Chapter kilometers of road ) in resulted in percent more employment for that area years later ( Duranton and Turner ) From decreased travel costs and increased trade to higher employment and output the economic effects of a national highway system are clear. The Interstate Highway System provides an interconnectedness that was not there before a means by which individuals and goods could travel more fluidly throughout the contiguous United States. The effects from the Interstate Highway System were drastic at its implementation and continue to be substantial today spillover effects stemming from states without large hubs ( Cohen and Morrison Paul ) Both investment in new public capital and improved maintenance of existing infrastructure can produce spillover effects again presumably due to the network nature of most transportation infrastructure where expanding a single facility can improve connections among many origins and destinations. In fact there is some evidence that the effects from State and local government investment in public capital can be larger for neighboring states than for the ones in which the investments are made. Evaluating annual state-level output and constructing weighted spillover indexes based on the commodity flows across states and the relative magnitudes of neighboring economies Kalyvitis and Vella ( ) find that outlays for new capital as well as those for operation and maintenance have large positive effects on neighboring economies calculating average spillover elasticities of output from new public capital and maintenance of and respectively. The relatively large spillover effects from public spending on operation and maintenance may result because states and localities primarily fund operation and maintenance ; as such only the states and localities that make the investments incur the associated costs allowing other states to enjoy the benefits without paying for the investment. Yet these authors estimates for direct output elasticities of public capital for states in which the investments are made are noticeably smaller at near-zero values. This divergence in magnitude between direct and spillover effects from public infrastructure spending on output is one reason why Federal support and trans-state organizations such as the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey are important A failure to recognize these spillover effects from the construction and improvement of transportation networks by State and local government A large hub refers to an airport that accounts for at least percent of the country s enplanements of passengers The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | agencies responsible for funding public infrastructure may cause those agencies to undervalue the true social gains that such projects offer Household Effects New investments in public transportation infrastructure especially in expanded transit service also support more robust and mobile labor markets by reducing geographic mismatches between the skill demands of jobs and workers who can offer specialized skills and by providing potentially faster and less-costly transportation options to connect workers with jobs. Public infrastructure can directly influence where people choose to live and work since access to public transit can play a crucial role in this decision-making process especially for households who can not afford or choose not to own cars. New public transit services can improve labor market efficiency by connecting individuals with jobs to which they may not previously have had access. Kawabata ( ) found that improved access to jobs through public transit noticeably increased the probability that low-skilled workers without automobiles in San Francisco and Los Angeles would be employed and also increased the likelihood that such employment would be full-time Another study found that more extensive metropolitan-area public transit infrastructure increases the employment density of central cities by percent and that a 10-percent rise in bus or rail service per capita increases metropolitan-area wages by on average $ million annually ( Chatman and Noland ) Improving public infrastructure can also foster higher city and suburban property values. Possible channels through which this effect can occur include : positive urban employment and spending spillovers from suburban inflows ; the positive impact that high-quality infrastructure has on the perception of a metropolitan area ; and the spillover of productivity gains from city centers to their surrounding suburbs. Haughwout ( ) found that a $ billion increase in spending on city infrastructure would raise city property values by $ million and related suburban property values by $ million This result provides a rationale for potential Federal or State involvement in the provision of urban public infrastructure particularly where large urban regions cross state borders and where sharing of common administrative overhead across a multi-jurisdictional project leads to more cost-efficient project delivery than undertaking multiple separate projects | Chapter Prospects for Increased Infrastructure Investment Low Interest Rates Investment in America s infrastructure is arguably as important today as it has been at any point in recent history given its current state of deterioration. The financial environment faced by all levels of government provides even further justification. Yields on 20-year U.S. Treasury bonds as well as on State and local bonds are at near-historic lows meaning that government agencies can borrow funds to finance long-term projects at costs as low as they have been over the past half-century as shown in Figure This is true even taking into account expected inflation rates. Long term real interest rates have moved decidedly lower in past decades ( CEA ) Given historically low borrowing costs and the potential upside boosts to short-run demand and long-run supply investing in infrastructure would offer benefits that according to Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer ( ) under current circumstances would outweigh the costs of its financing. Infrastructure investments promote current economic activity augment the value of public capital stocks in the long run and alleviate the burden on future generations of making needed infrastructure upgrades During a period of low growth for an advanced economy the large boost to Percent per Annum Figure Government Bond Yields 20-Year Treasury Bond Yield 20-Year State and Local Bond Yield Dec-2015 Note : The 20-year Treasury was discontinued on December and restored on October Data for the interim period are calculated as averages of the 10-year Treasury and 30-year Treasury constant maturity yields Source : Federal Reserve Board ; Haver Analytics The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | output in the near term from high-efficiency public investment can reduce the public-debt-to-GDP ratio ( IMF ) Maintenance and Repair Infrastructure maintenance and repair can generate high returns on investment. Infrastructure depreciates over time and does so more rapidly when it is used more intensively. Operation and maintenance expenditures allow infrastructure to function properly deliver its promised benefits and enable repair of structurally deficient assets. Neglecting proper maintenance and system preservation leads to deficient infrastructure conditions such as roads filled with potholes traffic delays power outages and so on which can impose sizable short-run costs on its users Investing in maintenance is a cost-effective technique for avoiding more expensive repairs in the future. One estimate is that every $ spent on preventive pavement maintenance reduces future repair costs by $ to $ ( Baladi et al. ) Transportation engineers have developed economic methods that determine the optimal timing for applying preventive maintenance treatments to flexible and rigid pavements by assessing the benefits and costs for each year the treatment could be applied ( Peshkin Hoerner and Zimmerman ) Allowing the condition of transportation infrastructure to deteriorate exacerbates wear and tear on vehicles. Cars and trucks that drive more frequently on substandard roads will require tire changes or other repairs more often estimated to cost each driver on average an additional $ annually in vehicle maintenance ( TRIP ) Delaying maintenance can also induce more accidents on transit systems. Not repaving a road replacing a rail reinforcing a bridge or restoring a runway can result in increased vehicle crashes that can disrupt transportation flows and create substantial safety hazards The conceptual relationship between spending on maintenance versus new infrastructure and its impact on economic growth is depicted in Figure The two are not perfect substitutes as the latter adds directly to the stock of public capital while the former offsets depreciation on existing infrastructure ( Kalaitzidakis and Kalyvitis ) Assuming that infrastructure investments are implemented efficiently effectively and optimally then if spending on maintenance is too low relative to new capital investment or vice versa economic output will grow at a rate below its potential To maximize economic growth from increased public investment in infrastructure governments must properly balance the needs for new infrastructure with those for maintaining the infrastructure that is currently in place. The ratio of public spending on operation and maintenance to new capital for water and transportation infrastructure in the United States | Chapter Figure Relationship between Output Growth and the Ratio of Maintenance Investment to New Infrastructure Investment Output Growth Rate Lack of Maintenance Investment Lack of New Infrastructure Investment Maximum Output Growth Rate Ratio of Investment in Maintenance to Investment in New Infrastructure Source : Kalaitzidakis and Kalyvitis ( ) since is shown in Figure From to the ratio of public spending on operation and maintenance to public spending on new capital for water and transportation infrastructure averaged meaning that for every $ spent toward new capital $ was spent on operation and maintenance. This relatively low public spending ratio largely reflected increased spending toward the continued construction of the Interstate Highway System. Over the years that followed the public spending ratio for operation and maintenance to new capital averaged indicating a balanced approach between funding needs for new capital with those for operation and maintenance. Since then public spending on water and transportation infrastructure has shifted toward supporting the operation and maintenance of current infrastructure relative to the formation of new capital more heavily than it did in the five decades prior averaging a public spending ratio of Although it is unclear what the optimal ratio is what is clear is that maximizing growth requires spending on new infrastructure and maintaining in-place assets not focusing solely on one and entirely ignoring the other The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | Figure Ratio of Public Spending on Operation and Maintenance to Public Spending on New Capital Source : Congressional Budget Office ( ) ; CEA calculations Managing and Funding Infrastructure Projects Beyond the need for infrastructure and the economic gains that can result from a well-designed investment a crucial decision in the infrastructure investment process is how to manage and fund such investments User Fees If infrastructure is funded through conventional methods that rely on general government revenues all taxpayers bear the costs of new projects But through a user-fee system only those who actually use the services that the new infrastructure provides are required to pay for it which could present a more equitable and viable funding mechanism as long as a project does not generate extensive externalities or spillovers. If there are substantial spillovers charging for use may dissuade users and lead to a socially inefficient outcome. One potential downfall of the user-fee approach is that revenues are dependent on demand. If the demand for a new transportation asset was over-estimated then the revenue generated from user fees would be below expectations causing the entity financially responsible for it to bear the shortfall though this could lead governments and private entities to be more prudent when selecting which projects to undertake.7 However if One noteworthy example is the Virginia Dulles Greenway project which defaulted on its bonds in its first few years because predicted demand for the new road system was too rosy | Chapter there is a clear demand for an infrastructure project which could be gauged by surveying households and firms noting that there are heavily congested transportation structures nearby or recognizing the need for maintenance on popular commuter routes user fees can be an effective approach for funding its development. Although they may be cost effective user fees are inherently exclusionary because consumers must pay to utilize the structure which can limit access for low- and moderate-income households Public-Private Partnerships Public-private partnerships ( PPPs ) where governments contract with a private firm for provision of some or all aspects of an infrastructure project have received increasing consideration and use in recent decades in the United States ( Buckberg Kearney and Stolleman ) though they are relied on more heavily in other advanced economies including Australia Canada and the United Kingdom. In July President Barack Obama launched the Build America Investment Initiative a government-wide initiative to boost infrastructure investment that includes expanding the market for public-private partnerships. The adoption of PPP financing for infrastructure projects in the United States has been gradual ( likely due to the availability of inexpensive financing in the U.S. municipal debt market ) Through less than transportation PPPs had reached financial close in the United States ( Engel Fischer and Galetovic ) As of PPPs were a feature of approximately infrastructure projects for new facilities in various stages of completion across the United States with mixed degrees of private-sector involvement ( DOT 2015b ) ; more than reached financial close in the three-year period ended April PPPs can provide a means for avoiding two of the major pitfalls that typically affect an infrastructure project designed and delivered using conventional methods of public funding. First under the more standard approach to infrastructure provision each of a number of firms or government entities may be called on to complete individual stand-alone elements of the project. As a result these firms face incentives to minimize their own costs in providing their single element of the project without regard for the quality or costliness of the project as a whole. More concretely the segmented nature of the infrastructure provision process means that private Financial close occurs when all of the project and financing agreements have been signed and project implementation can start These PPPs are not uniform as to the project phases that are assigned to the private sector ; different project characteristics necessitate different risk sharing arrangements. Roughly of the projects assigned only the responsibilities of designing and building to the private sector while more than stipulated that the private sector design build finance operate and maintain the structure The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | firms that are not ultimately responsible for operating or maintaining a structure have less incentive to adopt designs or construction methods that minimize total costs over the project s complete life cycle which includes its construction operation and maintenance. By contrast and depending on how the contract is structured PPPs can bundle the responsibilities of different project phases so that for example a single private firm is responsible for the design construction financing operation and maintenance of the infrastructure asset. This arrangement provides strong incentives for ontime project delivery and cost minimization over the entire life cycle of the structure ( Hart ) though PPPs can also be organized so that the private sector is responsible for just some of the phases of the project Second given that the public sector would still be responsible for funding the project under conventional provision the government would incur most or all of the risk associated with its underutilization or inadequate performance. In other words should actual use of a project fall short of its expected level or prove substandard in terms of its engineering or design the responsible government agency and ultimately the taxpayers would bear much or all of the resulting financial strain. On the other hand the bundled nature of PPPs allows at least some of the demand and performance risks associated with the project to be transferred from the government agency sponsoring the project to the contracting firm ( Buckberg Kearney and Stolleman ) This arrangement also serves to promote more effective project design and efficient construction. It may even ensure that more reliable and cost-effective materials are used thus ensuring longevity and reducing the frequency of required maintenance.10 Nevertheless because PPPs have potential drawbacks it is critical to design them carefully and use them only when appropriate. PPPs in which a government compensates the private entity directly through availability payments do not reduce the demand risk borne by the government because the private partner must be paid as long as the infrastructure service meets contracted quality standards even if actual utilization of the service is far below expectations. This drawback however can be overcome. Partnerships between government agencies and private firms can be structured to mitigate the demand risks faced by the government in developing a new infrastructure asset. For example a PPP contract could stipulate that the private firm finance the project and receive compensation through the collection of This incentive is especially relevant if the builder is also responsible for the maintenance of the structure | Chapter user fees or shadow tolls.11 Through this mechanism the government could mitigate downside risks such as project cost overruns or revenue shortfalls thereby insulating the government from budgetary risks associated with unexpected developments. However private investors may require a higher rate of return on their investment in exchange for being exposed to these uncertainties.12 Another risk associated with PPPs is that by outsourcing some or all elements of a project to private businesses the government relinquishes some of its control over planning constructing and potentially even operating and maintaining the structure. Although this feature is often seen as beneficial in that the private sector is perceived as being able to manage the project more efficiently there still exists the risk that the private firm will fail to meet its obligations or that its efforts will lead to excessively high user fees. Moreover because of their large scale of operation infrastructure assets often have characteristics of natural monopolies : they can be unique in the role they play for given transportation markets which in turn may eliminate the need or potential for competing options which raises the possibility of excessively high prices or profit. Finally many of the same principal-agent problems that arise in standard public finance where officials may not make the best decisions on behalf of the public can arise in PPPs. For example if local authorities are myopic with a horizon of the next election or next budget cycle primarily on their minds they could strike a sub-optimal deal that casts them in a positive light in the short run but is inefficient in the long term While infrastructure assets procured through PPPs are usually returned to public sector control after a contractually stipulated period many of the perceived risks mentioned above can be mitigated through effective contract design. The government can retain a certain level of control regulatory or otherwise over the private entity or entities. A contract can stipulate quality levels that structures must satisfy restrict the prices that can be charged for using assets and require sharing of excess revenues or profit as well as shortfalls in order to achieve a balanced and mutually acceptable Shadow tolls involve periodic payments from the government to the private firm based on how many users the asset attracts per time period. Like user fees shadow tolls provide an incentive for the private party to construct and manage the asset efficiently thus transferring demand risk from the government to the private party. Shadow tolls differ though in that they require that the government funds the private entity Importantly paying a higher return to the private partner to bear the demand risk need not result in the project realizing efficiency gains. In contrast to bundled design and construction risk for example the transfer of demand risk to the private partner in and of itself will not induce it to take actions that lower the overall cost of the project. This is due to the fact that the private partner can do little to affect utilization unlike the way in which its actions can substantially affect overall design and construction costs The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | allocation of risks ( Buckberg Kearney and Stollman ) Governments can also institute requirements for competitive bidding processes that are transparent and objective. In contracting the responsibility of financing an infrastructure project to the private sector State and local governments can also initiate the development of new assets without having the budgetary resources necessary for financing The Role of the Federal Government With the exception of freight railroads the Federal Government plays a key role in funding and developing transportation infrastructure. A Federal presence is particularly valuable when these transportation projects offer multi-state or nationwide benefits. One reason for Federal involvement is that State and local governments may undervalue the benefits of new infrastructure projects by not accounting fully for their positive spillover effects on nearby areas. States and localities may not have financial capacity to build new infrastructure assets or to provide maintenance for structures in need of extensive repair. Without Federal assistance such initiatives may be repeatedly postponed or bypassed entirely because of budgetary restrictions causing their potential benefits to be delayed or foregone completely Additionally the private sector may lack the incentives or resources needed to adequately complete or operate new transportation infrastructure projects which are often large and complex The Federal Government has an essential role in helping transportation planners and project managers collaborate on transportation infrastructure investments across jurisdictional and geographic boundaries These efforts can enhance the economic competitiveness of metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas along major corridors that are critical for supporting current and future freight and passenger flows. Federal expertise and resources are used to promote comprehensive multimodal planning that better integrates safety into surface transportation projects. For example Federal law requires that the State and metropolitan transportation planning processes be consistent with Strategic Highway Safety Plans The Federal Government has the capacity to stimulate improvements in infrastructure that maintain the resilience of the national economy coordinate multi-state planning for emergencies and protect and repair interconnected transportation systems. Recent extreme weather events such as hurricanes Katrina Rita and Sandy the national drought the recent California drought and other natural disasters have demonstrated the disruptions and other costs that can result from inadequate investment in infrastructure supporting multiple transportation modes. In the damage | Chapter to transportation facilities caused by hurricanes Katrina and Rita totaled more than $ billion in addition to the costs to repair the I-10 Twin Span Bridge as well as repair and replace rail lines pipelines ports waterways and airports ( Transportation Research Board ) In Hurricane Sandy flooded roads subways airport runways marine terminals and railroad tracks in New York and New Jersey illustrating the widespread and cascading effects of disasters and justifying a Federal response for assistance and coordination. The costs associated with these extreme events include prolonged disruption of transportation systems substantial capital damage suppressed economic activity and even loss of life The Federal Government contributes to infrastructure investment through direct expenditures and with incentives indirectly provided through the tax system sometimes referred to as tax expenditures. The direct expenditures are spending on infrastructure ( such as funding of dams and water resources ) and grants and loan subsidies to states for transportation projects States and localities have operational control over how the money is spent though they must comply with certain conditions to receive Federal funding. The Federal Government subsidizes the issuance of municipal bonds by offering tax preferences that lower the cost of debt for transportation projects. State and local governments typically finance infrastructure projects with tax-preferred bonds which are repaid with general tax receipts or from revenues collected from users of the infrastructure project. Public infrastructure investments by the private sector may also be eligible for taxpreferred financing through Private Activity Bonds if percent or more of the bond proceeds are used for surface transportation or other qualified projects. State and local governments typically determine whether to provide private financing for public infrastructure investments in their jurisdictions Federal funding and financing programs for transportation infrastructure are discussed below Federal Grants One avenue through which the Federal Government has funded infrastructure investment is the Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery ( TIGER ) discretionary grant program which was initially created as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act to fund highway transit rail port and other surface transportation projects subsequently funded through annual appropriations. The TIGER program developed a merit-based competitive approach for local project sponsors to obtain Federal funds where projects are evaluated based on the extent to which they promote the strategic goals of maintaining the Nation s economic competitiveness ensuring environmental sustainability improving The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | the livability of communities making transportation safer and maintaining infrastructure in a state of good repair. A Government Accountability Office ( ) review of projects from to showed that about half of the total construction costs for TIGER projects were funded by non-Federal sources with sizable contributions from counties cities and other local agencies. Notably every dollar invested through the TIGER program generated an estimated co-investment of dollars highlighting the effectiveness of the program The TIGER grants promote a merit-based competitive approach to directing Federal investment in transportation infrastructure. The TIGER eligibility requirements allow funding for multi-modal multi-jurisdictional projects along with port and freight rail projects all of which may have limited access to Federal funds. TIGER can provide capital funding directly to any public entity including municipalities counties port authorities and tribal governments in contrast to traditional Federal transportation programs that provide funding primarily to State departments of transportation and public transit agencies. A survey of state experiences with the TIGER grant program showed that the opportunity to utilize long-standing Federal expertise in planning transportation investments allowed many states to find new and innovative ways to speed up project delivery. The TIGER program has been heavily oversubscribed with a : ratio of requests to available funding reflecting a large demand for high-quality infrastructure projects across the country Federal Lending and Loan Guarantees The Transportation Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act ( TIFIA ) lending program assists State and local governments in financing infrastructure projects such as toll roads that are supported by user fees. Created in as part of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century the program has authorized approximately $ billion of Federal funds to cover $ billion of loans. The program s fundamental goal is to leverage Federal funds by attracting private and non-federal co-investment in surface transportation infrastructure projects such as highways bridges intercity passenger rails certain types of freight rail and public transit TIFIA requires that two-thirds of project costs come from State local or private sources. Borrowers benefit from improved access to capital markets and can potentially achieve earlier completion of large-scale capital intensive projects. The program has become increasingly popular since its inception and was relied on widely during the financial crisis ( Altman Klein and Krueger ) The FAST Act ( discussed below ) reduced TIFIA s annual authority from $ billion to an average of $ million a year | Chapter Tax-Exempt Bonds Transportation infrastructure projects provide a long-term stream of benefits and with appropriate fee structures can generate revenues for repayment over time from users of the projects. Construction of these projects is often financed through borrowing by State and local governments. Municipal bonds are issued by States and localities to finance a broad spectrum of public infrastructure including roads bridges airports utility systems schools and a limited number of private sector activities. The Federal government subsidizes the issuance of municipal bonds by offering tax exemptions and other preferences that lower the cost of issuing debt for these projects Tax-exempt bonds which pay interest to bondholders that is not subject to Federal income taxes are the dominant and most well-established type of tax-preferred debt dating from the beginning of the Federal income tax in ( CBO ) Purchasers of this debt are willing to accept a lower interest rate compared to rates offered on taxable debt of comparable risk and maturity. Infrastructure project development is stimulated when States and localities can readily access low-cost financing and tax-exempt bonds reduce the borrowing costs they incur thus encouraging infrastructure development. When State and local governments issue bonds they retain control over capital projects so priorities for infrastructure projects and decisions on the value and timing of tax-exempt debt issues are made by State and local governments. These entities repay all principal and interest on such debt while the Federal government effectively contributes a smaller portion by foregoing tax revenue it would otherwise collect From through the amount of tax-preferred debt issued to finance new infrastructure projects initiated by the public and private sectors totaled $ trillion.13 About percent or approximately $ trillion was used by States and localities. Private capital investments to fund projects with a public purpose such as hospitals or housing accounted for the remainder ( about $ billion ) After falling substantially during the Great Recession the amount of new tax-exempt debt issued each year has rebounded considerably. Since long-term government bond issues have grown at a rate of percent driven primarily by two factors. First the demand for debt financing reflects expanded investment in public infrastructure projects. Second the steady decline in interest rates charged to municipal borrowers has provided cheaper options for borrowers to finance capital spending by issuing debt CEA calculations drawn from Tax-Exempt Bond Statistics data through the Internal Revenue Service. The bond issuance data cover long-term maturity debt ( months or more ) which is generally used to finance construction or other capital improvement projects The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | Transportation bonds accounted for a major share nearly percent of governmental obligations issued to finance new investment in infrastructure from to Excluding housing which accounts for less than percent of tax-exempt government bonds transportation has been the fastest-growing use of tax-exempt government bonds rising on average just over percent a year since Build America Bonds Another way the Federal government has provided resources for infrastructure recently is through the Build America Bonds ( BABs ) program BABs introduced as part of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act were designed to encourage State and local governments to invest in economically critical infrastructure projects. State and local governments were authorized to issue special taxable bonds that received either a 35-percent direct federal subsidy to the borrower ( Direct Payment BABs ) or a Federal tax credit worth percent of the interest owed to investors ( Tax Credit BABs ) BABs broadened the pool of investors and eased the supply pressure in the municipal bond market while bringing down borrowing costs Through the BABs program the U.S. Department of the Treasury was able to harness the efficiencies of the taxable debt market resulting in lower average borrowing costs for States and localities. State and local governments were able to obtain cheaper financing ( averaging about basis points ) than through the regular municipal bond market ( Ang Bhansali and Xing ) On a present value basis BAB issuers saved an estimated $ billion in borrowing costs compared to traditional tax-exempt municipal debt ( U.S Department of the Treasury ) This savings was considerably greater than the net cost to the Federal Government from the BABs program. The program lasted roughly months and separate BABs amounting to $ billion were issued by State and local governments across all states the District of Columbia and two territories. Unlike other infrastructure programs BABs were not divided equally across states but were distributed on the basis of the demand for new infrastructure by states and localities The result was that the largest metropolitan areas accounted for nearly half of all funding for BABs issuances The BABs program was successful in spurring investment in economically critical infrastructure projects across the country and stimulated job-intensive projects. From through the program s expiration in BABs financed a third of all new State and local government long-term debt issuances | Chapter Recent Legislation In December President Barack Obama signed into law the Fixing America s Surface Transportation ( FAST ) Act which authorized roughly $ billion in spending for highways transit rail and safety over the next five years. While the FAST Act offered important benefits by increasing transportation funding and providing greater certainty on funding over the coming years it fell short of the level of investment needed to fully modernize U.S. infrastructure and the $ billion that the Administration proposed as part of its GROW AMERICA proposal. Of that approved spending approximately $ billion has been designated for highways and approximately $ billion for transit projects. Based on CEA assumptions about the future rates of inflation these dollar amounts translate to increases in investment of about percent for highways and percent for transit in real terms. The law also reauthorized the collection of Federal taxes on gasoline and other fuels which are frequently used to fund transportation projects and raise approximately $ billion in revenues annually with most of the tax revenue stemming from gasoline ( cents per gallon ) and diesel fuels ( cents per gallon ) The FAST Act established new Federal grant programs expanded current programs and furthered initiatives to improve safety and innovation The Act established the Nationally Significant Freight and Highway Projects competitive grant program aimed to support economically beneficial projects that will facilitate improved freight movement. This $ billion discretionary grant program will be complemented by $ billion in Federal-aid formula funding for states to invest directly into projects that contribute to the efficient movement of goods. The FAST Act also established the FederalState Partnership for State of Good Repair grant program to improve critical passenger rail assets for which maintenance had been deferred as well as the Consolidated Rail Infrastructure and Safety Improvements program to support rail projects more generally The Act expanded State eligibility for Federal lending through TIFIA and the Railroad Rehabilitation Improvement and Financing programs The application processes for these programs will be consolidated into the Surface Transportation Innovative Finance Bureau within the Office of the Secretary of Transportation another FAST Act creation which will strengthen the programs through streamlined review and transparent approval processes. The Innovative Finance Bureau will also help to promote public-private partnership procurements of large-scale infrastructure projects through expanded technical assistance. The Act established a formula freight program to be administered by the Federal Highway Administration which will fund critical transportation projects that would The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | Box : 21st Century Clean Transportation Plan The President s fiscal year budget proposes a 21st Century Clean Transportation Plan that expands investments in clean transportation infrastructure by percent above current levels in nominal terms. The 21st Century Clean Transportation Plan consists of four components designed to put America on a long-term course to reduce reliance on oil cut carbon pollution and strengthen resilience to the adverse impacts of climate change. The initiative aims to transform our transportation system using targeted Federal investments to stimulate State and local innovations in smarter cleaner and regional transportation systems to accelerate the adoption of low-carbon technologies autonomous vehicles and intelligent transportation systems and to provide funding to maintain and increase the safety of our transportation systems as they evolve Innovative methods to reduce congestion manage sprawl and improve air quality while providing affordable access to jobs are essential as the United States experiences continued population growth in midsized and large urban areas. The program will distribute capital funds to expand transit systems in cities suburbs and rural areas and make high-speed rail a viable alternative to flying in major regional corridors Other targeted investments include funding to invest in new rail technologies modernize the Nation s freight system and expand support for the TIGER competitive grant program for innovative local road rail transit and port projects A second component of the initiative will assist State and local governments to develop smarter and cleaner regional transportation systems. The plan provides incentives for State and local governments to maximize the returns on public investments and deliver more efficient results by reforming existing transportation formula funding. The initiative creates a Climate Smart Fund to reward states that leverage Federal funding to cut carbon pollution and improve efficiency in the transportation sector The plan advances specific proposals to promote the adoption of low-carbon cost-competitive intelligent transportation systems Working with State and local governments and leveraging public-private partnerships the initiative sets the goal that all Americans have access to at least one alternative transportation fuel by including electric vehicle charging advanced biofuel fuel pumps and others low-carbon options | Chapter benefit freight movements. The Act also provided funds to improve transportation safety by supporting projects that will alleviate highway congestion reduce accidents and improve rail safety Included in the President s fiscal year budget is a proposal discussed in Box to expand the development of clean transportation infrastructure Conclusion As discussed throughout this chapter infrastructure investment is important for the economy. At its core strengthening our Nation s transportation infrastructure improves economic opportunities for both households and businesses and supports the interconnectivity of individuals firms and regions. In the long run investing in infrastructure boosts the economy s productivity and thus spurs output growth. Reliable infrastructure facilitates the efficient exchange of goods labor and innovative ideas. From the Erie Canal in the early 1800s to the Transcontinental Railroad in the 1860s to the Interstate Highway System in the 1950s and 1960s previous generations of Americans have made these investments and they were instrumental in putting the country on a path for sustained economic growth By our population is expected to increase by more than million people and continued investment in infrastructure is essential to increasing productivity and spurring continued economic growth. Improvements in infrastructure provide more capital to the economy thereby increasing labor productivity reducing congestion and time lost in traffic and enhancing market efficiency. Workers benefit from reduced commuting times making it easier for them to move between jobs and expanding labor force opportunities. Businesses are able to manage their inventories more efficiently and transport goods faster and more cheaply helping them to access new suppliers and markets. Concentrated investment in infrastructure may even draw market participants together and build new cooperative efficiencies magnifying the resulting productivity gains. By making these investments in a smart way we can make our transportation system both more efficient and more climate friendly Investing in U.S. infrastructure boosts both short-run demand and long-run supply. The former generates new economic activity by increasing employment and workers earnings. The longer-run effect stems from increased productivity in the use of labor private capital and other resources thus allowing opportunities for both consumers and businesses to flourish. Sufficient infrastructure especially that supporting transportation is a fundamental underpinning of continued economic prosperity. Whether The Economic Benefits of Investing in U.S. Infrastructure | it is flying across the country shipping goods across state borders or simply commuting to work each day households and firms alike depend on adequate infrastructure. As our economy strives to increase investment and productivity public spending on infrastructure can play an important role | Chapter C H A P T E R THE TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS A lmost exactly years ago on February President Harry Truman signed the Employment Act of into law. Born out of America s experience during the Great Depression this law reflected Congress s desire to prevent an economic calamity of that scale from ever recurring. Yet the immediate practical consequences of the Employment Act were modest : it created two institutions the Joint Economic Committee on the Economic Report subsequently renamed the Joint Economic Committee ( JEC ) and the Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) Together with the JEC it was hoped that CEA would help to defend the ramparts against depression ( Flash ) CEA is in many ways a distinctive institution both within the administration and in the international context. The CEA chair reports directly to the President on economic issues but CEA has no regulatory authority and few prescribed operational responsibilities. For most of its history CEA has had a small staff drawn mostly from the academic economics community and hired on the basis of professional expertise. The views it expresses are grounded in economic analysis and are based on applying economic theory and empirical research to the often-novel situations in which policymakers find themselves However CEA is also a part of the Executive Office of the President working collaboratively with other departments within the Executive Office of the President and the administration more broadly to advance the President s agenda. CEA plays a distinctive role in the administration but like other components of the administration it also communicates and operates as part of a team on behalf of the President While the Council has made useful contributions to economic policymaking throughout its history its role and influence have varied depending on the needs of the President the economic issues facing the country and the personnel of CEA itself. Because CEA has no fixed statutory responsibilities except for assisting in the preparation of the annual Economic Report of the President its role and influence depend on the degree to which it can be useful and relevant to the President and other senior decision makers On the 70th Anniversary of the Employment Act of this chapter explores the origins of the Council of Economic Advisers describes its core functions and examines several key moments from its history. The chapter first examines the legislative origins of CEA and provides an overview of its institutional structure and policy priorities. It then focuses on four interrelated functions of CEA : helping to develop and evaluate economic policies for consideration by the President and the administration ; helping to advance the President s economic agenda ; gathering analyzing and interpreting information on economic trends and developments and informing the President about the state of the economy ; and engaging the economics community. The chapter draws on historical examples and former CEA chairs and members accounts including boxes from six former chairs about their experiences at CEA to illustrate each of these functions and their inherent challenges and identifies several institutional lessons for ensuring CEA s continued effectiveness Goals and Duties Origins of CEA Legislative History of the Employment Act of The Employment Act ultimately signed into law in February was markedly different from the original bill that Senator James E. Murray introduced in the Senate in January The original Senate bill ( S.380 ) which was called the Full Employment Act aimed to set postwar economic policy in a simple Keynesian mold ( Stein ) through solidly entrench [ ing ] a strong bias toward active countercyclical fiscal policy in the core of the American executive branch ( DeLong ) S.380 provided that the government first define full employment and then establish and maintain programs to ensure an inflation-free fully employed economy ( Mills ) The operational plan included the following key points : ( ) [ I ] t would be the responsibility of the federal government to ensure that anyone wishing to work would be able to locate a job ; ( ) the [ P ] resident was to prepare each year a National Production and Employment Budget which would include estimates of the size | Chapter and composition of the labor force investment plans for all levels of government plus those of the private sector ; ( ) if insufficient investment existed to provide full employment then the [ P ] resident would develop programs to achieve this level of employment. He was to have similar responsibility for and powers over the control of inflation ; ( ) this budget was to be prepared in the Executive Office of the President ; and ( ) this bill would establish a Joint Congressional Committee on the National Budget to study the [ P ] resident s document and either recommend or change any legislation implied in it ( Mills ) By contrast the House substitute bill called the Employment and Production Act of rejected the fundamental principles of the Senate bill ( Bailey ) It removed the declaration of the Federal Government s responsibility for maintaining full employment the accompanying commitment of government resources the affirmation of the right to employment opportunity and the National Production and Employment Budget program. It also provided for a Council of Economic Advisers to be composed of three members at $ a year whose duties were to submit recommendations to the President whenever inflation or unemployment threatened to consult with economic groups and to submit annual and quarterly reports on economic trends ( Bailey ) The Employment Act that emerged from the Joint Conference Committee and was signed into law reflects an attempt to reconcile the profoundly different economic views contained in the House and Senate bills. In the final law the words full employment were ultimately replaced with maximum employment production and purchasing power. The law also included language specifying that part of the Federal Government s purpose is to foster and promote free competitive enterprise. Instead of the National Production and Employment Budget the law called for an annual Economic Report of the President setting forth current and foreseeable trends in the levels of employment production and purchasing power and a program for carrying out the policy [ to promote ] conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment for those able willing and seeking to work ( Employment Act ; DeLong ) Meanwhile the language from the House bill establishing the Council of Economic Advisers was kept mostly intact.1 The law also established what is now known as the Joint Economic Committee a standing joint committee of Congress whose original functions were to coordinate economic policymaking to monitor the subjects in the Economic Report and to produce its own yearly report in response to the President s Economic Report ( Tollestrup ) The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | The balance struck in the final Employment Act meant that CEA s role could be interpreted differently depending on whether one emphasizes the language from the House bill or from the Senate bill. Because of this dichotomy from the beginning the Council faced a divergence of expectations regarding its brand of economic analysis its policy recommendations and its mode of operations ( Flash ) Consistent with that initial diversity of views CEA has focused on different policies over the course of its history as discussed in this chapter Institutional Structure CEA has an unusual and perhaps unique institutional structure Partially due to concerns about Executive Branch overreach during the Roosevelt Administration Congress intentionally provided CEA with limited resources and specified a Council of three rather than one single adviser CEA is currently headed by a chair and two members each of whom is required to be exceptionally qualified to analyze economic developments and recommend economic policy ( Employment Act ) Today CEA s staff is composed of academic economists and economics graduate students who are on leave from their university positions career government economists on temporary assignment from other agencies some recent college graduates who have studied economics and a small statistical forecasting and administrative staff Unlike in many other governments where the top professional economist reports to the finance minister or another cabinet minister the CEA chair is expected to participate at the Cabinet level in discussions about economic policy. Although in some other countries such as Germany the government has a separate set of economic advisers who are expected to make independent recommendations they are not integrated into day-today government decision-making in the same way as CEA CEA s institutional structure has shaped the role that it plays in economic policymaking. For example CEA s lack of regulatory authority and its few operational responsibilities mean that its influence depends largely on its relationship with the President and the rest of the Executive Branch. As such CEA s influence has waxed and waned at various points in its history depending on the strength of these relationships as well as the soundness and persuasiveness of its analysis. However CEA s position in the Executive Office of the President also allows it to take a broader perspective on economic policy and place less weight on the day-to-day exigencies of running the Federal Government. As former CEA Chairman Martin Feldstein put As a result of the Presidential Appointment Efficiency and Streamlining Act of the two non-chair CEA members no longer require Senate confirmation | Chapter it [ t ] he CEA and its chairman have the luxury of trying to discern what is in the best interest of the country and of providing that analysis and advice directly to the [ P ] resident and to the cabinet as a whole ( ) Similarly CEA s small size has also had a strong influence on how it functions. Being a small organization has enabled CEA to be more flexible efficient less rigid and hierarchical and less formal than would be possible otherwise. However it also means that CEA plays a limited role in more expansive and resource-intensive matters consistent with its lack of formal regulatory and operational responsibilities Both Roger Porter a scholar of the American Presidency and former White House economic adviser and former CEA Chairman R. Glenn Hubbard argue that CEA s small size its professional reputation and its limited operational responsibilities have contributed to its longevity ( Porter ; Hubbard ) Porter notes that of the nearly entities that have been located in the Executive Office of the President since it was created in the CEA is one of only that remain ( ) Policy Focus CEA s policy focus has evolved over the years. While countercyclical fiscal policy was the focus of the Employment Act of CEA has long since worked on a variety of other microeconomic and macroeconomic issues. For example CEA works on macroeconomic subjects such as longterm growth financial markets and international macroeconomics. CEA helps to frame public discussions on macroeconomic policy and it chairs the Troika forecasting process an interagency system first formed during the Kennedy Administration in which the Council of Economic Advisers the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget jointly produce regular macroeconomic forecasts used for planning the President s Budget ( see Box for former CEA Chair Laura D Andrea Tyson s discussion of the difficulty of economic forecasting and the role of fiscal policy in the Clinton Administration ) While macroeconomic issues continue to be an important part of CEA s portfolio in recent decades CEA has devoted an increasing amount of attention to microeconomic issues that arise in the context of legislation regulatory processes and other administrative actions. Former CEA Chairman Charles Schultze reports that the proportion of CEA s annual Economic Report focused on microeconomic subjects grew dramatically from through ( ) This evolution is due to a number of factors. In part it reflects a reduced emphasis by the economics profession on fiscal policy as a macroeconomic tool and an increased recognition of the importance of monetary The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | Box : Former CEA Chair Laura D Andrea Tyson ( ) A primary responsibility of CEA along with OMB and the Treasury is the development of economic forecasts on which the administration s annual and long-term budget projections depend. The budget deficit widely used as an indicator of fiscal policy stance and central to political debates is highly sensitive to the economy s performance. Yet forecasting that performance is an exercise fraught with uncertainty and subject to significant errors that get larger as the forecasting period lengthens In January at the beginning of the Clinton Presidency the economy was underperforming relative to forecasts and much weaker than expected macroeconomic conditions were producing much higher than expected budget deficits. Confronting a deteriorating budgetary outlook the new Clinton CEA worked with the rest of the Clinton economic team to develop a budget plan to cut the deficit by $ billion over years while honoring the President s top fiscal priorities to increase public investment and expand the earned income tax credit. The administration s economic forecasts underpinning this plan reflected the prevailing consensus among economists that the growth rate of potential output was around % resting on a labor productivity growth rate in the % range and a NAIRU of about % Yet this prevailing consensus proved to be wrong during the next five years the economy outperformed the administration s forecasts by a considerable margin But in January despite passage of Clinton s budget plan in August and the stronger than expected economic conditions it fostered projected budget deficits were still increasing albeit at a slower pace and the new Republican controlled Congress was demanding an administration plan to balance the budget within years. As the underlying economic forecasts improved CEA helped craft a new administration plan to achieve balance within years without economically indefensible cuts in spending in priority areas including health care education infrastructure and research. The administration s plan was rejected by Congress which used government shutdowns and threats of default on the federal debt to force the administration s hand. These tactics failed and in the administration and Congress agreed instead on a modest budget package that funded the government at current-law levels The economy continued to outperform forecasts and CEA worked with President Clinton to develop a plan to balance the budget in years He announced the plan in February shortly after his re-election Critics accused the President of flip flopping on the budget but what had changed was not his fiscal policy stance but the surprisingly strong economic conditions that resulted in larger than expected pro- | Chapter jected reductions in the deficit. Indeed as the President and Congress worked toward a 5-year balanced budget deal in the spring of the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) announced that it was reducing its 5-year deficit projection by another $ billion. Over the entire period between and actual budget outcomes were about $ trillion better than those projected by the CBO in with CBO s estimates showing that stronger than expected economic conditions accounted for about percent of this improvement with policy changes accounting for another percent. Since CBO s estimates did not include the effects of these policy changes on aggregate economic performance its estimate of their contribution to the improving budgetary outlook should be interpreted as a lower bound estimate of their actual effects.1 An economic boom that far exceeded forecasts was a major factor behind the remarkable budgetary improvement. But what explains the economy s extraordinary performance a growth rate in excess of % a labor productivity growth rate at % nearly double the rate and an unemployment rate falling to % with low inflation at % a combination of macroeconomic outcomes unfathomable when President Clinton took office ? And what was the role of his policies in fostering this performance ? The most important economic variable underlying budget outcomes is the rate of growth and a key volatile and unpredictable driver of economic growth is the productivity growth rate. In standard economic models there are two main sources of labor productivity growth capital deepening and technological progress. Both were in overdrive in the late 1990s As the Economic Report pointed out there is a strong correlation between investment rates and labor productivity growth across industrial countries and business investment soared in the US during the period. President Clinton s fiscal policies were premised on an untested theory that a credible sustained reduction in the budget deficit would increase national savings resulting in a significant decline in long-term interest rates that in turn would boost investment spending. The economy s performance during the second half of the 1990s was consistent with the theory s predictions : as the projected borrowing needs of the Federal Government declined national savings increased and long-term interest rates continued their gradual decline. Lower borrowing costs in turn fuelled stronger investment spending Douglas Elmendorf Jeffrey Liebman and David Wilcox. Fiscal Policy and Social Security Policy during the 1990s. In Jeffrey Frankel and Peter Orszag eds. American Economic Policy in the 1990s. Cambridge : MIT Press. The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | But this was only part of the story. The boom in information technology along with the resulting lower cost of computers and IT capital also fed the surge in business investment as did the soaring stock market.2 As the anticipated productivity benefits of the 50-year old computer revolution began to intensify and spread throughout the economy businesses were motivated to invest to reap these benefits The economy also benefitted from other unpredicted and unpredictable positive supply shocks including a deceleration in health care costs in moderate wage settlements falling oil prices and a soaring dollar. All of these beneficial developments ameliorated the predicted tradeoff between strong growth and low unemployment on the one hand and low inflation on the other As a result the Federal Reserve whose independence was staunchly defended by the Clinton economic team was able to pursue a monetary policy that focused on the growth side of its dual mandate Indeed Federal Reserve Chairman Greenspan often mentioned positive productivity surprises in his explanation of Fed policy during the second half of the 1990s. And consistent with economic theory the combination of tighter fiscal policy and relatively easy monetary policy held down real interest rates and created a macroeconomic climate that supported a growth-enhancing investment boom I have met former President Clinton many times since when his term of office ended. With a touch of humor he often reminds me that as CEA Chair I provided forecasts that significantly underestimated the economy s macro performance. I humbly respond that I was simply providing unbiased forecasts based on the prevailing consensus among economists a consensus that was proven wrong. I also remind him that as an economic forecaster and policy-maker it is wise to err on the side of caution Alan Blinder and Janet Yellen. The Fabulous Decade : Macroeconomic Lessons from the 1990s New York : The Century Foundation Press policy. By the early 1980s the focus on macroeconomic stabilization policy had shifted to the Federal Reserve and the economics profession had come to see a smaller role for discretionary countercyclical fiscal policy. However this has changed again in recent years as the length and severity of the Great Recession and its aftermath have precipitated a resurgence of interest in discretionary fiscal policy In addition the Federal Government now plays a larger regulatory role in areas including health care the environment and labor markets than it did when CEA was first formed a time before the establishment of for | Chapter example the Environmental Protection Agency the Department of Health and Human Services the Department of Transportation the Department of Education and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. At the same time the field of economics has broadened to include not only traditional areas like macroeconomics and finance but also subjects such as health care and the environment. As a result a considerably larger fraction of CEA s work today is devoted to analyzing regulatory issues in areas like health labor and the environment than during its early years Despite the evolution in CEA s institutional structure and policy priorities over the years CEA has continued to fulfill its functions under the Employment Act which as outlined above can be understood as being organized around four interconnected functions : ( ) helping to develop economic policy ; ( ) helping to advance the President s economic agenda ; ( ) gathering analyzing and interpreting information on economic trends and developments ; and ( ) engaging with the economics community. Of course these functions overlap to some extent for example monitoring economic trends and engaging the economics community help to inform the formulation of economic policies. Yet examining how CEA has fulfilled these four functions over the course of its history is useful both for understanding how its work supports the President and for illustrating certain characteristics which have helped to render it a more effective and durable institution Help to Develop Economic Policy The Employment Act provides that CEA shall develop and recommend to the President national economic policies to foster and promote free competitive enterprise to avoid economic fluctuations or to diminish the effects thereof and to maintain employment production and purchasing power. CEA performs many different tasks to fulfill this function including working collaboratively with other offices and agencies to develop legislative proposals ( such as the President s Budget and State of the Union initiatives ) providing analysis to support regulatory processes and supporting other administrative initiatives Although the Employment Act signaled that the Federal Government would be held responsible for how the economy functioned its language reflected a careful balance between supporting macroeconomic management as well as a less active approach to the business cycle. As a result CEA is not tied to one macroeconomic philosophy but instead has march [ ed ] alternately under these two banners over the course of its history ( Hargrove and Morley ) The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | The perspective of CEA has varied depending on the ideology of different administrations the particular people chosen as chair members and staff of the Council the understanding of the economics profession more broadly and the specific economic circumstances facing the country However CEA has consistently advanced a perspective that emphasizes the importance of decentralized decisions to the effective functioning of our market economy but which also recognizes that the Federal Government has an important role in macroeconomic stabilization in correcting market failures and in ensuring that everyone participates sufficiently in the economy s benefits. Indeed the Council s very first Report rejected both complete laissez-faire and overreliance on fiscal and monetary remedies as approaches to macroeconomic policy denoting these two positions respectively as the Spartan Doctrine of Laissez Faire and the Roman Doctrine of an External Remedy ( CEA ) Keyserling and Full-Employment Economics Perhaps the closest CEA has ever come to endorsing the Roman view was during the Truman Administration when CEA was chaired by Leon Keyserling the second person to hold that position. Before becoming CEA chairman Keyserling had served as vice chairman of CEA and had previously worked as a legislative assistant on Capitol Hill where he helped author among other things the Employment Act of Keyserling was influenced by proto-Keynesian theories and became a major advocate of full-employment economics harnessing government spending to foster employment by creating demand and promoting consumer spending ( Wehrle ) Keyserling believed despite the grim experience of the 1930s that the potential of the American economy was unlimited and that with the proper combination of countercyclical and long-term economic policy economic growth could produce and maintain abundance for all ( Brazelton ) Unable to find political support for dramatically expanding domestic social programs an increasingly frustrated Keyserling turned to defense spending as a means to advance his full-employment agenda. After Russia detonated an atomic bomb in August President Truman ordered that the State and Defense departments conduct a review of the national security situation and develop a planning document which eventually became known as NSC When war broke out in Korea the Truman Administration definitively committed to the rapid mobilization of military resources called for in NSC While Keyserling was not a central figure in directing the mobilization effort he actively promoted it and defended its economic viability | Chapter Keyserling and the Council participated in the National Security Council s so-called costing exercise to estimate the cost of the military mobilization. CEA also helped to draft the economics chapter of NSC and CEA defended the economic feasibility of a massive defense expansion against the view held by the Secretary of Defense and the Budget Director that it would precipitate ruinous inflation intolerable economic dislocation or both ( Flash ) Keyserling also helped to forestall the implementation of direct price controls believing they would dampen expanded production In doing all of this the Council helped to persuade policymakers that the Truman Administration s national security objectives were compatible with its economic ones For a few years Keyserling successfully used the Korean War mobilization to promote his expansionist agenda. During the war unemployment fell below percent and labor leaders appointed by Truman to various planning agencies helped to redirect some military spending to economically depressed regions and industries in the United States ( Wehrle ) By the end of the Korean War however Keyserling s influence and support for his policies had diminished. As inflation began to mount the Council found itself torn between competing objectives : Keyserling warned the President about inflationary pressure yet he also worried that excessive focus on inflation would be used as a pretext to dampen spending. This ambivalence served to exacerbate confusion within the administration about the proper course of action and in turn undercut the Council s influence toward the end of the Truman Presidency ( Flash ) The Heller Council and the Tax Cut Another particularly notable instance where CEA played a large role in advocating for countercyclical policy occurred during the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations. In the early months of Kennedy s Presidency unemployment had reached almost percent and economic growth had been lackluster. Two schools of thought developed on the source of the problem : the first group which included CEA Chairman Walter Heller argued that the problem was insufficient aggregate demand and that public spending or tax reductions were necessary to boost demand for goods and services ; by contrast the second group argued that there were structural deficiencies in the economy and that increasing spending would only aggravate the problem ( Norton ) Drawing on relatively new macroeconomic concepts such as the fiscal multiplier and the full employment surplus CEA made the case that the economy suffered from insufficient demand emphasizing the gap between progress and potential the resistance to improvement of unemployment The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | and the drag of the wartime tax structure ( Flash ) The Council presented its argument publicly on several occasions : before the Joint Economic Committee in and in the and Economic Report of the President. In the Economic Report the Council strongly advocated for a tax cut to boost demand : [ F ] or all its advances the Nation is still falling substantially short of its economic potential Private initiative and public policy must join hands to break the barriers built up by the years of slack since and bring the Nation into a new period of sustained full employment and rapid economic growth The main block to full employment is an unrealistically heavy burden of taxation. The time has come to remove it Through these efforts CEA helped solidify support for the tax reduction. President John F. Kennedy pushed for it in his State of the Union address and it was ultimately signed into law by President Lyndon B Johnson in CEA did not design the specific details of the tax reduction but it helped to make the supporting economic case Edward Flash a scholar of public administration argues that this moment constituted a turning point in the Council s history by helping to align economic policymaking with economic thinking at that time : As demonstrated by the Administration s tax program the primary significance of the Heller Council is that it was the most important single creative force in the development of a new approach to economic policy. As the Employment Act of ratified the government s responsibility for the nation s economic welfare ( and hence its acceptance of Keynesian principles ) the tax proposals of signaled the policy-maker s recognition that expenditure-revenue combinations leading to deficits can be a constructive force in economic growth. Policy thinking became more consistent with economic thinking. A new tradition was established. The Council analyzed advocated articulated and gained acceptance for new economic values new techniques of economic analysis and new concepts of fiscal policy as a positive contributor to national economic well-being ( ) Moreover Flash notes that winning President Kennedy s approval for implementing countercyclical policy at a time of existing budget deficits was a notable achievement especially considering that the President had previously committed himself to balancing the Federal budget | Chapter Countercyclical Policy in Other Administrations CEA has engaged in deliberations about countercyclical fiscal policy at some point during most administrations in the post-World War II era As discussed later CEA Chairman Arthur F. Burns helped to convince President Dwight D. Eisenhower to support counter-recessionary tax cuts the first time massive tax cuts were made at a time of Federal budgetary deficit to counter a recession ( Norton ) The Gardner Ackley CEA tried but failed to convince President Johnson to raise taxes in to avoid inflation. The Alan Greenspan CEA advocated for and the Ford Administration proposed a fiscal stimulus in that was considerably more moderate than what was ultimately enacted by Congress and called for greater fiscal restraint in the Economic Report ( CEA ) The Schultze CEA advocated for an additional stimulus in during the Carter Administration ( Schultze ) while the Michael J. Boskin CEA advocated for set of tax measures to stimulate the economy during the George H.W Bush Administration ( Frankel ) The Laura D. Tyson CEA advocated for a small one-time expenditure stimulus as part of a larger deficit reduction program during the Clinton Administration. The R. Glenn Hubbard N. Gregory Mankiw and Harvey S. Rosen CEAs promoted tax cuts enacted in and as a means of stimulating the economy during a period of sluggish economic activity ( CEA ; CEA ; Rosen and Forbes ) Most recently under the leadership of CEA Chairs Edward Lazear Christina Romer and Austan Goolsbee CEA played a role in designing countercyclical measures that were passed in response to the global financial crisis and its aftermath. The Council conducted the overall macroeconomic analysis that helped identify the need for and design of countercyclical fiscal measures most notably the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of ( see Box for former CEA Chair Christina Romer s account of the role that CEA played in the Obama Administration s response to the financial crisis ) CEA has also pushed to defend existing automatic stabilizers features of the tax and transfer system that automatically offset fluctuations in economic activity against policy changes such as balanced-budget proposals that would interfere with them. Charles Schultze observes that [ w ] hile most Republican CEAs throughout the period continued to be more cautious than their Democratic counterparts about the advice they gave on the use of fiscal policy for stabilization purposes the difference was one of degree not of kind ( ) The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | Box : Former CEA Chair Christina Romer ( ) President Obama was elected in the middle of the severe financial crisis in November Even with incomplete data and rapidly changing conditions it was clear at the time that the crisis was having a rapid and disastrous impact on the rest of the economy. Firms unable to get loans were laying off workers consumers were deserting stores and unemployed families were struggling to keep their homes Because of the crisis the incoming economics team had to start designing many of the policy responses during the transition before we had the resources or the skills of the professional staffs at our agencies That was certainly true of the fiscal stimulus package that the President worked closely with Congress to craft and which was signed into law as the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act less than a month after his inauguration. From late November on the economics team debated and planned a package of tax cuts infrastructure spending and aid to those directly affected by the crisis to try to help stabilize the economy and make it stronger in the future Though we were a skeletal team just the member nominees and two graduate students who would eventually become staff economists the transition Council of Economic Advisers attempted to do what CEA always does : bring the best evidence and economic analysis to bear on the problem. We gathered economic projections from a wide range of public- and private-sector forecasters. In the spirit of bipartisan professionalism that has always characterized CEA the outgoing chair Edward Lazear and his staff shared the evidence they had about the economy and where it was heading. We also collected the best estimates available of the likely effects of different types of fiscal actions from the economics literature professional agencies such as the Federal Reserve and private forecasters As we put the forecasts and the estimates of the effects of fiscal stimulus together it quickly became apparent that the fiscal packages being considered by most analysts and Congress were too small. This was a once-in-a-century problem that required a once-in-a-century response The analysis we presented to the President-Elect in mid-December helped persuade him to work with Congress for a larger more effective package. Though the final legislation was still not has large as the President would have desired given the terrible recession at $ billion the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act was by far the largest discretionary fiscal stimulus in American history. And a burgeoning literature on its effects confirms that the Act was essential in helping to halt the decline and turn the economy around | Chapter In designing the Recovery Act one component around which there was substantial uncertainty was aid to State and local governments Rising unemployment was devastating state tax revenues and economists feared that state balanced-budget requirements would force State and local governments to cut spending and employment just as their economies and citizens needed those funds and jobs the most. For this reason the incoming economics team urged Congress to include in the Recovery Act transfers from the Federal Government to the States to stabilize their coffers. As a practical matter this was accomplished primarily by temporarily increasing the fraction of Medicaid spending ( always a joint Federal/State program ) covered by the Federal Government. The final Recovery Act included roughly $ billion of state fiscal relief of this and other sorts Though the logic of the action was sound because such fiscal transfers are rare there was only limited empirical evidence on their likely effects. CEA helped fill that knowledge gap by doing a careful study of the state fiscal relief done through the Recovery Act. The study conducted by four CEA staff economists was included in CEA s first quarterly report to Congress on the effects of the Recovery Act. CEA economists used the fact that some of the variation in the fiscal relief across States was due to pre-existing differences in the generosity of their Medicaid programs rather than to state economic conditions to accurately identify the employment effects of these transfers. The estimates indicated that the effects were substantial. Indeed the estimated job effects were sufficiently large that the state fiscal relief appeared to be one of the most cost-effective components of the legislation. The four economists ultimately expanded their study into a paper which was published in the American Economic Journal : Economic Policy ( where it won the best paper prize in ) This CEA analysis of state fiscal relief was influential in subsequent policy discussions and recommendations. Though the American economy started growing again in the summer of job losses continued throughout the year and unemployment remained painfully high. The economics team debated at length the relative merits of many measures to spur job growth. Interestingly about the only thing we didn t debate was the desirability of additional state fiscal relief. What had been a logical but untested action in the Recovery Act was now understood to have been an effective job-creation tool thanks in part to CEA s analysis There was easy agreement that it belonged in any second comprehensive Gabriel Chodorow-Reich Laura Feiveson Zachary Liscow and William Gui Woolston Does State Fiscal Relief During Recessions Increase Employment ? Evidence from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy ( ) : The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | jobs package. And in early December President Obama proposed additional action which included further funds for State and local governments as a significant part Sadly Congress did not accept all of the President s recommendations and fewer additional job creation measures were taken that winter than were needed. But additional state fiscal relief resurfaced in a more limited form in a bill the President signed on August As part of a multi-faceted act Congress appropriated $ billion in aid to State and local governments to help maintain teacher jobs. A treasured memento of my time at CEA is one of the pens the President used to sign that bill It is a reminder that rigorous empirical analysis by one of the smallest agencies in Washington can sometimes spur legislation that creates jobs and helps heal a troubled economy Microeconomic Policy In recent decades CEA has increasingly spent its time applying core microeconomic lessons : that individuals and organizations behavior is shaped by the incentives they face ; that markets are generally an efficient way of organizing economic activity ; that public policy can sometimes improve the functioning of markets such as in the presence of externalities ( when the market does not fully take social costs and benefits into account ) or informational problems ; and that policy choices can affect whether the benefits of markets are narrowly or broadly shared. Schultze writes that the injection of basic microeconomic principles well back from the frontiers of research can significantly raise the quality of the debate ( ) Although CEA s views on some particular microeconomic issues have evolved over time and with administrations this shared commitment to a basic microeconomic canon has ensured a substantial amount of continuity. Under both Republican and Democratic administrations the Council has argued that reshaping incentives is often a better way of addressing market failures than imposing command-and-control regulation. It has also pushed for policies that promote overall economic efficiency rather than the well-being of specific sectors industries or firms. Charles Schultze notes that despite some areas of disagreement a succession of CEAs under both parties has given similar advice on a wide range of microeconomic matters ( ) CEA has also frequently provided more detailed technical or empirical expertise such as analyzing the effect of policies on incentives or performing cost-benefit analyses. Former CEA Chairman Joseph Stiglitz enumerates a number of specific narrow microeconomic initiatives in which CEA has played an important role such as designing tradable permits in pollutants | Chapter incorporating risk and discounting into cost-benefit analysis and introducing auction mechanisms ( ) During negotiations over the Clean Air Act Amendments of CEA was viewed as the repository of neutral competence and was called on to produce unbiased cost estimates of a range of different provisions ( Porter ) In recent years empirical research has become an especially important part of CEA s portfolio reflecting the proliferation of available data and the economics profession s shift toward empirical work. This trend has benefited the field of microeconomics in particular ( Stevenson ) CEA has also helped to advocate for or contribute to the generation of new policy proposals. For example the Burns Council supported the Federal Aid Highway Act of which began the present Interstate Highway System. The Heller Council under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson was especially prolific helping to shape transportation and trade bills aiding in the development of the monetary twist policy helping to keep mortgage rates down [ and ] developing the rationale of the wage-price guideposts ( Flash ) It also helped to develop the idea of the War on Poverty.3 Other CEAs have helped to initiate or push for ( sometimes successfully ; sometimes not ) various other reforms such spectrum auctions pension simplification and indexed bonds reforms of the air-traffic control system housing sector reform and a comprehensive approach to natural-disaster policy ( Stiglitz ) During the negotiations over the Kyoto Protocol on Climate Change former CEA Chair Janet Yellen testified on a number of occasions regarding the cost savings that could be achieved through emissions trading and participation by developing countries ( Hahn and Stavins ) ( See Box for former CEA Chairman N. Gregory Mankiw s description of CEA s role in trying to reform Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac during the George W Bush Administration. ) Walter Heller gives the following account of the impetus for the War on Poverty : Then around Christmas of [ President Kennedy ] read Dwight MacDonald s poverty articles in the New Yorker that helped get him started. Then he asked to see some other things that had been written He asked to see these things read them and was obviously deeply affected So first of all I had Bob [ Lampman ] put together the things he had done the best work on the subject in the United States namely measuring what had happened to poverty what the sources of poverty were what groups were impacted why people were mired in poverty We gave Kennedy this factual account about in March of Then something triggered my political interest in it : in June it was said that some Republican group I ve forgotten which Republican policy committee was going to zero in on the poverty problem. At that point I wrote my basic memo to Kennedy saying in effect You really should have in your program an attack ( I didn t call it a war on poverty but an attack ) on poverty and here are the kinds of things that it might include. Unless you tell us not to we re going to go ahead and work on them. We worked on them through the summer and this I think is well known the very last thing I talked to him about three days before the assassination was the poverty program and he said It s going to be part of my program. We didn t know how big it was to be ( Hargrove and Morley ) The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | Box : Former CEA Chairman N. Gregory Mankiw ( ) Looking back at my experience as CEA chair I am struck by the broad range of questions the Council had to confront. Should corporate dividends be taxed at the same rate as ordinary income ? What effect does Chinese exchange-rate policy have on the American economy ? How should accountants treat executive stock options when computing a company s earnings ? Why aren t U.S. utilities building new nuclear power plants ? How should means be defined when means-testing a Medicare entitlement ? What is the best way for policymakers to help speed the nascent recovery from the dot-com collapse ? For a professional economist working at CEA is both demanding and exhilarating. Confronting such a large range of issues is inevitably a learning experience and one done in short order and with high stakes It is a great honor to play a small part in trying to steer public policy in a better direction and thereby improve the lives of our fellow citizens With the benefit of hindsight one issue from my time at CEA is particularly notable : the oversight of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. CEA was part of a White House team that tried to reform these governmentsponsored enterprises ( GSEs ) We recognized that the GSEs were problematic. Their private goal of profit maximization did not mesh well with the implicit government guarantee of their debts In a speech I gave in November to a conference of bank supervisors I described the situation as follows : The enormous size of the mortgage-backed securities market means that any problems at the GSEs matter for the financial system as a whole. This risk is a systemic issue also because the debt obligations of the housing GSEs are widely held by other financial institutions. The importance of GSE debt in the portfolios of other financial entities means that even a small mistake in GSE risk management could have ripple effects throughout the financial system. The administration sought legislation that would create and empower a more effective regulator. The regulator would have the authority to set both risk-based and minimum capital standards for GSEs ; to review and if appropriate reject new GSE activities ; and to wind down the affairs of a troubled GSE through receivership. We also wanted to make the GSEs less political. We recommended removing presidentially appointed directors from their boards and giving the regulator a permanent funding mechanism by allowing it to assess the GSEs rather than relying on the congressional appropriations process In the end the administration failed in this effort at least while I was there. Legislation to improve the oversight of Fannie and Freddie was enacted only in July well after the imbalances that led to the financial crisis had built up making the problems apparent to everyone. In and with financial markets still placid Fannie | Chapter and Freddie had lots of friends in Congress ( on both sides of the aisle ) who blocked the White House s reform efforts. But we fought the good fight. And subsequent history shows I believe that we were on the right side of the issue Did CEA at the time foresee the housing boom and bust that unfolded over the next six years ? No of course not. But we did recognize the vulnerabilities of the GSEs which were major players in the huge market for mortgage-backed securities. Would the proposed reforms have prevented the financial crisis ? No probably not. But they might have made it less severe and more manageable People often ask me whether it is frustrating to work in Washington noting how hard it is to get anything done. Yes in some ways it is. This episode is only one example where our good policy ( as my White House colleagues and I saw it ) was subverted by an uncooperative legislature Yet over time I have come to appreciate that frustration for those in policy jobs is not a bug in the system but rather a feature. The founding fathers in their great wisdom built this tension into the system. In high school civics classes it goes by the name checks and balances. A common lament is that there is too much gridlock in Washington and maybe there is. But imagine that your least favorite candidate wins the next presidential election. Might you be grateful when the new President and his or her CEA chair become frustrated while trying to implement their new ideas for economic policy ? Ensuring that Policies are in the Public Interest CEA also plays an important role in providing analyses to demonstrate that some policies while superficially appealing or offering substantial benefits to particular sectors or firms are not cost-effective or in the national interest. Joseph Stiglitz claims that the money saved from just one of the many bad projects the CEA had helped stop would have been enough to provide us with a permanent endowment ( ) Former CEA Chairman Ben Bernanke also emphasized this function when describing economists role in policymaking more generally while at the same time emphasizing the limitations of economics : Economics is a highly sophisticated field of thought that is superb at explaining to policymakers precisely why the choices they made in the past were wrong. About the future not so much. However careful economic analysis does have one important benefit which is that it can help kill ideas that are completely logically inconsistent or wildly at variance with the data. This insight covers at least percent of proposed economic policies ( ) The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | Box : Former CEA Chairman Joseph Stiglitz ( ) My four years at the Council ( two as a member and two as chairman ) were perhaps the most memorable in my life. There were many battles some which we won some which we lost some in which we achieved a temporary victory and some which we lost in the short run only to see our positions vindicated with time. We came into government at an exciting time. The fall of the Iron Curtain had redefined the economic agenda. Our challenge was to find the right balance between the market and the state. The Council saw its role as helping to clarify the principles and then applying these principles to the major issues of the day The Council of Economic Advisers had an important positive agenda as we pushed to reshape trade welfare and environmental policies. To name one example we successfully pushed for inflation indexed bonds arguing that they could provide retirees with insurance against inflation which they could not obtain in other ways and that the risk premium that the market would likely pay for these bonds would generate revenues important then as now in the context of budgetary constraints. Some opposed inflation indexed bonds ostensibly because there would be little demand for them but perhaps grounded in the fact that the low turnover on such bonds meant they would generate few fees for Wall Street. Our view that there would be demand was vindicated and Treasury Inflation Protected Securities ( TIPS ) have proven to be a durable useful and informative part of the financial landscape Some of the most intense battles we fought now seem dated and that may have been partly because of our success. Today there is a broad consensus against corporate welfare and especially tax expenditures that both distort the economy and increase inequality even if they have shown enormous resilience. At the time the topic was politically sensitive but we drew up a list of them for the President and that list has only gotten longer with time But we also did a lot to stop bad ideas and in collaboration with many allies across government we succeeded in many arenas. We forged an alliance with the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice to block a proposal to sustain the price of aluminum through the creation of a global aluminum cartel. We helped overcome legislative attempts to change the mandate of the Federal Reserve to focus only on inflation and not on unemployment and helped defeat a constitutional amendment to require a balanced budget One temporary victory contains important lessons for CEA s commitment to understanding incentives. For years we succeeded in blocking the privatization of the United States Enrichment Corporation | Chapter ( USEC ) USEC was responsible for producing and marketing enriched uranium the key ingredient in nuclear power plants and in atomic bombs. CEA argued that private incentives to create markets for USEC s product conflicted with national and global interests in nonproliferation. Even worse USEC was entrusted with bringing into the United States the enriched uranium from deactivated Russian warheads We worried that USEC s profit-making incentives would induce them to do what they could to avoid bringing the uranium into the United States. CEA s concerns proved justified as we uncovered that USEC had refused an offer to buy substantial amounts of uranium from Russia This discovery halted the privatization albeit only temporarily. But USEC s continued travails leading even to proposals for renationalization vindicated CEA s position The Council was also engaged in other international issues. We opposed the policy of Chinese containment that was pursued in the earliest days of the Clinton Administration and when the administration changed course toward re-engagement we became active participants in that process. Our expertise in the transition from Communism to a market economy especially in Russia gave us a seat at the table in discussions over policies in that part of the world The Council was actively engaged in trade policy not just pushing back against protectionist measures but defining the principles that should guide market access initiatives. We questioned unfettered capital flows across borders a view that has become officially vindicated by the IMF s endorsement of it As I think back over the years at the Council one of the things that is striking is how many of the issues we focused on then have since risen to the top of the agenda. One was climate change. The Council was actively engaged in thinking about economic strategies that would reduce our emissions and those of the rest of the world. I served on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( which shared the Nobel Peace Prize with former Vice President Al Gore ) Another was inequality. We debated the causes and what could be done about it and included a full chapter on the topic in the Economic Report of the President. Our analysis highlighted how reducing capital gains tax rates would enhance the country s already worsening inequality and further distort the economy As we engaged in these discussions and many more CEA developed an enormously strong sense of comradery. It was these bonds as much as the ideas themselves that I think about when I reflect upon my four years at the Council The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | There were many lessons that I draw from these and a multitude of other examples during my four years in the Council. The Council can stop bad ideas and initiate goods ones. Given its small but highly dedicated staff it must be focused and use leverage. It is most effective when it works closely with other agencies at multiple levels interacting both with staff and top political appointees. This is even truer today with an increasingly large number of departments having a chief economist Not to sound too imperial but economics and economic analysis enter into every aspect of public decision-making. Incentives matter. And this is true not just in the arena of domestic policy but also foreign policy Finally most of the important issues are long run whatever we do today we will be dealing with them for years to come. The Council can play an important role in shaping and elevating the public debate As I wrote years ago in celebration of the Council s 50th anniversary,1 CEA is an important institutional innovation that has served the country well. Like other agencies in government it has a special interest one that often gets short shrift in day-to-day political life : the national interest Joseph Stiglitz. Looking Out for the National Interest : The Principles of the Council of Economic Advisers. American Economic Review ( ) : Some examples of this function are especially noteworthy ( see Box for former CEA Chairman Joseph Stiglitz s account of CEA s role in evaluating and generating policy proposals during the Clinton Administration ) For instance the Heller Council argued against a proposal during the Kennedy Administration to use nuclear explosives to widen the Panama Canal. In the Nixon Administration CEA played a leading role in the analysis that led to the conclusion that the government should not subsidize the development of a supersonic transport or SST plane dubbed the sure-to-be-subsidized transport ( Schultze ) Under President Ronald Reagan CEA participated in a Gold Commission which investigated the feasibility of returning to the gold standard and ultimately advised against doing so Of course the President makes policy decisions based on a wide range of other advice and perspectives and economic considerations often are not paramount. Furthermore as former CEA Chairman Herbert Stein points out not all policy proposals lend themselves to such definitive economic conclusions : The range of uncertainty [ in economics ] has been very great and the range of disagreements among respected people is very great. The political figure making a decision has this great range from which to choose and he has to make a choice on some basis other than what | Chapter can be reported to him as the perceived wisdom of the economics profession because that perceived wisdom gives pretty wide range ( Hargrove and Morley ) Finally economic advice is only useful to policymakers if it is communicated well. Former CEA Chairman Martin Baily emphasizes that when CEA is assessing proposals from Congress or other parts of the administration it is important for it to frame those issues in a way that can help foster useful discussion among policymakers ( ) Help to Advance the President s Economic Agenda Another primary function of CEA is to help advance the President s economic agenda. As outlined in CEA s statement before the Joint Economic Committee [ t ] he Council has a responsibility to explain to the Congress and to the public the general economic strategy of the President s program especially as it relates to the objectives of the Employment Act. CEA accomplishes this through several different means : writing the annual Economic Report of the President and testifying before the Joint Economic Committee producing reports on specific policy proposals or issues delivering speeches writing op-eds speaking with reporters and in more recent years writing blog posts and engaging the public on social media outlets Despite the fact that CEA draws heavily from academia and performs economic research it is not an academic institution or an independent body. Instead CEA is part of the team that helps to develop the President s agenda and its public communications are intended to complement that role while reflecting rigorous economic research. Like communications from any other component of the Executive Office of the President or the administration more generally statements from CEA are intended to be consistent with the President s agenda and economic policy As many commentators and former CEA chairs have observed there can be a tension between CEA s duty to advance the President s agenda and its responsibility to provide expert economic advice. For most of its history CEA has managed to strike a successful balance between these roles. As Edward Flash notes CEA s reports are not partisan tracts but rather documents oriented to the economic policies and values of the Administration ( ) However there are inherent challenges entailed by fulfilling these dual responsibilities. This section uses the conflict between CEA s first chairman Edwin G. Nourse and its second Leon H. Keyserling to explore these challenges. It also draws some institutional lessons to ensure the Council s continued effectiveness The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | Nourse and Keyserling The three years ( ) during which Nourse and Keyserling served on the Council together were difficult ones. Nourse opposed Keyserling s full-employment economics and expansionist agenda and held different views than Keyserling on inflation and countercyclical policy. Their disagreements on economic policy were exacerbated by ambiguity surrounding the Council s organizational structure. Although Nourse was the official chairman he and the two members had functionally equivalent roles and responsibilities and each of them got one vote when making decisions Consequently it was not always clear who was speaking on behalf of the Council and Edward Flash reports that by the Council could no longer report to the President in a single voice as memoranda and reports began to incorporate differing individual viewpoints ( ) Nourse and Keyserling also held fundamentally different views about how the Council should operate. Nourse who had enjoyed a distinguished career as an agricultural economist viewed the Council as a scientific agency that should be objective and scrupulously avoid politics. Nourse summarized his view of the Council in a letter to President Truman accepting the offer of chairmanship : The Council of Economic Advisers is conceived as a scientific agency of the Federal Government. Its prime function is to bring the best available methods of social science to the service of the Chief Executive and of the Congress in formulating national policy from year to year and from month to month. There is no occasion for the Council to become involved in any way in the advocacy of particular measures or in the rival beliefs and struggles of the different economic and political interest groups. It should give a clearer and more comprehensive picture than we have ever had as to the economic state of the nation as to factors which are tending to retard prosperity and as to the probable effect of various remedial measures which may be under consideration by the Executive or the Congress ( Flash ) Nourse believed that the Council s function should be limited to providing advice and did not view himself as being an active participant in or advocate of the President s program involved in day-to-day affairs or in the promotion of his program ( Norton ) Indeed he took this notion so seriously that he argued that members of the Council should not testify before any Congressional committees other than appropriation committees | Chapter By contrast Keyserling had actively engaged in public policy before arriving at CEA : he had served as a legislative assistant to Senator Robert Wagner and as a staff member of the Senate Committee on Banking and Currency worked in different capacities at various public housing agencies and participated in numerous Democratic election campaigns. He and to a lesser extent CEA s other member John D. Clark believed that the Council should not only provide advice but also should participate in the policy process and advocate for the President s policies. As discussed above for example he did not hesitate to involve himself in the Korean War mobilization since it aligned with his views of the necessity of economic expansion. In addition he felt that the Council s advice should not be limited to economics and should include social and political aspects as well ( Norton ) Keyserling and Clark also thought it was entirely appropriate for them to testify before Congressional committees. Ultimately it became necessary for President Truman to resolve the disagreement siding with Keyserling and Clark After three years of service as chairman of CEA Nourse tendered his resignation to President Truman. Nourse had become increasingly frustrated that he was unable to develop satisfactory relations or channels of communication with the President and the White House while Keyserling who was more operationally and promotionally included than Nourse had an easier time operating within a political environment ( Flash ) Keyserling was named chairman about six months after Nourse s departure Although Keyserling outlasted Nourse the acrimony between the two men along with the perception of Keyserling as being overly political contributed to questions about the Council s future. Criticism began to intensify toward the later part of the Truman Administration and in the Hoover Commission on Government Reorganization recommended that CEA be replaced with an Office of the Economic Adviser that would have a single head but a similar staff ( Nourse ) Once Republicans won the White House and both houses of Congress in the future status of the Council was unclear. Toward the end of the Truman Administration Congress cut the Council s budget for fiscal year by percent but a group of Senators who supported the Council managed to have its funds distributed so as to fully fund it for the first nine months of the fiscal year ( Flash ) Funds ran out on March around six weeks after President Dwight D. Eisenhower took office by which time most of CEA s staff had dispersed. The new Congress refused President Eisenhower s request to extend funds for the end of the fiscal year instead providing funding for a single economic assistant to the President ( Porter ) It was widely believed at the time that the Council s The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | shut-down towards the end of the Truman Administration was a result of excess politicking under Keyserling s chairmanship ( Naveh ) though Keyserling himself disputed this perception Eventually Arthur F. Burns who had been appointed as President Eisenhower s sole economic adviser convinced the President and Congress to keep CEA arguing that the President definitely needed economic advice on a continual basis and on a professional level [ and ] that a deliberative body would serve the President better than a single economic adviser ( Hargrove and Morley ) Congress restored CEA s appropriation and Burns was sworn in as chairman in March Burns also helped to persuade President Eisenhower to reorganize CEA. Together with staff from the Budget Bureau ( the precursor to the Office of Management and Budget ) he worked to develop Reorganization Plan No. which formally established the chair as the leader of CEA and gave her or him responsibility for representing the Council to the President However Hugh Norton writes that perhaps Burns s greatest contribution was his success at least in appearance in removing the Council from the area of partisanship into which it had fallen in the late Truman-Keyserling period To what degree this was merely an illusion is debatable but at least he created the image ( ) Institutional Lessons The discord between Nourse and Keyserling and its political fall-out illustrates that CEA chairs and members need to be able to operate effectively within a political environment without it affecting the integrity of their economic advice. Put more succinctly Charles Schultze advises that CEA members should see themselves as partisan advocates of the efficient solution ( ) Former CEA Chairman Murray Weidenbaum writes that subsequent CEA chairs and members have tried to avoid the two extremes of the Truman Administration so as not to be pegged as either advocate or oracle ( ) Political values and judgments intersect with CEA s role in a number of ways. As Schultze notes CEA must have some political sensibilities to be effective : [ t ] he CEA chairman and members can not be effective if they are seen as political eunuchs with little understanding of the political stakes involved ( ) Arthur Okun concurs [ i ] t is far more important for society and for the profession to have economists who maintain rapport with the President and thus have the greatest influence on the inside ( Naveh ) Similarly former CEA Member William A. Niskanen recommends that [ m ] embers of the CEA and other senior policy advisers should be selected on the basis of three criteria : professionalism loyalty to the fundamental | Chapter goals of the government in their area of responsibility and an ability to operate in a political environment ( ) Moreover although CEA s strength is providing unvarnished economic advice it is impossible to divorce this advice from the broader context of the Administration s goals and objectives. While economists can help policymakers to weigh tradeoffs among different policy options or to design policies so that they are more likely to achieve their stated objective how those tradeoffs are weighed and goals are set often depends on values In addition policy recommendations themselves are more relevant if they can be implemented which in turn depends on a range of political factors like legislative feasibility and how the policy is described and contextualized Finally CEA chairs are selected and agree to serve because they at least broadly share the goals and values of the President and the administration Beyond the chair however there is no guarantee that CEA members or especially staff economists and researchers share a political or philosophical agreement with the President As dictated in the Employment Act of CEA s advice must ultimately be guided by its own analysis of which economic policies will foster and promote free competitive enterprise avoid economic fluctuations and maintain employment production and purchasing power. Former CEA chairs members and staff offer several specific pieces of advice as to how to successfully strike this balance : they advise that CEA should not publicly advocate for policies that are not supported by economic analysis and that CEA should stick to giving economic advice not political advice. CEA s comparative advantage is economics and as illustrated by Keyserling s tenure and its aftermath straying outside this function risks damaging the institution s credibility Others advise that the Council should not get too involved in policy coordination. CEA s limited staff and resources combined with the academic background of most of its staff render it poorly equipped to serve as a policy coordinating body. One episode that illustrates this lesson occurred during the Johnson Administration when CEA was responsible for the day-to-day administration of wage-price guideposts to combat inflation Reflecting on the experience Walter Heller remarked that there was no other appropriate agency to handle the wage-price guideposts but that it was diversionary and that the Council has to stay away from that kind of operational responsibility ( Hargrove and Morley ) Excessive involvement in policy coordination can also have the effect of undermining CEA s institutional credibility due to the types of compromises that are necessary. Hugh Norton writes that CEA s efforts to administer the wage-price guidelines had the effect of weakening the general moral The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | authority of the Council ( ) Charles Schultze refused to move his office from the Eisenhower Executive Office Building to the West Wing and serve as an economic policy coordinator because [ h ] e felt it would compromise his objectivity and burden him with administrative duties inconsistent with his role as the head of the President s in-house economic think tank ( Eizenstat ) Stuart Eizenstat President Carter s domestic policy adviser argues that [ t ] he CEA can not provide both detached Olympian economic advice and become enmeshed in the daily inter-agency compromises and political log-rolling ( ) This is not to say that CEA should not contribute to operational matters at all. To the contrary it is quite common for CEA to participate in interagency committees and CEA occasionally even chairs some committees. Yet the academic background of most of CEA s staff and its mission to provide expert economic advice render it unsuited to serve as a policy or strategic coordinator Recognizing this most recent Presidents have relied on some other institutional body or senior White House aides to coordinate economic policy.4 Since the National Economic Council has been responsible for coordinating economic policymaking. These arrangements have largely served to augment CEA s effectiveness by permitting it to focus on providing economic advice and analysis and giving the Council greater exposure to the President. Roger Porter writes : What might appear on the surface as a competitive arrangement has rarely been viewed by the participants as a zero-sum game. To the contrary both the CEA chairman and the White House economicpolicy assistant have usually viewed the other as an ally and often as a trusted confidant ( ) Former CEA Chairman Alan Krueger writes that the development of the National Economic Council elevated the Council of Economic Advisers freeing it to advocate efficient economic programs and ensuring that the [ P ] resident had its input ( ) For example President Eisenhower established the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability and the Council on Foreign Economic Policy ; President Nixon created the Cabinet Committee on Economic Policy the Council on International Economic Policy and the Council on Economic Policy ; President Ford established the Economic Policy Board ; President Carter created the Economic Policy Group ; and President Reagan established the Economic Policy Council. Most of these committees or councils have not continued in the same form from one administration to the next ( Orszag et al. ; Porter ) | Chapter Gather Analyze and Interpret Information on Economic Trends and Developments Another one of CEA s functions under the Employment Act of is to to gather timely and authoritative information concerning economic developments and economic trends. This includes staying up to date on major trends in the macroeconomy financial markets and labor markets as well as in sectors such as health care energy and housing. This role is important not only because developments in these sectors can be the bases for motivating future policies but also because the President senior White House staff and the public need to understand these issues CEA fulfills this role through a variety of different means including : sending regular memos to the President on the evening before key data releases ; providing daily weekly or monthly updates on developments in the economy ; writing more detailed one-off memos to the President and the senior White House team on specific issues ; producing public reports on relevant economic topics or trends ; and publishing the annual Economic Report of the President. Sometimes the President will call for CEA to explicate a particular issue. For example Murray Weidenbaum reports having a pleasant but spirited and extended difference of views [ with President Ronald Reagan ] on the matter of seasonally adjusted versus unadjusted reports on employment and unemployment ( ) In many cases this work does not immediately motivate or advance a particular policy but the ongoing monitoring and communicating information about the economy ultimately helps to inform the development prioritization and public reception of economic policies ( see Box for former CEA Chairman Alan Greenspan s history of the weekly Gross National Product measurement that CEA developed and used to assess the need for expansionary fiscal measures during the Ford Administration ) The Burns Council and the Recession The recession represented an early test of this informationgathering function. By the time President Eisenhower took office in the economy had fully recovered from a mild recession that had occurred a few years earlier and the unemployment rate was at its lowest point since World War II. However in July the United States signed the Korean armistice and the public anticipated that a substantial decline in military expenditures would soon follow sparking concern about an impending recession ( Engelbourg ) During the summer of the newly reconstituted Council grew increasingly worried about the possibility of a recession and spent the next The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | Box : Former CEA Chairman Alan Greenspan ( ) In the autumn of industrial production began to fall rapidly and unemployment started to increase rapidly. That the economy was heading into a recession ( if it were not in fact already in one ) didn t require much debate. By Christmas the key question for the Ford Administration s economic policy was whether we were experiencing an inventory recession which would mean a sharp but temporary erosion in production and employment as businesses worked off excess inventories or a far more dangerous softening in the economy engendered by a persistent weakness in final demand. This was the burning issue for the President. For a short-term inventory correction the optimum policy as we saw it was to do as little as politically possible The political advice being offered to the administration was unequivocal. It was typified by the March testimony of AFL-CIO president George Meany to Congress that America is in the worst economic emergency since the Great Depression The situation is frightening now and it is growing more ominous by the day. This is not just another recession for it has no parallel in the five recessions in the post World War II period. America is far beyond the point where the situation can correct itself. Massive government action is needed. The Council of Economic Advisers had no real time measure of the state of demand and inventories. Official estimates of gross national product ( GNP ) and its components would answer the vexing question But the data required to make the key policy choices would become available weeks perhaps months in the future. In December however CEA developed what amounted to a weekly GNP. It would not have passed the exacting statistical publication standards of the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of Commerce but it was more than adequate in fact quite instrumental in answering the question of whether we were experiencing an inventory recession a final demand recession or both While the Department of Commerce has since abandoned its weekly retail sales series it nonetheless did yeoman service during that period in indicating that personal consumption expenditures were not undergoing a downward plunge. This was confirmed by the timely 10-day data of full coverage of motor vehicle sales. The other sectors of the economy had to be estimated more indirectly. Industry trade sources coupled with the latest data on building permits ( which leads residential construction ) outlined the residential sector for us. Survey forecasts of plant and equipment monthly new orders and shipments for machinery data on nonresidential construction and with a delay imports of capital equipment constructed a crude proxy for capital investment. From | Chapter the unemployment insurance system we were able to develop a rough indicator of aggregate hours worked which combined with an estimate of output per work hour ( which were little more than educated guesses ) yielded a rough preliminary estimate of total real GNP which was then adjusted to reconcile with its component parts These data indicated with some degree of robustness something that we knew for a fact only much later : that the rate of inventory liquidation the gap between GNP and final demand was exceptionally large by historic standards. That gap reflected the fact that production had been cut well below the level of final demand in order to work off the excess inventories that had accumulated. Therefore if final demand continued to stabilize as apparently it was doing in the early weeks of the recession s low point was close at hand and a marked rebound from the downturn was highly likely. Inventory liquidation can not go on indefinitely. The rate must eventually slow and that process closes the gap between final demand and production sometimes quite rapidly It soon became clear from the weekly insured unemployment data and several qualitative indicators that the worst was over.1 At that point we could conclude that further expansionary fiscal measures beyond the modest initiatives of the Ford Administration would be unnecessary and in the long run could turn out to be counterproductive. Short-term emergency GNP monitoring was no longer necessary and the short but admirable history of the weekly GNP came to a close Real GDP rose percent from Q1 : to Q1 : few months documenting economic data showing worsening conditions CEA s new chairman Arthur Burns was an expert on business cycles and was considered to be a champion of empirical or inductive economics preferring to draw conclusions and base policy upon observable facts rather than deductively from theoretical relationships and models ( Flash ) Thus over the next several months the Council monitored various economic indicators such as unemployment stock prices commercial construction new housing starts farm income business inventory accumulation and business sales and submitted regular updates to the President and other agencies In addition to monitoring economic developments the Council also began actively helping to develop a counter-recessionary strategy. First the Council attempted to convince the Federal Reserve to ease the money supply and credit and Burns lost no opportunity to seek its cooperation ( Norton ) ( Note that the Federal Reserve has long-established independence and Executive Branch policy in recent administrations has been to not The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | comment on or in any way attempt to influence its actions. ) Second CEA advocated for reducing Federal taxes to stimulate demand contrary to the views of then-Treasury Secretary George Humphrey who was concerned about tax cuts adding to the deficit.5 Finally CEA advocated for increased public works spending developing various proposals and publicly calling for it in the Economic Report of the President. However Burns recognized that public works projects would take a long time to implement and take effect and the Council ultimately advised that extra public works funds should only be requested if unemployment reached six million in which never came close to occurring ( Engelbourg ) Thus although the Council and others within the administration devoted much deliberation to planning public works activities in the end their practical effects were fairly minimal In the end the economy experienced a relatively short and mild recession an outcome that helped CEA reach a high-water mark of prestige and acceptance ( Flash ) Moreover as noted previously this was the first time that a major tax cut had been implemented at the time of a budgetary shortfall to counter a recession. According to the Economic Report of the President the administration s actions in established the bipartisan character of expansionary fiscal policies for the first time ( CEA ) That being said some have argued that the Council s work in monitoring and informing the administration and the public about economic developments was ultimately more influential than its direct efforts to promote specific countercyclical policies. Edward Flash writes : Burns inductive economics reinforced policy objectives and provided an excellent analysis of unfolding developments Except for underestimating the reductions in government expenditures for fiscal and allegedly overestimating administrative budget flexibility the Council correctly assessed the mildness of the recession and provided Only a couple years later their roles in the debate were reversed. In Burns and Humphrey took opposite sides in another dispute with Humphrey arguing for a tax reduction and Burns arguing against it because inflation was beginning to pick up. Humphrey scheduled a meeting to make his case to President Eisenhower. Burns s account of the meeting is as follows : Eisenhower greeted us with his customary enthusiasm : My two friends just the two men I wanted to see. I just had a damn fool businessman in here saying that we ought to lower taxes now this at a time when inflation is beginning to heat up to lower taxes ! Can you imagine any idiocy like that ? I took out a handkerchief and covered my face It was all I could do to control myself from bursting out laughing. Well there was talk about all kinds of things for about an hour and a quarter. I did not say one word. I was waiting for Humphrey ; but he never got around to the subject of the meeting ( Hargrove and Morley ) Chairman Burns s efforts also won praise from President Eisenhower with the President remarking to him one day Arthur my boy you would have made a fine chief of staff overseas during the war ( Norton ) | Chapter an informational basis for appropriate Administration policies Through Burns the Council kept the President and the Cabinet informed ; through ABEGS [ the Advisory Board on Economic Growth and Stability ] chaired by Burns the Council accomplished the same thing with departments and agencies. To the President Burns provided constant and expert counsel ; to the departments he conveyed an overview of recession developments and governmental countermoves that transcended particular operational operations and outlook ( ) By contrast Flash argues that it appears reasonable to conclude that one the Council s influence on the [ F ] ederal [ G ] overnment s actions of tax reduction and monetary easing which most significantly contributed to recovery was minor and two those instances where its influence was significant involved actions that did not bulk large in recovery impact ( ) For instance he notes that much of the tax reduction that was enacted had already been scheduled to go into effect : the personal income tax reduction was implemented as a result of legislation enacted during the Korean War mobilization and the excess profits tax was scheduled to expire automatically. CEA did persuade the President to pass an additional tax reduction of $ billion but by the time it was implemented the recovery was already underway The 1970s and Stagflation Of course there have also been moments in CEA s history where its interpretation of economic trends and its understanding of the appropriate policy response have proved deficient. Herbert Stein notes that the 1970s were a particularly difficult time for CEA : The later Nixon years the Ford years and the Carter years were a period in which the CEA struggled with problems for which the economics profession was unprepared. High unemployment and high inflation persisted. Fiscal policy was dominated by concern with rising expenditures and deficits. The growth rate of potential output seemed to be slowing down for reasons that were not understood ( ) Stein writes that CEA s most serious error during the Nixon Administration was thinking that the natural rate of unemployment was percent. This led the Council to think that it only had to let unemployment rise slightly above that before inflation would start to dissipate. Yet CEA was proven wrong and when unemployment rose to percent with no sign of The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | progress confidence in the policy of gradualism evaporated [ which ] helped to set the stage for the radical move to price and wage controls which the CEA had not foreseen and did not want ( ) More generally Stein comments that two institutional deficiencies of CEA are that it does not look far enough ahead but gets too engrossed in immediate problems [ and that ] like the government as a whole is deficient in contingency planning. To remedy the first problem Stein advises that [ i ] t might be useful to segregate a portion of the staff under the guidance of one of the members to think only of what the economy and its problems might look like in say years ( ) Engage the Economics Community The final function of CEA is to engage with the economics community by staying abreast of the latest academic research and by sharing new insights with policymakers and in turn by communicating the administration s actions and plans to the economics community. This function helps to support the administration s efforts to develop economic policies and to articulate and advance the President s agenda. While the academic character of CEA may not have been originally intended by Congress when it created CEA this engagement has arguably made the Council a more effective and durable institution The Origins of Economists in the White House Although CEA is now closely identified with the economics profession this was not originally the case. J. Bradford DeLong writes that [ e ] stablishing in the White House staff a group of short-term employees with a primary allegiance to economists sense of the public interest may have been the furthest thing from the minds of those who wrote Section of the Employment Act ( ) Rather during the lead-up to the passage of the Employment Act [ t ] here were some people in Congress who envisioned the Council as a representative body [ and that ] each one of the three basic sectors of the American economy ; agriculture industry and labor should be represented on the Council ( Naveh ) Some supporters of the Employment Act wanted CEA to be staffed by people who had experience working in government or business while others wanted to appoint academic economists In the end the first CEA under President Truman included representation from all of these backgrounds. Nourse was an agricultural economist who had spent much of his career at the Brookings Institution ; Keyserling was a lawyer who had completed graduate coursework in economics and | Chapter had experience working in government and ties to organized labor ; and Clark was a former oil industry executive and a business school dean. By comparison the staff recruited to serve on the first Council was comprised of [ e ] conomists who integrated government experience and academic training almost all of whom could be called government careerists ( Naveh ) The shift toward hiring more academic economists commenced under the Burns Council and intensified during the Heller Council. In part Burns started hiring academic economists due to a scarcity of available labor : Burns had a hard time finding qualified economists who at the same time were not too closely identified with the previous administrations would agree to work for President Eisenhower [ and ] would stay in Washington at the time [ of ] Senator McCarthy s investigations. Meanwhile academic institutions were a convenient supplier of temporary personnel ( Naveh ) Burns also saw hiring academics as a means of depoliticizing CEA and establishing its credibility which was especially important since CEA had come to be viewed as excessively political during Keyserling s tenure Institutional Advantages and Challenges CEA s economic perspective and academic character have as Burns intended helped to insulate it against politics to some extent. As discussed above the Council has held a number of the same positions under both Democratic and Republican administrations. In large part this is because CEA tends to reflect the policy views of the economics profession and on many ( but not all ) issues there is a distinct consensus among economists ( Schultze ) Murray Weidenbaum notes that when Congress in was debating whether to continue to fund CEA every active Republican ex-chairman came to the defense of the CEA as well as the Democratic economists who served on the [ C ] ouncil ( ) When the administration changes the leadership of CEA changes too but there is a tradition of its staff continuing to serve through the first summer of the subsequent administration Some former CEA chairs have claimed that the institutional structure of CEA can help to reinforce its economic perspective. For example Joseph Stiglitz argues that the fact that CEA is composed of citizen-bureaucrats who know they will be returning to their academic perches shortly means that they have a long-term incentive to maintain [ their ] professional reputations ( ) and that this creates an incentive for CEA staff to ensure that its recommendations are economically defensible. This point is echoed by former CEA Chairman Martin Feldstein ( ) and former CEA Member Jeffrey Frankel ( ) Of course CEA s perspective is not unique The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | Box : Former CEA Chairman Martin Feldstein ( ) I became Chairman of President Ronald Reagan s Council of Economic Advisers in the summer of I served for two years the maximum time allowed by Harvard s policy of leave for government service. Acting as CEA chairman provided a crash course in a wide range of economic issues including exchange rates financial regulation and emerging market deficits as well as an education in how the political process works inside the administration and with Congress Ronald Reagan made his economic goals very clear : lowering the rate of inflation reducing the government s share of gross domestic product ( GDP ) while increasing defense spending lowering tax rates and reducing government regulation. Although he left it to others to work out the details he made these things happen because of his skills in speaking to the American public and his ability to compromise in working with the Congress. He succeeded in achieving his goals although never to the extent that he wanted. Government spending fell from percent of GDP in to percent in while the defense share rose from percent to percent taxes fell from percent of GDP to percent and the fiscal deficit excluding interest on the national debt ( the primary balance ) fell from percent to minus percent Although the Democrats had an overwhelming majority in the House of Representatives for the entire eight years of the Reagan presidency the President achieved major tax reform ( a revenue-neutral reduction of the top personal tax rate from percent to percent ) a major reform of Social Security ( raising the future age for full benefits from to ) and a free trade agreement with Canada The Federal Reserve under Chairman Paul Volcker ( who had been appointed by President Jimmy Carter and later reappointed by President Reagan ) achieved a rapid fall in inflation from percent in to percent in and This disinflation involved double-digit interest rates and a sharp economic downturn. One of my challenges as CEA chairman was to defend the Federal Reserve s actions against critics both inside and outside the administration The overall budget deficit increased sharply from percent of GDP in to percent of GDP in The 25-percent cut in personal tax rates that was enacted in was not expected to result in such a large deficit increase because with tax brackets not indexed to inflation before it was projected that the high inflation that prevailed before the tax cuts would raise taxable incomes to offset the cut in tax rates. The unexpectedly rapid fall in inflation reduced the offsetting tax revenue. Although some of the rise in the fiscal deficit was also due to the recession that began in a net increase in the structural deficit | Chapter remained. I joined forces with Budget Director David Stockman to argue that revenue increases as well as spending cuts were needed to shrink that structural deficit. Although the political side of the White House criticized me for this position President Reagan made no objections and did support annual revenue-raising changes in corporate taxation while sticking with his promise not to raise taxes on hard-working families struggling to make ends meet. Although there were very good economists in several different cabinet departments I realized that they each had two roles. In addition to advising the cabinet member who was the head of their department they had to represent their department s position at interdepartmental meetings. I therefore found myself debating with these economists at meetings while suspecting that they were presenting their department s positions rather than their professional judgments. Perhaps they didn t mind losing some of those debates In my meetings with economic officials of other countries I came to appreciate the unique role of the Council. As CEA chairman I reported directly to the President and presented my own views in testimony to Congress. In contrast the senior economic officials in other countries were often political figures rather than professional economists or were economists who reported only privately to a minister of finance The team at the CEA is also unusual in being academics serving for only one or two years ( except for the very valuable long-term statistical staff ) This meant having very high quality people who brought up-todate professional thinking but who had to learn quickly the details of policy issues. William Poole and William Niskanen were already members of the CEA when I arrived and continued to work with me during my two years. The people I recruited as members of the staff included Democrats as well as Republicans chosen for their analytic abilities including Larry Summers Paul Krugman John Cochrane and Jeff Frankel as well as younger economists Ken Froot Larry Lindsey Greg Mankiw and Katherine Utgoff and others whose political affiliations I did not know. Although the White House personnel office was surprised when they eventually discovered some of their political affiliations there was no attempt to change these appointments or limit what I did in my second-year appointments One of the many pleasures in working with President Reagan was his positive and optimistic attitude. It no doubt made it possible for him to work successfully with both Republicans and Democrats in Congress But it sometimes made it difficult for me to convince him of the need to adopt certain policy changes. I recall one occasion after I had just had one of my Oval Office meetings with the President in which I said The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | that it would be very risky not to make a particular policy change. The President asked whether continuing with the current policy was sure to create a problem. I said that I couldn t be certain of that but that the current policy would have a very low probability of success. I thought that my argument would have persuaded a typical prudent corporate CEO to make the change that I was suggesting. But the President decided not to do so As I left the Oval Office I realized that the President s optimism and his willingness to take a long shot on policy was not an accident but was based on his own life history. He started as a radio sports announcer but was soon a major movie star in Hollywood. When his movie career came to an end he eventually went on to become a popular California governor. He later ran for the nomination as Republican candidate for the presidency but was defeated. But the next time around he won the nomination was elected overwhelmingly and was reelected four years later with an even larger margin. And there I was after his long string of improbable successes trying to persuade him not to do something because it was unlikely to happen and policy analysts throughout the Federal Government often hold similar views as CEA but CEA is unusual in that providing an economic perspective is essentially its sole institutional purpose ( see Box for former CEA Chairman Martin Feldstein s discussion of CEA s unusual institutional structure and CEA s role in informing fiscal policy during the Reagan Administration ) CEA s academic character also helps to bring fresh perspectives on policy into the government both by bringing in new people who have new ideas and through keeping open the channels of communication with academia. It also means that CEA s views about policy tend to reflect economists current understanding of how best to promote the public interest. For example Charles Schultze notes that CEA regularly supported antitrust policies under the Eisenhower Kennedy Ford and Nixon Administrations but that its support for such policies waned during the 1980s as the economics profession s views shifted ( ) In recent years growing evidence of economic rents has led CEA along with many in the economics profession to increasingly emphasize the importance of fostering more competitive markets as a means to address inequality and raise real incomes ( see discussion in Chapter ) In this way Edwin Nourse s view of CEA as a doorway through which the best thinking of systematic economics may be brought into clear and effective focus at the point of executive decision as to national economic policy and action has been vindicated ( Norton ) | Chapter Of course relying on short-term academic economists also presents some notable challenges : CEA s staff have little institutional memory and often do not enter government with much knowledge about policy decisionmaking processes or much understanding of the details of how Federal programs function. In addition as discussed above though it is critical to provide unvarnished economic advice such advice is likely to be more useful if it is at least presented with an awareness of the broader political context These constraints result in a substantial learning curve for many incoming CEA staff and if they are not surmounted can present barriers to engaging effectively in the policy process. Some CEAs have attempted to attenuate these obstacles by including a few government economists on staff and by relying on several career staff members for institutional memory Conclusion Many of CEA s contributions are due to its unique institutional structure : that it is a small organization with no regulatory authority of its own few direct operational responsibilities and populated by academic economists. Yet its contributions are also dependent on the ability of its staff to balance operating effectively in a necessarily political environment without being overly influenced by politics and to be effective in advocating for their positions while providing objective economic advice. All in all given the divergent objectives reflected in the Employment Act of CEA s turbulent early years and its unusual institutional structure CEA has proven to be a durable and effective advocate for the public interest The 70th Anniversary of the Council of Economic Advisers | REFERENCES Chapter American Civil Liberties Union. The War on Marijuana in Black and White. Accessed January Aizer Anna Shari Eli Joseph P. Ferrie and Adriana Lleras-Muney. The Long Term Impact of Cash Transfers to Poor Families. NBER Working Paper Autor David. The Polarization of Job Opportunities in the U.S. Labor Market. Center for American Progress the Hamilton Project Bakija Jon Adam Cole and Bradley T. Heim. Jobs and Income Growth of Top Earners and the Causes of Changing Income Inequality : Evidence from U.S. Tax Return Data. Department of Economics Working Paper Williams College Boskin Michael J. Unions and Relative Real Wages. The American Economic Review ( ) : Bricker Jesse Lisa J. Dettling Alice Henriques Joanne W. Hsu Kevin B. Moore John Sabelhaus Jeffrey Thompson and Richard A Windle. Changes in U.S. Family Finances from to : Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances. Federal Reserve Bulletin Vol. No. Brown David W. Amanda E. Kowalski and Ithai Z. Lurie. Medicaid as an Investment in Children : What is the Long-term Impact on Tax Receipts ? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Card David Thomas Lemieux and W. Craig Riddell. Unions and Wage Inequality. Journal of Labor Research ( ) : Carson Ann. Prisoners in Bureau of Justice Statistics Department of Justice Chetty Raj Nathaniel Hendren Patrick Kline Emmanuel Saez and Nicholas Turner. Is the United States Still a Land of Opportunity ? Recent Trends in Intergenerational Mobility. NBER Working Paper Chetty Raj Nathaniel Hendren Patrick Kline and Emmanuel Saez. Where is the Land of Opportunity ? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States. Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Chetty Raj John N. Friedman and Jonah Rockoff. New Evidence on the Long-Term Impacts of Tax Credits. Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income Working Paper Cingano Federico. ( ) Trends in Income Inequality and its Impact on Economic Growth. OECD Social Employment and Migration Working Papers No. OECD Publishing Congressional Budget Office. The Distribution of Household Income and Federal Taxes Publication No. Corak Miles. Inequality from Generation to Generation : the United States in Comparison. University of Ottawa. Accessed January Council of Economic Advisers. Eleven Facts about American Families and Work. ______. 2015a. Fines Fees and Bail. Issue Brief ______. 2015b. Long-Term Benefits of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Issue Brief ______. 2015c. Worker Voice in a Time of Rising Inequality. Issue Brief Duesenberry James. Income Saving and the Theory of Consumer Behavior. Harvard University Press Cambridge MA Duncan and Murnane ( ) ; Putnam Robert. Our Kids : The American Dream in Crisis. New York New York : Simon & Schuster Furman Jason. 2015a. Barriers to Shared Growth : The Case of Land Use Regulation and Economic Rents. Remarks at the Urban Institute ______. 2015b. Occupational Licensing and Economic Rents. Remarks at the Brookings Institution | References Furman Jason and Peter Orszag. A Firm-Level Perspective on the Role of Rents in the Rise in Inequality. Presentation at A Just Society Centennial Event in Honor of Joseph Stiglitz Columbia University October Glaeser Edward L. and Joseph Gyourko. The Impact of Building Restrictions on Housing Affordability. Economic Policy Review ( ) : Glaeser Edward L. Joseph Gyourko and Raven E. Saks. Why Have Housing Prices Gone Up ? American Economic Review ( ) : Goldin Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. The Race between Education and Technology : The Evolution of U.S. Educational Wage Differentials to NBER Working Paper No. Greene Karen. Occupational Licensing and the Supply of Nonprofessional Manpower. Washington DC : Manpower Administration U.S. Department of Labor Gyourko Joseph and Raven Molloy. Regulation and Housing Supply. in Duranton,Gilles J. Vernon Henderson and William C Strange eds. Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics Volume 5B. Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics. Amsterdam ; San Diego and Oxford : Elsevier Science Hoynes Hilary W. Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach and Douglas Almond Long Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Johnson Janna E. and Morris M. Kleiner. Is Occupational Licensing a Barrier to Interstate Migration ? Working Paper University of Minnesota Kleiner Morris M. Are There Economic Rents for More Restrictive Occupational Licensing Practices ? 42nd Annual Proceedings United States : Industrial Relations Research Association ______. Licensing Occupations : Ensuring Quality or Restriction Competition ? W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research Kalamazoo MI : Upjohn Institute Press ______. Reforming Occupational Licensing Policies. Discussion Paper The Hamilton Project References | Kleiner Morris M. and Alan B. Krueger. The Prevalence and Effects of Occupational Licensing. British Journal of Industrial Relations Vol. No. : ______. Analyzing the Extent and Influence of Occupational Licensing on the Labor Market. Journal of Labor Economics Vol No. : S173-S202 Liebman Jeffrey B. The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Incentives and Income Distribution. Tax Policy and the Economy Vol. MIT Press Milanovic Branko. Global Income Inequality by the Numbers : in History and Now. Policy Research Working Paper The World Bank Development Research Group Minor -Harper Stephanie. State and Federal Prisoners Bureau of Justice Statistics Department of Justice Mishel Lawrence Josh Bivens Elise Gould and Heidi Shierholz. The State of Working America 12th ed. Economic Policy Institute Cornell University Press Okun Arthur. Equality and Efficiency : The Big Trade-Off. Washington DC : Brookings Institution Ostry Jonathan D. Andrew Berg and Charalambos G. Tsangarides. Redistribution Inequality and Growth. IMF Staff Discussion Note. IMF Research Department Piketty Thomas. Capital in the Twenty-First Century. Harvard University Press Pikkety Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. ( updating text ) Income Inequality in the United States Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. ( ) RealtyTrac. Home Price Appreciation Outpaces Wage Growth in Percent of U.S. Markets During Housing Recovery. Saez Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman. Wealth Inequality in the United States Since : Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data. NBER Working Paper The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights. Chapter Three : Race Sentencing and the Tough Crime Movement. Accessed January | References Troy Leo and Neil Sheflin. Union Sourcebook : Membership Structure Finance Directory. West Orange NJ : Industrial Relations Data Information Services Weil David. Building Safety : The Role of Construction Unions in Enforcement of OSHA. Journal of Labor Research ( ) : Western Bruce and Jake Rosenfeld. Unions Norms and the Rise in U.S. Wage Inequality. American Sociological Review ( ) : World Top Income Database ( WTID ) The World Top Incomes Database. Alvaredo Facundo Tony Atkinson Thomas Piketty Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman. Accessed January Chapter Ball Laurence and Sandeep Mazumder. Inflation Dynamics and the Great Recession. International Monetary Fund Working Paper WP/11/121 Been Vicki Ingrid Gould Ellen Michael Gedal Edward Glaeser and Brian J. McCabe. Preserving History or Hindering Growth ? The Heterogeneous Effects of Historic Districts on Local Housing Markets in New York City. National Bureau of Economics Working Paper No. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement. December Bricker Jesse Lisa Dettling Alice Henriques Joanne Hsu Kevin Moore John Sabelhaus Jeffrey Thompson Richard Windle Sebastian Devlin-Foltz and Jacob Krimmel. Changes in U.S. Family Finances from to : Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances. Federal Reserve Bulletin ( ) Brynjolfsson Erik and JooHee Oh. The Attention Economy : Measuring the Value of Free Digital Services on the Internet. Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on Information Systems Economics and Value of IS. Orlando. December Chetty Raj Nathaniel Hendren Patrick Kline and Emmanuel Saez. Where is the Land of Opportunity ? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : References | Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) 2013a. Macroeconomic Effects of Alternative Budgetary Paths. ______. 2013b. The Economic Impact of S. the Border Security Economic Opportunity and Immigration Modernization Act. ______. A Macroeconomic Analysis of the President s Budget. Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) Economic Report of the President. ______. The All-of-the-Above Energy Strategy as a Path to Sustainable Economic Growth. ______. 2015a. A Better Measure of Economic Growth : Gross Domestic Output ( GDO ) ______. 2015b. Economic Report of the President. ______. 2015c. Explaining the U.S. Petroleum Consumption Surprise. ______. 2015d. Long-Term Interest Rates : A Survey. Decker Ryan John Haltiwanger Ron Jarmin and Javier Miranda. The Role of Entrepreneurship in US Job Creation and Economic Dynamism. Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : ______. Forthcoming. Changing Business Dynamism : Volatility of vs Responsiveness to Shocks ? American Economic Review Engen Eric Thomas Laubach and Dave Reifschneider. The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve s Unconventional Monetary Policies. Finance and Economics Discussion Series Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System European Commission. Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership : The Economic Analysis Explained. Fieller E.C. Some Problems in Interval Estimation. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society ( ) : Gudell Svenja. Q3 Negative Equity : Still Coming Down Still Messing Things Up. Zillow Briefs Negative Equity. December Glaeser Edward L. and Bryce A. Ward. The Causes and Consequences of Land Use Regulation : Evidence from Greater Boston. Journal of Urban Economics ( ) : | References Glaeser Edward L. Joseph Gyourko and Raven Saks. Why Have Housing Prices Gone Up ? American Economic Review ( ) : Goodman Laurie Rolf Pendall and Jun Zhu. Headship and Homeownership : What Does the Future Hold ? Washington : Urban Institute Gyourko Joseph Albert Saiz and Anita Summers. A New Measure of the Local Regulatory Environment for Housing Markets : The Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index. Urban Studies ( ) : Gyourko Joseph and Raven Molloy. Regulation and Housing Supply. In Gilles Duranton J. Vernon Henderson and William C. Strange eds. Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics : Volume 5B. Amsterdam San Diego and Oxford : Elsevier Science Hamilton James D. What is an Oil Shock ? Journal of Econometrics ( ) : Hatzius Jan and Kris Dawsey. Doing the Sums on Productivity Paradox v2.0. US Economics Research Issue 15/30. New York : Goldman Sachs Hsieh Chang-Tai and Enrico Moretti. Why Do Cities Matter ? Local Growth and Aggregate Growth. National Bureau of Economics Working Paper No. Ihrig Jane Elizabeth Klee Canlin Li Brett Schulte and Min Wei. Expectations about the Federal Reserve s Balance Sheet and the Term Structure of Interest Rates. Finance and Economics Discussion Affairs Series Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) World Economic Outlook October : Legacies Clouds Uncertainties. Washington ______. World Economic Outlook October : Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices. Washington Joint Center for Housing Studies. The State of the Nation s Housing. Cambridge MA : Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University Kilian Lutz. Oil Price Shocks : Causes and Consequences. Annual Review of Resource Economics ( ) : References | Kocin Paul J. and Louis Uccellini. A Snowfall Impact Scale Derived from Northeast Storm Snowfall Distributions. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society ( ) : McCulla Stephanie H. and Shelly Smith. The Annual Revision of the National Income and Product Accounts. Survey of Current Business ( ) : Molloy Raven Christopher L. Smith and Abigail Wozniak. Internal Migration in the United States. Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : Moulton Brent. Harmonizing BEA s Measures of GDP GDI and Value Added : Update Session. Presentation at the Bureau of Economic Analysis Advisory Committee. May Nakamura Leonard I. and Rachel H. Soloveichik. Valuing Free Media across Countries in GDP. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper NIPA Handbook. Concepts and Methods of the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts. Methodology Papers National Accounts ( February ) Bureau of Economic Analysis Nordhaus William D. Principles of National Accounting for NonMarket Accounts. In Dale Jorgenson J. Steven Landefeld and William Nordhaus eds. Architecture for the National Accounts Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Petri Peter A. and Michael G. Plummer. The Economic Effects of the Trans-Pacific Partnership : New Estimates. Working Paper Series WP Washington : Peterson Institute for International Economics Polivka Anne E. Stephen M. Miller. The CPS after the Redesign : Refocusing the Economic Lens. In John Haltiwanger Marilyn E. Manser and Robert Topel eds. Labor Statistics Measurement Issues. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Sahm Claudia. Why Have Americans Income Expectations Declined So Sharply ? Finance and Economics Discussion Series Notes September Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Staiger Douglas James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson. How Precise are Estimates of the Natural Rate of Unemployment ? In Christina | References Romer and David Romer eds. Reducing Inflation : Motivation and Strategy. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Summers Lawrence H. Reflections on Secular Stagnation. Keynote Address at Julius-Rabinowitz Center Princeton University. Princeton NJ. February Varian Hal. Economic Value of Google to US Advertisers and Customers. Keynote Address at the Web Expo Conference. San Francisco. March Vidangos Ivan. Deleveraging and Recent Trends in Household Debt. Finance and Economics Discussion Series Notes April Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Yellen Janet. The Federal Reserve s Asset Purchase Program. Speech at the Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting Brimmer Policy Forum. Denver. January Chapter Bacchetta Philippe and Eric van Wincoop. Explaining Sudden Spikes in Global Risk. Journal of International Economics ( ) : B n trix Agust n Philip Lane and Jay Shambaugh. International Currency Exposures Valuation Effects and the Global Financial Crisis. Journal of International Economics ( S1 ) : S98 S109 Borio Claudio. The Financial Cycle and Macroeconomics : What have we learnt ? Journal of Banking & Finance ( ) : Brunnermeier Markus. Asset Pricing Under Asymmetric Information : Bubbles Crashes Technical Analysis and Herding. Oxford UK : Oxford University Press Conference Board Total Economy Database. Productivity Brief Summary Tables : Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) 2015a. Economic Report of the President. ______. 2015b. The Economic Benefits of U.S. Trade. Eichengreen Barry Donghyun Park and Kwanho Shin. The Global Productivity Slump : Common and Country-Specific Factors. National Bureau of Economics Working Paper No. References | Fajgelbaum Pablo and Amit Khandelwal. Measuring the Unequal Gains from Trade. National Bureau of Economics Working Paper No. International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) World Economic Outlook September : The Global Demographic Transition. Washington ______. World Economic Outlook September : Slowing Growth Rising Risks. Washington ______. World Economic Outlook October : Coping with High Debt and Sluggish Growth. Washington ______. World Economic Outlook October : Transitions and Tensions. Washington ______. World Economic Outlook October : Legacies Clouds Uncertainties. Washington ______. 2015a. Global Financial Stability Report Vulnerabilities Legacies and Policy Challenges : Risks Rotating to Emerging Markets. Washington ______. 2015b. Macroeconomic Developments and Prospects in LowIncome Developing Countries : International Monetary Fund Policy Papers Series. Washington ______. 2015c. Regional Economic Outlook Sub-Saharan Africa : Navigating Headwinds. Washington ______. 2015d. World Economic Outlook October : Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices. Washington ______. World Economic Outlook Update January : Subdued Demand Diminished Prospects. Washington Jord scar Moritz Schularick and Taylor Alan. Financial Crises Credit Booms and External Imbalances : Years of Lessons. International Monetary Fund Economic Review ( ) : ______. When Credit Bites Back. Journal of Money Credit and Banking ( S2 ) : Kalwij Adriaan. The Impact of Family Policy Expenditure on Fertility in Western Europe. Demography ( ) : Karam Philippe Dirk Muir Joana Pereira and Anita Tuladhar. Beyond Retirees. Finance and Development ( ) : | References Kohsaka Akira. Aging and Economic Growth in the Pacific Region Abingdon Oxon : Routledge M hleisen Martin and Hamid Faruqee. Japan : Population Aging and the Fiscal Challenge. Finance and Development ( ) Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. OECD Economic Outlook. OECD Economic Outlook ( ) Paris : OECD Publishing ______. OECD Economic Outlook. OECD Economic Outlook ( ) Paris : OECD Publishing Petri Peter A. and Michael G. Plummer. The Economic Effects of the Trans-Pacific Partnership : New Estimates. Working Paper No Washington : Peterson Institute for International Economics Riker David. Do Jobs In Export Industries Still Pay More ? And Why ? Manufacturing and Services Economics Brief No. U.S Department of Commerce International Trade Association ______. Export-Intensive Industries Pay More on Average : An Update. Journal of International Commerce and Economics ( ) Riker David and Brandon Thurner. Weekly Earnings in ExportIntensive U.S. Services Industries. Manufacturing and Services Economics Brief No. U.S. Department of Commerce International Trade Association Scharfstein David and Jeremy Stein. Herd Behavior and Investment. The American Economic Review ( ) : U.S. Census Bureau. Ownership Characteristics of Classifiable U.S Exporting Firms : Survey of Business Owners Special Report Issue June Veldkamp Laura. Information Markets and the Comovement of Asset Price. The Review of Economic Studies ( ) : ______. Information Choice in Macroeconomics and Finance. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press Wong Chack-Kie Kwong-Leung Tang and Shengquan Ye. The Perceived Importance of Family-Friendly Policies to Childbirth Decision among Hong Kong Women. International Journal of Social Welfare ( ) : References | World Bank. Global Economic Prospects : Spillovers amid Weak Growth. Washington Chapter Acevedo-Garcia Dolores and Kimberly A. Lochner. Residential Segregation and Health. In Ichiro Kawachi and Lisa F. Berkman eds. Neighborhoods and Health. New York : Oxford University Press Adhvaryu Achyuta James Fenske and Anant Nyshadham. Early Life Circumstance and Adult Mental Health. University of Oxford Department of Economics Discuss Paper Series ISSN Administration for Children and Families. Home Visiting Program Model Effects. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Aizer Anna and Janet Currie. The Intergenerational Transmission of Inequality : Maternal Disadvantage and Health at Birth. Science : Aizer Anna Laura Stroud and Stephen Buka. Forthcoming. Maternal Stress and Child Outcomes : Evidence from Siblings. Journal of Human Resources Aizer Anna Shari Eli Joseph Ferrie and Adriana Lleras-Muney. Forthcoming. The Long Term Impact of Cash Transfers to Poor Families. American Economic Review Almond Douglas and Bhashkar Mazumder. Health Capital and the Prenatal Environment : The Effect of Ramadan Observance during Pregnancy. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics ( ) : Almond Douglas and Janet Currie. Killing Me Softly : The Fetal Origins Hypothesis. Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : Almond Douglas Hilary Hoynes and Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach Inside the War on Poverty : The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes. The Review of Economics and Statistics ( ) : Almond Douglas Kenneth Y. Chay and Michael Greenstone. Civil Rights the War on Poverty and Black-White Convergence in | References Infant Mortality in the Rural South and Mississippi. MIT Department of Economics Working Paper American Correctional Association. Directory of Adult and Juvenile Correctional Facilities. Anderson Michael L. Multiple Inference and Gender Differences in the Effects of Early Intervention : A Reevaluation of the Abecedarian Perry Preschool and Early Training Projects. Journal of the American Statistical Association ( ) : Autor David David Figlio Krzysztof Karbownik Jeffrey Roth and Melanie Wasserman. Family Disadvantage and the Gender Gap in Behavioral and Educational Outcomes. Institute for Policy Research at Northwestern University Working Paper ______. School Quality and the Gender Gap in Educational Achievement. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No Baker Michael Jonathan Gruber and Kevin Milligan. Universal Child Care Maternal Labor Supply and Family Well-Being. Journal of Political Economy ( ) : ______. Non-Cognitive Deficits and Young Adult Outcomes : The Long-Run Impacts of a Universal Child Care Program. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Barnett W. Steven. Lives in the Balance : Age-27 Benefit-Cost Analysis of the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program. Ypsilanti : High/Scope Press Barnett W. Steven and Leonard N. Masse. Comparative Benefit-Cost Analysis of the Abecedarian Program and its Policy Implications. Economics of Education Review ( ) : Bartik Timothy J. William Gormley and Shirley Adelstein. Earnings Benefits of Tulsa s Pre-K Program for Different Income Groups. Economics of Education Review ( ) : Bartik Timothy J. From Preschool to Prosperity : The Economic Payoff to Early Childhood Education. Kalamazoo : W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research Becker Gary S. Investment in Human Capital : A Theoretical Analysis. Journal of Political Economy ( ) : References | Belfield Clive R. Milagros Nores Steve Barnett and Lawrence Schweinhart The High/Scope Perry Preschool Program Cost Benefit Analysis Using Data from the Age-40 Follow-Up. Journal of Human Resources ( ) : Ben-Porath Yoram. The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earnings. Journal of Political Economy ( ) : Bernal Raquel and Michael P. Keane. Child Care Choices and Children s Cognitive Achievement : The Case of Single Mothers. Journal of Labor Economics ( ) : Berquin P. C. J. N. Giedd L. K. Jacobsen S. D. Hamburger A. L. Krain J L. Rapoport and F. X. Castellanos. Cerebellum in AttentionDeficit Hyperactivity Disorder : A Morphometric MRI Study. Neurology ( ) : Bertrand Marianne and Jessica Pan. The Trouble with Boys : Social Influences and the Gender Gap in Disruptive Behavior. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics ( ) : Billings Stephen B. David J. Deming and Jonah Rockoff. School Segregation Educational Attainment and Crime : Evidence from the End of Busing in Charlotte-Mecklenburg. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Bitler Marianne P. Hilary W. Hoynes and Thurston Domina. Experimental Evidence on Distributional Effects of Head Start. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Bitler Marianne P. and Janet Currie. Does WIC Work ? The Effects of WIC on Pregnancy and Birth Outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management ( ) : Black Sandra E. Do Better Schools Matter ? Parental Valuation of Elementary Education. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Black Sandra E. Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes. From the Cradle to the Labor Market ? The Effect of Birth Weight on Adult Outcomes. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : ______. Does Grief Transfer across Generations ? Bereavements during Pregnancy and Child Outcomes. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics ( ) : | References Black Sandra E. Paul J. Devereux Katrine V. L ken and Kjell G. Salvanes Care or Cash ? The Effect of Child Care Subsidies on Student Performance. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Black Sandra E. Paul J. Devereux Petter Lundborg and Kaveh Majlesi Poor Little Rich Kids ? The Determinants of the Intergenerational Transmission of Wealth. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Brooks-Gunn Jeanne C.M. McCarton P.H. Casey M.C. McCormick C.R Bauer J.C. Bernbaum J. Tyson M. Swanson F.C. Bennett D.T Scott J.T. Tonascia and C.L. Meinert. Early Intervention in Low-Birth-Weight Premature Infants : Results through Age Years from the Infant Health and Development Program. Journal of the American Medical Association ( ) : Brown David W. Amanda E. Kowalski and Ithai Z. Lurie. Medicaid as an Investment in Children : What is the Long-term Impact on Tax Receipts ? National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Campbell Frances A. and Craig T. Ramey. Cognitive and School Outcomes for High-Risk African-American Students at Middle Adolescence : Positive Effects of Early Intervention. American Educational Research Journal ( ) : Campbell Frances A. Elizabeth P. Pungello Shari Miller-Johnson Margaret Burchinal and Craig T. Ramey. The Development of Cognitive and Academic Abilities : Growth Curves From an Early Childhood Educational Experiment. Developmental Psychology ( ) : Campbell Frances A. Elizabeth P. Pungello Kirsten Kainz Margaret Burchinal Yi Pan Barbara H. Wasik Oscar Barbarin Joseph J Sparling and Craig T. Ramey. Adult Outcomes as a Function of an Early Childhood Educational Program : An Abecedarian Project Follow-Up. Developmental Psychology ( ) : Campbell Frances A. Gabriella Conti James J. Heckman Seong Hyeok Moon Rodrigo Pinto Elizabeth Pungello and Yi Pan. Early Childhood Investments Substantially Boost Adult Health. Science ( ) : References | Campbell Jennifer A. Rebekah J. Walker and Leonard E. Egede. Associations between Adverse Childhood Experiences High-Risk Behaviors and Morbidity in Adulthood. American Journal of Preventive Medicine Card David and Jesse Rothstein. Racial Segregation and the BlackWhite Test Score Gap. Journal of Public Economics ( ) : Carneiro Pedro Claire Crawford and Alissa Goodman. The Impact of Early Cognitive and Non-Cognitive Skills on Later Outcomes. London School of Economics Centre for the Economics of Education Carneiro Pedro and Rita Ginja. Long-Term Impacts of Compensatory Preschool on Health and Behavior : Evidence from Head Start. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy ( ) : Cascio Elizabeth U. and Diane Schanzenbach. The Impacts of Expanding Access to High-Quality Preschool Education. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall : Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Number of Children Tested and Confirmed BLL s > = ug/dL by State Year and BLL Group Children <72 Months Old. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Children. Accessed January https : //www.medicaid.gov/medicaid-chip-programinformation/by-population/children/children.html Chay Kenneth Y. Jonathan Guryan and Bhashkar Mazumder. Birth Cohort and the Black-White Achievement Gap : The Roles of Access and Health Soon After Birth. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Chen Alice Emily Oster and Heidi Williams. Why is Infant Mortality Higher in the US than in Europe ? Working Paper Chetty Raj John N. Friedman and Jonah Rockoff. New Evidence on the Long-Term Impacts of Tax Credits. Internal Revenue Service Statistics of Income Working Paper ______. Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II : Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood. American Economic Review ( ) : | References Chetty Raj Nathaniel Hendren Frina Lin Jeremy Majerovitz and Benjamin Scuderi. Childhood Environment and Gender Gaps in Adulthood. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No Chetty Raj Nathaniel Hendren Patrick Kline and Emmanuel Saez. Where is the Land of Opportunity ? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Chetty Raj and Nathaniel Hendren. The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility : Childhood Exposure Effects and County-Level Estimates. Harvard University and National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Chetty Raj Nathaniel Hendren and Lawrence F. Katz. Forthcoming. The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on Children : New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment. American Economic Review Cohen Sheldon Joseph Schwartz Elissa Epel Clemens Kirschbaum Steve Sidney and Teresa Seeman. Socioeconomic Status Race and Diurnal Cortisol Decline in the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults ( CARDIA ) Study. Psychosomatic Medicine : Cohodes Sarah Daniel Grossman Samuel Kleiner and Michael F. Lovenheim. The Effect of Child Health Insurance Access on Schooling : Evidence from Public Insurance Expansions. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Coleman-Jensen Alisha Matthew P. Rabbit Christian Gregory and Anita Singh. Household Food Security in the United States in USDA Economic Research Report No. Coleman John and Leo Hendry. The Nature of Adolescence Routledge College Board. Average Published Undergraduate Charges by Sector Conti Gabriella James J. Heckman and Rodrigo Pinto. The Effects of Two Influential Early Childhood Interventions on Health and Healthy Behaviors. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. References | Council of Economic Advisers. The President s Proposal to Expand the Earned Income Tax Credit. ______. 2015a. The Economics of Early Childhood Investments. ______. 2015b. The Economics of Family-Friendly Workplace Policies. In Economic Report of the President ______. 2015c. Long-Term Benefits of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. Cunha Flavio and James Heckman. The Technology of Skill Formation. American Economic Review ( ) : Cunha Flavio James J. Heckman Lance Lochner and Dimitriy V. Masterov Interpreting the Evidence on Life Cycle Skill Formation. In Handbook of the Economics of Education. 26th ed. Vol. Elsevier B.V. Currie Janet and Duncan Thomas. School Quality and the LongerTerm Effects of Head Start. Journal of Human Resources ( ) : Currie Janet. Early Childhood Education Programs. Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : Currie Janet and Enrico Moretti. Mother s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital : Evidence from College Openings. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Currie Janet and Ishita Rajani. Within-Mother Estimates of the Effects of the WIC on Birth Outcomes in New York City. Economic Inquiry ( ) : Currie Janet and Maya Rossin-Slater. Early-Life Origins of Lifecycle Wellbeing : Research and Policy Implications. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management ( ) : Cutler David M. and Edward L. Glaeser. Are Ghettos Good or Bad ? The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Dahl Gordon B. and Lance Lochner. The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement : Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Review ( ) : | References Deming David. Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development : Evidence from Head Start. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics ( ) : Dickerson Niki T. Black Employment Segregation and the Social Organization of Metropolitan Labor Markets. Economic Geography ( ) : Dobbie Will and Roland G. Fryer Jr. Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase Achievement Among the Poor ? Evidence from the Harlem Children s Zone. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics ( ) : Dodge Kenneth A Benjamin Goodman Robert A. Murphy Karen O Donnell and Jeannine Sato. Randomized Controlled Trial of Universal Postnatal Nurse Home Visiting : Impact on Emergency Care. Pediatrics ( ) : S140-S146 Duncan Greg J. and Aaron J. Sojourner. Can Intensive Early Childhood Intervention Programs Eliminate Income-Based Cognitive and Achievement Gaps ? Presented for Legislative Leadership Institute Duncan Greg J. Ariel Kalil and Kathleen M. Ziol-Guest. Parent Income-Based Gaps in Schooling Earnings and Family Income : Cross-Cohort Trends in the NLSYs and the PSID. Working Paper Duncan Greg J. Kathleen M. Ziol-Guest and Ariel Kalil. EarlyChildhood Poverty and Adult Attainment Behavior and Health. Child Development ( ) : Duncan Greg J. and Katherine Magnuson. Introduction : The American Dream Then and Now. In Duncan Greg J. and Richard H Murnane eds. Whither Opportunity ? Rising Inequality Schools and Children s Life Chances. New York : Russell Sage Foundation. ______. Investing in Preschool Programs. Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : Duncan Greg J. Katherine Magnuson and Elizabeth Votruba-Drzal. Boosting Family Income to Promote Child Development. Future of Children ( ) : Duncan Greg J. and Richard J. Murnane. Whither Opportunity ? Rising Inequality Schools and Children s Life Chances. New York : Russell Sage Foundation References | Eissa Nada and Jeffrey B. Liebman. Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Eissa Nada and Hilary Hoynes. Redistribution and Tax Expenditures : The Earned Income Tax Credit. National Tax Journal ( ) : Evans Gary W. and Michelle A. Schamberg. Childhood poverty chronic stress and adult working memory. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the United States of America ( ) : Falk Gene and Margot L. Crandall-Hollick. The Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) : An Overview. Congressional Research Service Falk Gene. The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families ( TANF ) Block Grant : Responses to Frequently Asked Questions. Congressional Research Service Felitti Vincent J. Robert F. Anda Dale Nordenberg David F. Williamson Alison M. Spitz Valerie Edwards Mary P. Koss and James S Marks. Relationship of Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction to Many of the Leading Causes of Death in Adults : The Adverse Childhood Experiences ( ACE ) Study. American Journal of Preventive Medicine ( ) : Figlio David Jonathan Guryan Krzysztof Karbownik and Jeffrey Roth The Effects of Poor Neonatal Health on Children s Cognitive Development. American Economic Review ( ) : Fitzpatrick Maria D. Starting School at Four : The Effect of Universal Pre-Kindergarten on Children s Academic Achievement. The B.E Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy ( ) Flaherty E.G. R. Thompson H. Dubowitz E.M. Harvey D.J. English M.D Everson L.J. Proctor and D.K. Runyan. Adverse Childhood Experiences and Child Health in Early Adolescence. Journal of the American Medical Association Pediatrics ( ) : Fryer Roland G. Jr. Injecting Charter School Best Practices into Traditional Public Schools : Evidence from Field Experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : | References Fryer Ronald G. Jr. and Steven D. Levitt. Testing for Racial Differences in the Mental Ability of Young Children. American Economic Review ( ) : Gassman-Pines Anna and Laura E. Bellows. The Timing of SNAP Benefit Receipt and Children s Academic Achievement. Association of Public Policy Analysis and Management Fall Conference Miami FL Gennetian Lisa Roopa Seshadri Nathan Hess Aaron Winn and Robert George. Food Stamp Benefit Cycles and Student Disciplinary Infractions. Working Paper Georgieff Michael K. Nutrition and the Developing Brain : Nutrient Priorities and Measurement. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition ( ) : Gormley William T. Jr. and Ted Gayer. Promoting School Readiness in Oklahoma : An Evaluation of Tulsa s Pre-K Program. Journal of Human Resources ( ) : Gormley William T. Jr. Ted Gayer Deborah Phillips and Brittany Dawson The Effects of Universal Pre-K on Cognitive Development. Developmental Psychology ( ) : Gothro Andrew and Carole Trippe. Multiple Benefit Receipt among Individuals Receiving Food Assistance and Other Government Assistance. Mathematica Policy Research Green B. L. C. Ayoub J. Dym-Bartlett A. VonEnde C. J. Furrer R Chazan-Cohen C. Vallotton and J. Klevens. The effect of Early Head Start on child welfare system involvement : A first look at longitudinal child maltreatment outcomes. Children and Youth Services Review : Gross Ruth T. Donna Spiker and Christine W. Haynes. Helping Low Birth Weight Premature Babies : The Infant Health and Development Program. Stanford University Press Halle Tamara Nicole Forry Elizabeth Hair Kate Perper Laura Wandner Julia Wessel and Jessica Vick. Disparities in Early Learning and Development : Lessons from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study Birth Cohort ( ECLS-B ) Publication No. Washington DC : Child Trends References | Hastings Justine S. and Ebonya Washington. The First of the Month Effect : Consumer Behavior and Store Responses. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy ( ) : Havnes Tarjei and Magne Mogstad. No Child Left Behind : Subsidized Child Care and Children s Long-Run Outcomes. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy ( ) : Health Resources and Services Administration. Prenatal Care Utilization. Child Health USA U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Heckman James J. Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged Children. Science ( ) : Heckman James J. David Olds Rodrigo Pinto and Maria Rosales. A Reanalysis of the Nurse Family Partnership Program : The Memphis Randomized Control Trial. University of Chicago Center for the Economics of Human Development Heckman James J. Jora Stixrud and Sergio Urzua. The Effects of Cognitive and Noncognitive Abilities on Labor Market Outcomes and Social Behavior. Journal of Labor Economics ( ) : Heckman James J. Seong Hyeok Moon Rodrigo Pinto Peter A. Savelyev and Adam Yavitz. The Rate of Return to the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public Economics ( ) : Herbst Chris M. The Labor Supply Effects of Child Care Costs and Wages in the Presence of Subsidies and the Earned Income Tax Credit. Review of Economics of the Household ( ) : ______. Universal Child Care Maternal Employment and Children s Long-Run Outcomes : Evidence from the U.S. Lanham Act of IZA Discussion Paper No. Herbst Chris M. and Erdal Tekin. The Impact of Child Care Subsidies on Child Well-being : Evidence from Geographic Variation in the Distance to Social Service Agencies. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. ______. Child Care Subsidies Maternal Health and Child-Parent Interactions : Evidence from Three Nationally Representative Datasets. Health Economics ( ) : | References Hill Carolyn William Gormley and Shirley Adelstein. Do the ShortTerm Effects of a High-Quality Preschool Program Persist ? Early Childhood Research Quarterly : Hillis Susan D. Robert F. Anda Shanta R. Dube Vincent J. Felitti Polly A Marchbanks and James S. Marks. The Association Between Adverse Childhood Experiences and Adolescent Pregnancy LongTerm Psychosocial Consequences and Fetal Death. Pediatrics ( ) : Hoynes Hilary W. Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach and Douglas Almond Forthcoming. Long Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net. American Economic Review Hoynes Hilary W. Doug Miller and David Simon. Income the Earned Income Tax Credit and Infant Health. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy ( ) : Hoynes Hilary W. Marianne Page and Ann Huff Stevens. Can Targeted Transfers Improve Birth Outcomes ? Evidence from the Introduction of the WIC Program. Journal of Public Economics ( ) : Internal Revenue Service. Individual Income Tax Returns Statistics of Income Publication ( Rev. ) Isaacs Julia B. Starting School at a Disadvantage : The School Readiness of Poor Children. Brookings Social Genome Project Research ( ) : Isen Adam Maya Rossin-Slater and W. Reed Walker. Forthcoming. Every Breath You Take Every Dollar You ll Make : The Long-Term Consequences of the Clean Air Act of Journal of Political Economy Jensen Arthur R. Bias in Mental Testing. New York : Free Press Joyce Ted Diane Gibson and Silvie Colman. The Changing Association between Prenatal Participation in WIC and Birth Outcomes in New York City. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management ( ) : Kalil Ariel. Proposal : Addressing the Parenting Divide to Promote Early Childhood Development for Disadvantaged Children. Hamilton Project Policies to Address Poverty in America References | Kalil Ariel Rebecca Ryan and Michael Corey. Diverging Destinies : Maternal Education and the Developmental Gradient in Time with Children. Demography : Karoly Lynn A. Peter W. Greenwood Susan S. Everingham Jill Houb M. Rebecca Kilburn C. Peter Rydell Matthew Sanders and James Chiesa. Investing in Our Children : What We Know and Don t Know About the Costs and Benefits of Early Childhood Interventions Santa Monica : RAND Kearney Melissa S. and Philip B. Levine. Early Childhood Education by MOOC : Lessons from Sesame Street. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Kilburn M. Rebecca. Evidence on Home Visiting and Suggestions for Implementing Evidence-Based Home Visiting Through MIECHV. RAND Corporation Testimony presented before the House Ways and Means Committee Subcommittee on Human Resources on April Kline Patrick and Christopher Walters. Evaluating Public Programs with Close Substitutes : The Case of Head Start. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Knudsen Eric I. James J. Heckman Judy L. Cameron and Jack P. Shonkoff Economic Neurobiological and Behavior Perspectives on Building America s Future Workforce. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science ( ) : Krueger Alan B. Economic Considerations and Class Size. The Economic Journal ( ) : F34-36 Kunz-Ebrecht Sabine R. Clemens Kirschbaum and Andrew Steptoe Work Stress Socioeconomic Status and Neuroendocrine Activation over the Working Day. Social Science and Medicine : Laughlin Lynda. Who s Minding the Kids ? Child Care Arrangements : Spring Census Bureau Household Economic Studies Lavy Victor Analia Schlosser and Adi Shany. Out of Africa : Human Capital Consequences of In Utero Conditions. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. | References Lefebvre Pierre and Philip Merrigan. Child-Care Policy and the Labor Supply of Mothers with Young Children : A Natural Experiment from Canada. Journal of Labor Economics ( ) : Lefebvre Pierre Philip Merrigan and Matthieu Verstraete. Impact of Early Childhood Care and Education on Children s Preschool Cognitive Development : Canadian Results from a Large Quasiexperiment. CIRPEE Working Paper No. Leventhal Tama and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. The Neighborhoods They Live In : The Effects of Neighborhood Residence on Child and Adolescent Outcomes. Psychological Bulletin ( ) : Lipsey M.W. D.C. Farran and K.G. Hofer. A Randomized Control Trial of the Effects of a Statewide Voluntary Prekindergarten Program on Children s Skills and Behaviors through Third Grade. Peabody Research Institute Research Report Liu Li Ling-Li Zeng Yaming Li Qiongmin Ma Baojuan Li Hui Shen and Dewen Hu. Altered Cerebellar Functional Connectivity with Intrinsic Connectivity Networks in Adults with Major Depressive Disorder. PLoS ONE Love John M. Ellen E. Kisker Christine Ross Jill Constantine Kimberly Boller Rachel Chazan-Cohen Christy Brady-Smith Allison S Fuligni Helen Raikes Jeanne Brooks-Gunn Louisa B. Tarullo Peter Z. Shochet Diane Paulsell and Cheri Vogel. The Effectiveness of Early Head Start for 3-Year-Old Children and Their Parents : Lessons for Policy and Programs. Developmental Psychology ( ) : Love John M. Ellen E. Kisker Christine M. Ross Peter Z. Schochet Jeanne Brooks-Gunn Diane Paulsell Kimberly Boller Jill Constantine Cheri Vogel Allison Sidle Fuligni and Christy Brady-Smith. Making a Difference in the Lives of Infants and Toddlers and Their Families : The Impacts of Early Head Start. Volume I : Final Technical Report. Prepared for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Ludwig Jens and Douglas Miller. Does Head Start Improve Children s Life Chances ? Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Design. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Mani Anandi Sendhil Mullainathan Eldar Shafir and Jiaying Zhao. Poverty Impedes Cognitive Function. Science ( ) : References | Maxfield Michelle. The Effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Child Achievement and Long-Term Educational Achievement. Michigan State University Job Market Paper McCarton C.M. J. Brooks-Gunn I.F. Wallace C.R. Bauer F.C. Bennett J.C. Bernbaum R.S. Broyles P.H. Casey M.C. McCormick D.T Scott J. Tyson J. Tonascia and C.L. Meinert. Results at Age Years of Early Intervention for Low-Birthweight Premature Infants : The Infant Health and Development Program. Journal of the American Medical Association ( ) : McClellan Jack M. Ezra Susser and Mary-Claire King. Maternal Famine De Novo Mutations and Schizophrenia. Journal of the American Medical Association ( ) : McCormick M.C. J. Brooks-Gunn S.L. Buka J. Goldman J. Yu M Salganik D.T. Scott F.C. Bennett L.L. Kay J.C. Bernbaum C.R Bauer C. Martin E.R. Woods MA. Martin and P.H. Casey Early Intervention in Low Birth Weight Premature Infants : Results at Years of Age for the Infant Health and Development Program. Pediatrics ( ) : Meyer Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum. Welfare the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Meyer Bruce D. and Laura R. Wherry. Saving Teens : Using a Policy Discontinuity to Estimate the Effects of Medicaid Eligibility. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Michelmore Katherine. The Effect of Income on Educational Attainment : Evidence from State Earned Income Tax Credit Expansions. Working Paper Miller Sarah and Laura R. Wherry. The Long-Term Effects of Early Life Medicaid Coverage. University of Michigan Working Paper Milligan Kevin and Mark Stabile. Do Child Tax Benefits Affect the Well-Being of Children ? Evidence from Canadian Child Benefit Expansions. American Economic Journal Economic Policy ( ) : Mogreet. Guide to Text Messaging Regulations & Best Practices. National Center for Education Statistics. Public School Revenue Sources. The Condition of Education. U.S. Department of | References Education. Accessed February http : //nces.ed.gov/programs/ coe/indicator_cma.asp National Research Council and Institute of Medicine. From Neurons to Neighborhoods : The Science of Early Childhood Development Committee on Integrating the Science of Early Childhood Development. Jack P. Shonkoff and Deborah A. Phillips eds. Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington DC : National Academy Press National Scientific Council on the Developing Child. The Timing and Quality of Early Experiences Combine to Shape Brain Architecture. Harvard Center on the Developing Child Working Paper No. Neidell Matthew J. Air Pollution Health and Socio-economic Status : The Effect of Outdoor Air Quality on Childhood Asthma. Journal of Health Economics ( ) : Neugebauer Richard Hans Wijbrand Hoek and Ezra Susser. Prenatal Exposure to Wartime Famine and Development of Antisocial Personality Disorder in Early Adulthood. Journal of the American Medical Association ( ) : Nichols Austin and Jesse Rothstein. The Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. Nielsen Eric. The Income-Achievement Gap and Adult Outcome Inequality. Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. Washington DC : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Oden Sherri Lawrence Schweinhart David Weikart Sue Marcus and Yu Xie. Into Adulthood : A Study of the Effects of Head Start. Ypsilanti : High/Scope Press Office of Head Start. Early Head Start Program Facts for Fiscal Year U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Accessed January http : //eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/hslc/tta-system/ehsnrc/ about-ehs # fact Office for Civil Rights. Civil Rights Data Collection : Data Snapshot : School Discipline. U.S. Department of Education References | Olds David John Eckenrode Charles R. Henderson Harriet Kitzman Jane Powers Robert Cole Kimberly Sidora Pamela Morris Lisa M. Pettit and Dennis Luckey. Long-term Effects of Home Visitation on Maternal Life Course and Child Abuse and Neglect : Fifteen-Year Follow-up of a Randomized Trial. Journal of the American Medical Association ( ) : Olds David Charles R. Henderson Jr. Robert Cole John Eckenrode Harriet Kitzman Dennis Luckey Lisa Pettitt Kimberly Sidora Pamela Morris and Jane Powers. Long-term Effects of Nurse Home Visitation on Children s Criminal and Antisocial Behavior : 15-Year Follow-up of a Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of the American Medical Association ( ) : Persson Petra and Maya Rossin-Slater. Family Ruptures Stress and the Mental Health of the Next Generation. Working Paper Puma Michael Stephen Bell Ronna Cook Camilla Heid Pam Broene Frank Jenkins Andrew Mashburn and Jason Downer. Third Grade Follow-Up to the Head Start Impact Study : Final Report. Office of Planning Research and Evaluation Report No. Washington DC : U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Ramey Craig T. and Frances A. Campbell. Preventive Education for High-Risk Children : Cognitive Consequences of the Carolina Abecedarian Project. American Journal of Mental Deficiency : Ramey Garey and Valerie A. Ramey. The Rug Rat Race. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring : Rawlings Lynette. Understanding the Environmental Contexts of Boys and Young Men of Color. Urban Institute Reardon Sean F. The Widening Academic Achievement Gap between the Rich and the Poor : New Evidence and Possible Explanations. In Duncan Greg J. and Richard H. Murnane eds. Whither Opportunity ? Rising Inequality Schools and Children s Life Chances. New York : Russell Sage Foundation. Reyes Jessica W. 2015a. Lead Exposure and Behavior : Effects on Antisocial and Risky Behavior among Children and Adolescents. Economic Inquiry ( ) : ______. 2015b. Lead Policy and Academic Performance : Insights from Massachusetts. Harvard Educational Review ( ) : | References Reynolds Arthur J. Majida Mehana and Judy A. Temple. Does Preschool Intervention Affect Children s Perceived Competence ? Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology ( ) : Reynolds Arthur J. Judy A. Temple Dylan L. Robertson and Emily A Mann. Long-term Effects of an Early Childhood Intervention on Educational Achievement and Juvenile Arrest : A 15-Year Follow-up of Low-Income Children in Public Schools. Journal of the American Medical Association ( ) : ______. Age Cost-Benefit Analysis of the Title I Chicago ChildParent Centers. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis ( ) : Reynolds Arthur J. Judy A. Temple Suh-Ruu Ou Irma A. Arteaga and Barry A.B. White. School-Based Early Childhood Education and Age-28 Well-Being : Effects by Timing Dosage and Subgroups. Science ( ) : Rosales Francisco J. J. Steven Reznick and Steven H. Zeisel. Understanding the Role of Nutrition in the Brain & Behavioral Development of Toddlers and Preschool Children : Identifying and Overcoming Methodological Barriers. Nutritional Neuroscience ( ) : Rossin-Slater Maya. WIC in Your Neighborhood : New Evidence on the Impacts of Geographic Access to Clinics. Journal of Public Economics : Schweinhart Lawrence J. Benefits Costs and Explanation of the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program. Presentation at the Meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development Tampa Florida Schweinhart Lawrence J. and David P. Weikart. Effects of the Perry Preschool Program on Youths through Age Journal of Early Intervention ( ) : Schweinhart Lawrence J. Jeanne Montie Zongping Xiang William S Barnett Clive R. Belfield and Milagros Nores. Lifetime Effects : The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study Through Age Ypsilanti : High/Scope Press Shapiro Jesse M. Is There a Daily Discount Rate ? Evidence from the Food Stamp Nutrition Cycle. Journal of Public Economics ( ) : References | Solon Gary. Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States. American Economic Review ( ) : Spaulding Shayne Robert Lerman Harry Holzer and Lauren Eyster. Expanding Economic Opportunity for Young Men and Boys of Color through Employment and Training. Urban Institute Research Report Smith Alex. The Long-Run Effects of Universal Pre-K on Criminal Activity. Working Paper Stoner Rich Maggie L. Chow Maureen P. Boyle Susan M. Sunkin Peter R. Mouton Subhojit Roy Anthony Wynshaw-Boris Sophia A Colamarino Ed S. Lein and Eric Courchesne. Patches of Disorganization in the Neocortex of Children with Autism. New England Journal of Medicine ( ) : Subramanian S. V. Dolores Acevedo-Garcia and Theresa L. Osypuk. Racial Residential Segregation and Geographic Heterogeneity in Black/White Disparity in Poor Self-Rated Health in the US : A Multilevel Statistical Analysis. Social Science and Medicine ( ) : Susser Ezra Richard Neugebauer Hans W Hoek Alan S Brown Shang Lin Daniel Labovitz and Jack M Gorman. Schizophrenia after Prenatal Famine : Further Evidence. Archives of General Psychiatry ( ) : Susser Ezra S. and Shang P. Lin. Schizophrenia after prenatal exposure to the Dutch Hunger Winter of Archives of General Psychiatry ( ) : Sweet Monica A. and Mark I. Appelbaum. Is Home Visiting an Effective Strategy ? A Meta-Analytic Review of Home Visiting Programs for Families with Young Children. Child Development ( ) : Tamis-LeMonda Catherine Jacqueline Shannon Natasha Cabrera and Michael Lamb. Father and Mothers at Play with Their and Year-Olds : Contributions to Language and Cognitive Development. Child Development ( ) : Tax Policy Center. Taxation and the Family : What is the Child Tax Credit ? The Tax Policy Briefing Book | References Temple Judy A. and Arthur J. Reynolds. Benefits and Costs of Investments in Preschool Education : Evidence from the Child Parent Centers and Related Programs. Economics of Education Review ( ) : Thompson Ross. Stress and Child Development. Future of Children ( ) : Todd Jessica E. Revisiting the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program cycle of food intake : Investigating heterogeneity diet quality and a large boost in benefit amounts. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy ( ) : U.S. Census Bureau. School Enrollment : CPS October Table U.S. Department of Agriculture. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) Eligibility. Accessed January http : // www.fns.usda.gov/snap/eligibility U.S. Department of Education. It s Time for Equitable Spending of State and Local Dollars. ______. Public School Expenditures. National Center for Education Statistics ______. IDEA Part B Child Count and Educational Environments Collection. EDFacts Data Warehouse Vallotton C.D. T. Harewood C.A. Ayoub B. Pan A.M. Mastergeorge and H. Brophy-Herb. Buffering Boys and Boosting Girls : The Protectice and Promotive Effects of Early Head Start for Children s Expressive Language in the Context of Parenting Stress. Early Childhood Research Quarterly ( ) : Vernon-Feagans Lynne Margaret Burchinal and Irina Mokrova. Diverging Destinies in Rural America. In P.R. Amato ed. Families in an Era of Increasing Inequality : Diverging Destinies Switzerland : Springer International Vogel Cheri Jeanne Brooks-Gunn Anne Martin and Mary M. Klute Impacts of Early Head Start Participation on Child and Parent Outcomes at Ages and Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development ( ) : Walters Christopher R. Inputs in the Production of Early Childhood Human Capital : Evidence from Head Start. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics ( ) : References | Wherry Laura R. Sarah Miller Robert Kaestner and Bruce D. Meyer. Childhood Medicaid Coverage and Later Life Health Care Utilization. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No Wong Vivian C. Thomas D. Cook W. Steven Barnett and Kwanghee Jung An Effectiveness-Based Evaluation of Five State Pre-Kindergarten Programs. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management ( ) : York Benjamin N. and Susanna Loeb. One Step at a Time : the Effects of an Early Literacy Text Messaging Program for Parents of Preschoolers. Center for Education Policy Analysis Working Paper Zickuhr Kathryn and Aaron Smith. Digital Differences. Pew Research Center Report Chapter Acemoglu Daron Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson. The Rise of Europe : Atlantic Trade Institutional Change and Economic Growth. American Economic Review ( ) : Aghion Philippe Nick Bloom Richard Blundell Rachel Griffith and Peter Howitt. Competition and Innovation : An Inverted-U Relationship. Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Aghion Philippe Richard Blundell Rachel Griffith Peter Howitt and Susanne Prantl. Entry and Productivity Growth : Evidence from Microlevel Panel Data. Journal of the European Economic Association ( ) : Akcigit U. D. Hanley and N. Serrano-Velarde. Back to Basics : Basic Research Spillovers Innovation Policy and Growth. University of Pennsylvania mimeo Amiti Mary and Shang-Jin Wei. Service offshoring and productivity : Evidence from the US. The World Economy ( ) : Arrow Kenneth J. Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Inventions. In The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity : Economic and Social Factors edited by R.R. Nelson Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press | References Atkin David Azam Chaudhry Shamyla Chaudry Amit K. Khandelwal and Eric Verhoogen. Organizational Barriers to Technology Adoption : Evidence from Soccer-Ball Producers in Pakistan. NBER Working Paper Autor David H. Why Are There Still So Many Jobs ? The History and Future of Workplace Automation Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : Autor David H. and David Dorn. The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the US Labor Market. American Economic Review ( ) : Autor David H. Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane. The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change : An Empirical Exploration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( November ) : Aw Bee Yan Mark J. Roberts and Daniel Yi Xu. R&D Investments Exporting and the Evolution of Firm Productivity. American Economic Review ( ) : Balasubramanian Natarajan and Jagadeesh Sivadasan. What Happens When Firms Patent ? New Evidence from U.S. Economic Census Data. Review of Economics and Statistics ( ) : Bartel Ann Casey Ichniowski and Kathryn Shaw. How Does Information Technology Affect Productivity ? Plant-Level Comparisons of Product Innovation Process Improvement and Worker Skills. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Beede David N. Competition Among U.S. Broadband Service Providers. U.S. Department of Commerce Economics and Statistics Administration. http : //www.esa.doc.gov/sites/default/files/ competition-among-us-broadband-service-providers.pdf Black Sandra E. and Lisa M. Lynch. What s the Driving the New Economy ? : The Benefits of Workplace Innovation. The Economic Journal ( ) : Bloom Nicholas Benn Eifert Aprajit Mahajan David McKenzie and John Roberts. Does Management Matter ? Evidence From India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Bloom Nicholas Raffaella Sadun and John Van Reenen. Americans do I.T. Better : US Multinationals and the Productivity Miracle. American Economic Review ( ) : References | Bloom Nicholas Mark Schankerman and John Van Reenen. Identifying Technology Spillovers and Product Market Rivalry. July Econometrica ( ) : Boler Esther Ann Andreas Moxnes and Karen Helene Ulltveit-Moe. R&D International Sourcing and the Joint Impact on Firm Performance. American Economic Review forthcoming Chien Colleen V. Startups and Patent Trolls Stanford Technology Law Review Forthcoming The Conference Board. Total Economy Database. https : //www conference-board.org/data/economydatabase/ Council of Economic Advisers. Economic Report of the President February ______. Economic Report of the President. February ______. 2015a. Economic Report of the President. February ______. 2015b. Mapping the Digital Divide. http : //www.whitehouse.gov/ sites/default/files/wh_digital_divide_issue_brief.pdf Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) Department of Labor and the Department of the Treasury. Occupational Licensing : A Framework for Policymakers. Crafts N.F.R. Steam as a General Purpose Technology : A Growth Accounting Perspective. The Economic Journal ( ) Czernich Nina Oliver Falck Tobias Kretschmer and Ludger Woessmann Broadband Infrastructure and Economic Growth. The Economic Journal ( ) : De Loecker Jan and Pinelopi Koujianou Goldberg. Firm Performance in a Global Market. Annual Review of Economics ( ) : Decker Ryan John Haltiwanger Ron S. Jarmin and Javier Miranda. The Secular Decline in Business Dynamism in the U.S. University of Maryland working paper Education Superhighway. State of the States. A Report on the State of Broadband Connectivity in America s Public Schools. November. http : //cdn.educationsuperhighway.org/assets/sos/full_ report-c2e60c6937930e8ca5cdbf49d45d45c8.pdf Fairlie Robert. Race and the Digital Divide. Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy B.E. Journals. UC Santa Cruz : Department of Economics UCSC. Retrieved from : http : //escholarship.org/uc/item/48h8h99w Feldman Robin and Mark A. Lemley. Do Patent Licensing Demands Mean Innovation ? Iowa Law Review Feuer Alan. On The Waterfront Rise of the Machines. The New York Times. September Field Anne. Enter the Smart Warehouse. June http : //newsroom cisco.com/feature-content ? articleId = Frey Carl Benedikt and Michael A. Osborne. The Future of Employment : How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation ? Oxford Martin Programme on the Impacts of Future Technology Furman Jason. Productivity Growth in the Advanced Economies : The Past the Present and Lessons for the Future. July Remarks given at the Peterson Institute for International Economics Furman Jason and Peter Orszag. A Firm-Level Perspective on the Role of Rents in the Rise in Inequality. Paper presented at Columbia University s A Just Society Centennial Event in Honor of Joseph Stiglitz New York NY Galasso Alberto and Schankerman Mark. Patent Rights and Innovation by Small and Large Firms NBER Working Paper Garcia-Macia Daniel Chang-Tai Hsieh and Peter J. Klenow. How Destructive is Innovation ? Stanford University working paper Garfield Leanna. These Four-foot-tall Robots Could Change the Way Warehouse Workers Do Their Jobs. TechInsider. February Gilson Ronald J. The Legal Infrastructure of High Technology Industrial Districts : Silicon Valley Route and Covenants Not to Compete. New York University Law Review : Goos Maarten Alan Manning and Anna Salomons. Explaining Job Polarization : Routine-Biased Technological Change and Offshoring. American Economic Review ( ) : Gordon Robert J. Is US economic Growth Over ? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds. September. Centre for Economic Policy Research Policy Insight No. Graetz Georg and Guy Michaels. Robots at Work. Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper No. References | Graham Stuart JH Cheryl Grim Tariqul Islam Alan C. Marco and Javier Miranda. Business Dynamics of Innovating Firms : Linking US Patents with Administrative Data on Workers and Firms. US Census Bureau Center for Economic Studies Paper No CES-WP-15-19 Greene Karen. Occupational Licensing and the Supply of Nonprofessional Manpower. Washington DC : Manpower Administration U.S. Department of Labor Griliches Zvi. Productivity R&D and the Basic Research at the Firm Level in the 1970s. American Economic Review ( ) : ______. Patents : Recent Trends and Puzzles. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity : Microeconomics ______. The Search for R&D Spillovers. Scandinavian Journal of Economics ( ) : S29 Grueber Martin and Tim Studt. Global R&D Funding Forecast. December. Battelle Memorial Institute and R&D Magazine Halpern Laszlo Miklos Koren and Adam Szeidl. Imported Inputs and Productivity. American Economic Review forthcoming Hourihan Matt and David Parkes. Omnibus Sets Up Major Boosts for Several Science Agencies. AAAS. December http : //www aaas.org/news/omnibus-sets-major-boosts-several-science-agencies International Federation of Robotics. World Robotics IFR Statistical Department ______. World Robotics IFR Statistical Department Jones Charles I. Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas. American Economic Review ( ) : Jones Charles I. and John C. Williams. Measuring the Social Return to R&D. Quarterly Journal of Economics ( ) : Jorgenson Dale W. and Kevin J. Stiroh. Raising the Speed Limit : U.S Economic Growth in the Information Age. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity ( ) : Keynes John Maynard. Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren. In Essays in Persuasion. London : Macmillan and Co. Ltd | References Kiebzak Stephen Rafert Greg and Tucker Catherine. The Effect of Patent Litigation and Patent Assertion Entities on Entrepreneurial Activity. Research Policy ( ) : King Robert G. and Ross Levine. Finance Entrepreneurship and Growth. Journal of Monetary Economics ( ) : Kleiner Morris M. Are There Economic Rents for More Restrictive Occupational Licensing Practices ? 42nd Annual Proceedings United States : Industrial Relations Research Association ______. Licensing Occupations : Ensuring Quality or Restriction Competition ? W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research Kalamazoo MI : Upjohn Institute Press. http : //dx.doi org/10.17848/9781429454865 Kleiner Morris M. and Alan B. Krueger. Analyzing the Extent and Influence of Occupational Licensing on the Labor Market. Journal of Labor Economics ( ) : S173-S202 Kolko Jed. Broadband and Local Growth. Journal of Urban Economics ( ) : Kuhn Peter and Hani Mansour. Is Internet Job Search Still Ineffective ? The Economic Journal : Lemley Mark A. and A. Douglas Melamed. Missing the Forest for the Trolls. Columbia Law Review ( ) : Manyika James Susan Lund Kelsey Robinson John Valentino and Richard Dobbs. A Labor Market That Works : Connecting Talent With Opportunity In the Digital Age. June. McKinsey Global Institute. http : //www.mckinsey.com/ ~ /media/McKinsey/ dotcom/Insights/Employment % 20and % 20growth/Connecting % talent % 20with % 20opportunity % 20in % 20the % 20digital % 20age/ MGI_Online_talent_A_labor_market_that_works_Full_report_ June_2015.ashx Marx Matt Jasjit Singh and Lee Fleming. Regional Disadvantage ? Employee Non-compete Agreements and Brain Drain. Research Policy ( ) : McKinsey Global Institute. Four Fundamentals of Workplace Automation. McKinsey Quarterly November Available : http : //www.mckinsey.com/insights/business_technology/ four_fundamentals_of_workplace_automation References | Melitz Marc J. The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry Productivity. Econometrica ( ) : Najarzadeh Reza Farzad Rahimzadeh and Michael Reed. Does the Internet Increase Labor Productivity ? Evidence From a CrossCountry Dynamic Panel. Journal of Policy Modeling ( ) : National Science Foundation. Table U.S. R&D Expenditures by Performing Sector Source of Funds and Character of Work : Science and Engineering Indicators National Telecommunications and Information Administration and Economics and Statistics Administration in the U.S. Department of Commerce. Exploring the Digital Nation. America s Emerging Online Experience. June. https : //www.ntia.doc.gov/ files/ntia/publications/exploring_the_digital_nation_-_americas_ emerging_online_experience.pdf Nelson Richard R. The Simple Economics of Basic Scientific Research. Journal of Political Economy ( ) : North Douglass C. and Weingast Barry R. Constitutions and Commitment : The Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England. Journal of Economic History ( ) : OECD. OECD Communications Outlook OECD Publishing http : //dx.doi.org/10.1787/comms_outlook-2013-en ______. Main Science and Technology Indicators. Vol. 2015/1. OECD Publishing. Paris. DOI : http : //dx.doi.org/10.1787/msti-v2015-1-en Oliner Stephen D. and Daniel E. Sichel. Information Technology and Productivity : Where Are We Now and Where Are We Going ? Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review ( Third Quarter ) : Peri Giovanni Kevin Shih and Chad Sparber. Foreign Stem Workers and Native Wages and Employment in U.S. Cities. NBER Working Paper No. Png Ivan PL. Law and Innovation : Evidence from State Trade Secrets Laws. Review of Economics and Statistics forthcoming PricewaterhouseCoopers and National Venture Capital Association Moneytree Report. Q4/2015/full year summary. | References January. https : //www.pwcmoneytree.com/Reports/FullArchive/ National_2015-4.pdf PWC. Patent Litigation Study : Big Cases Make Headlines While Patent Cases Proliferate available at http : //www.pwc.com/ en_US/us/forensic-services/publications/assets/2013-patent-litigation-study.pdf ______. The Sharing Economy. Consumer Intelligence Series available at https : //www.pwc.com/us/en/technology/publications/ assets/pwc-consumer-intelligence-series-the-sharing-economy.pdf Rawley Evan. Diversification Coordination Costs and Organizational Rigidity : Evidence from Microdata. Strategic Management Journal ( ) : Rayle Lisa Susan Shaheen Nelson Chan Danielle Dai and Robert Cervero App-Based On-Demand Ride Services : Comparing Taxi and Ridesourcing Trips and User Characteristics in San Francisco. University of California Transportation Center. http : //www.uctc net/research/papers/UCTC-FR-2014-08.pdf Robb Alicia M. and David T. Robinson. The Capital Structure Decisions of New Firms. Review of Financial Studies ( ) : Romer Paul. New Goods Old Theory and the Welfare Costs of Trade Restrictions. Journal of Development Economics ( ) : RPX. NPE Litigation Report available at http : //www.rpxcorp com/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/RPX-2013-NPE-LitigationReport.pdf ______. NPE Litigation Report available at http : //www rpxcorp.com/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2015/03/RPX_LitigationReport-2014_FNL_040615.pdf Sander Alison and Meldon Wolfgang. The Rise of Robotics. BCG Perspectives. https : //www.bcgperspectives.com/content/articles/ business_unit_strategy_innovation_rise_of_robotics/ Schmitt John Heidi Schierholz and Lawrence Mishel. Don t Blame the Robots. Assessing the Job Polarization Explanation of Growing Wage Inequality. Economic Policy Institute. http : //www.epi.org/ publication/technology-inequality-dont-blame-the-robots/ Scott Morton Fiona and Carl Shapiro. Strategic Patent Acquisitions. Antitrust Law Journal ( ) : References | ______. Patent Assertions : Are We Any Closer to Aligning Rewards to Contribution ? Innovation Policy and the Economy forthcoming Seamans Robert C. Fighting City Hall : Entry Deterrence and Technology Upgrades in Cable TV Markets. Management Science ( ) : Solow Robert M. On Macroeconomic Models of Free-Market Innovation and Growth. In Entrepreneurship Innovation and the Growth Mechanism of the Free-Enterprise Economies edited by Eytan Sheshinski Robert J. Strom and William Baumol. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press Sperling Gene. The Case for a Manufacturing Renaissance. July Remarks given at the Brookings Institution Stevenson Betsey. The Internet and Job Search. NBER Working Paper Sutton John. Competing in Capabilities : The Globalization Process Oxford UK : Oxford University Press Wadhwa Vivek AnnaLee Saxenian Ben A. Rissing and G. Gereffi. America s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs : Part I. Duke Science Technology & Innovation Paper No. Zervas Georgios Davide Proserpio and John Byers. The Rise of the Sharing Economy : Estimating the Impact of Airbnb on the Hotel Industry. Proceedings of the Sixteenth ACM Conference on Economics and Computation Pages Chapter Altman Roger C. Aaron Klein and Alan B. Krueger. Financing U.S Transportation Infrastructure in the 21st Century. The Hamilton Project Discussion Paper The Hamilton Project May Ang Andrew Vineer Bhansali and Yuhang Xing. Build America Bonds. Journal of Fixed Income ( ) : Aschauer David A. Is public expenditure productive ? Journal of Monetary Economics ( ) : Auerbach Alan J. and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. Measuring the Output Responses to Fiscal Policy. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy ( ) : | References Baladi Gilbert Tunwin Svasdisant Thomas Van Neeraj Buch and Karim Chatti. Cost-Effective Preventive Maintenance : Case Studies. Transportation Research Record ( ) : Barth Matthew and Kanok Boriboonsomsin. Real-World Carbon Dioxide Impacts of Traffic Congestion. Transportation Research Record : Journal of the Transportation Research Board : Bom Pedro R. D. and Jenny E. Ligthart. What Have We Learned From Three Decades of Research on the Productivity of Public Capital. Journal of Economic Surveys ( ) : Brueckner Jan K. Airline Traffic and Urban Economic Development. Urban Studies ( ) : Buckberg Elaine Owen Kearney and Neal Stolleman. Expanding the Market for Infrastructure Public-Private Partnerships : Alternative Risk and Profit Sharing Approaches to Align Sponsor and Investor Interests. U.S. Department of the Treasury Office of Economic Policy White Paper April California High-Speed Rail Authority. High-Speed Rail Program Fact Sheets. Chatman Daniel G. and Robert B. Noland. Transit Service Physical Agglomeration and Productivity in US Metropolitan Areas. Urban Studies ( ) : Chen Zhenhua and Kingsley E. Haynes. Regional Impact of Public Transportation Infrastructure : A Spatial Panel Assessment of the U.S. Northeast Megaregion. Economic Development Quarterly ( ) : Christian Thomas J. Trade-Offs Between Commuting Time and Health-Related Activities. Journal of Urban Health : Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine ( ) : Christiano Lawrence Martin Eichenbaum and Sergio Rebelo. When Is the Government Spending Multiplier Large ? Journal of Political Economy ( ) : Cohen Jeffery P. and Catherine J. Morrison Paul. Airport infrastructure spillovers in a network system. Journal of Urban Economics ( ) : References | Congressional Budget Office. Subsidizing Infrastructure Investment with Tax-Preferred Bonds. with the Joint Committee on Taxation October ______. Public Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure to March Council of Economic Advisers. An Economic Analysis of Transportation Infrastructure Investment. July ______. Long-term Interest Rates : A Survey. July Duranton Gilles and Matthew A. Turner. Urban Growth and Transportation. Review of Economic Studies : Duranton Gilles Peter M. Morrow and Matthew A. Turner. Roads and Trade : Evidence from the US. Review of Economic Studies ( ) : Engel Eduardo Ronald Fischer and Alexander Galetovic. PublicPrivate Partnerships to Revamp U.S. Infrastructure. The Hamilton Project Discussion Paper Eggertsson Gauti B. What Fiscal Policy is Effective at Zero Interest Rates ? ed. Daron Acemoglu and Michael Woodford. NBER Macroeconomics Annual : Fischer Stanley. What have we learned from the crises of the last years ? Remarks at the International Monetary Conference Toronto Ontario June Hart Oliver. Incomplete Contracts and Public Ownership : Remarks and an Application to Public-Private Partnerships. The Economic Journal ( ) : C69 C76 Haughwout Andrew F. Regional Fiscal Cooperation in Metropolitan Areas : An Exploration. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management ( ) : Hurlin Christophe and Alexandru Minea. Is public capital really productive ? A methodological reappraisal. European Journal of Operational Research ( ) : Hymel Kent. Does traffic congestion reduce employment growth ? Journal of Urban Economics : | References International Monetary Fund. Is it Time for an Infrastructure Push ? The Macroeconomic Effects of Public Investment. World Economic Outlook Chapter October Kalaitzidakis Pantelis and Sarantis Kalyvitis. Financing ` New Public Investment and/or Maintenance in Public Capital for Growth ? The Canadian Experience. Economic Inquiry : Kalyvitis Sarantis and Eugenia Vella. Productivity Effects of Public Capital Maintenance : Evidence from U.S. States. Economic Inquiry ( ) : Kawabata Mizuki. Job Access and Employment among Low-Skilled Autoless Workers in US Metropolitan Areas. Environment and Planning A ( ) : Leduc Sylvain and Daniel Wilson. Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere ? Theory and Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment. NBER Macroeconomics Annual ( ) : Melo Patricia C. Daniel J. Graham and Ruben Brage-Ardao. The productivity of transport infrastructure investment : A meta-analysis of empirical evidence. Regional Science and Urban Economics : Michaels Guy. The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill : Evidence from the Interstate Highway System. Review of Economics and Statistics ( ) : Nadiri M. Ishaq and Theofanis P. Mamuneas. Contribution of Highway Capital to Industry and National Productivity Growth. Report prepared for Federal Highway Administration Office of Policy Development September Natural Resources Defense Council. Summary of Energy and Transportation Provisions in the Economic Recovery Bill. NRDC Legislative Facts December Novaco Raymond W. and Oscar I. Gonzalez. Commuting and well-being. in Technology and Psychology Well-being ( Ed. Yair Amichai-Hamburger ) : Pereira Alfredo M. On the Effects of Public Investment on Private Investment : What Crowds in What ? Public Finance Review ( ) : References | Peshkin David G. Todd E. Hoerner and Kathryn A. Zimmerman. Optimal Timing of Pavement Preventive Maintenance Treatment Applications. National Cooperative Highway Research Program National Transportation Board Report Public Broadcasting Service. State of the Union Address Schrank David Bill Eisele Tim Lomax and Jim Bak. Urban Mobility Scorecard. Texas A&M Transportation Institute and INRIX August Thompson Eric C. and Amitabh Chandra. Economic Impact of Interstate Highways in Kentucky. In Berger Mark C. Glenn C. Blomquist Richward W. Furst and Steven N. Allen ( Eds. ) Kentucky Annual Economic Report : Tong Tingting Tun-Hsiang Edward Yu Seong-Hoon Cho Kimberly Jensen and Daniel De La Torre Ugarte. Evaluating the spatial spillover effects of transportation infrastructure on agricultural output across the United States. Journal of Transport Geography : TRIP. Bumpy Roads Ahead : America s Roughest Rides and Strategies to Make our Roads Smoother. July Urban Land Institute. Infrastructure : A Strategic Priority. With Ernst & Young Washington DC U.S. Government Accountability Office. Surface Transportation : Department of Transportation Should Measure the Overall Performance and Outcomes of the TIGER Discretionary Grant Program. Report to the Ranking Member Committee on Environment and Public Works U.S. Senate GAO-14-766 September U.S. Department of Agriculture. USDA Announces $ Million to be Invested in Renewable Energy Infrastructure through the Biofuel Infrastructure Partnership. October U.S. Department of Transportation. Status of the Nation s Highways Bridges and Transit : Conditions & Performance. U.S Federal Highway Administration Report to Congress ______. 2015a. Freight Facts and Figures Bureau of Transportation Statistics January | References ______. 2015b. Public-Private Partnerships : Project Profiles. U.S. Federal Highway Administration. http : //www.fhwa.dot.gov/ipd/p3/default aspx ______. 2015c. Table : Condition of U.S. Roadways by Functional System. Bureau of Transportation Statistics ______. 2015d. Table : Condition of U.S. Bridges. Bureau of Transportation Statistics ______. 2015e. The Interstate System. U.S. Federal Highway Administration. https : //www.fhwa.dot.gov/highwayhistory/interstate.cfm U.S. Department of the Treasury. Treasury Analysis of Build America Bonds Issuance and Savings. Washington DC : U.S. Department of the Treasury Transportation Research Board. Potential Impacts of Climate Change on U.S. Transportation. Transportation Research Board Special Report National Research Council Washington DC Weikel Dan. Diesel Era Ends for MTA Buses. Los Angeles Times January Chapter Arrow Kenneth. Discussion at CEA. Washington. September Bailey Stephen K. Congress Makes a Law : The Story Behind the Employment Act of New York : Columbia University Press Baily Martin. Interview with the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Washington. August Bernanke Ben S. The Ten Suggestions. Baccalaureate Ceremony Princeton University. Princeton New Jersey. June Blinder Alan S. and Janet L. Yellen. The Fabulous Decade : Macroeconomic Lessons from the 1990s. New York : The Century Foundation Blinder Alan S. and Mark Zandi. How the Great Recession Was Brought to an End. Princeton University and Moody s Analytics Bonafede Dom. Reagan s Economic Advisers Share Task of Shaping and Explaining Reaganomics. National Journal. February Brazelton W. Robert. Retrospectives : The Economics of Leon Hirsch Keyserling. Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : References | ______. Designing U.S. Economic Policy : An Analytical Biography of Leon H. Keyserling. New York : Palgrave Chodorow-Reich Gabriel Laura Feiveson Zachary Liscow and William Gui Woolston. Does State Fiscal Relief During Recessions Increase Employment ? Evidence from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy ( ) : Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) First Annual Report to the President ______. The Economic Report of the President ______. The Economic Report of the President ______. The Economic Report of the President ______. The Economic Report of the President ______. The Economic Report of the President ______. The Economic Report of the President ______. The Economic Report of the President ______. The Economic Report of the President DeLong J. Bradford. Keynesianism Pennsylvania Avenue Style : Some Economic Consequences of the Employment Act of Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : Eizenstat Stuart E. Economists and White House Decisions. Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : Elmendorf Douglas W. Jeffery B. Liebman and David W. Wilcox. Fiscal Policy and Social Security Policy during the 1990s. In Jeffrey Frankel and Peter R. Orszag eds. American Economic Policy in the 1990s. Cambridge : MIT Press. Employment Act of Pub. L. ch. Sec. Stat. Engelbourg Saul. The Council of Economic Advisers and the Recession of Business History Review ( ) : Feldstein Martin ed. How the CEA Advises Presidents. Challenge ( ) : ______. The Council of Economic Advisers and Economic Advising in the United States. The Economic Journal ( ) : | References ______. American Economic Policy in the 1980s. Chicago : The University of Chicago Press Flash Edward S. Jr. Economic Advice and Presidential Leadership : The Council of Economic Advisers. New York : Columbia University Press Frankel Jeffrey. What an Economic Adviser Can Do When He Disagrees with the President. Challenge ( ) : Frankel Jeffrey and Peter R. Orszag eds. American Economic Policy in the 1990s. Cambridge : MIT Press Furman Jason. It Could Have Happened Here : The Policy Response That Helped Prevent a Second Great Depression. Speech at Macroeconomic Advisers 25th Annual Washington Policy Seminar Washington. September ______. Productivity Growth in the Advanced Economies : The Past the Present and Lessons for the Future. Speech at Peterson Institute for International Economics. Washington. July Galbraith James K. The Council of Economic Advisers Report : A Review. Challenge ( ) : ______. Economic Report of the President : A Review. Challenge ( ) : Genovese Michael A. The Presidency and Styles of Economic Management. Congress & The Presidency ( ) : Gross Betram M. and John P. Lewis. The President s Economic Staff During the Truman Administration. The American Political Science Review ( ) : Hahn Robert W. and Robert N. Stavins. National Environmental Policy During the Clinton Years. In Jeffrey Frankel and Peter R Orszag eds. American Economic Policy in the 1990s. Cambridge : MIT Press. Hargrove Erwin C. and Samuel A. Morley eds. The President and the Council of Economic Advisers : Interviews with CEA Chairmen Boulder CO : Westview Press Hubbard R. Glenn. Comments. In Jeffrey Frankel and Peter R Orszag eds. American Economic Policy in the 1990s. Cambridge : MIT Press. References | Krueger Alan B. Honest Brokers Separate Policy from Sausage for the White House. The New York Times. November Mankiw NG. Remarks at the Conference of State Bank Supervisors : State Banking Summit and Leadership Conference. Washington November Mills Geofrey T. Introduction. In Robert Sobel and Bernard S. Katz eds. Biographical Directory of the Council of Economic Advisers Westport CT : Greenwood Press Naveh David. The Political Role of Academic Advisers : The Case of the U.S. President s Council of Economic Advisers Presidential Studies Quarterly ( ) : Niskanen William A. Out of the Trenches : Economists and Politicians. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management ( ) : Norton Hugh S. The Employment Act and the Council of Economic Advisers Columbia : University of South Carolina Press Nourse Edwin G. Economics in the Public Service : Administrative Aspects of the Employment Act. New York : Harcourt Brace and Company Orszag Jonathan M. Peter R. Orszag and Laura D. Tyson. The Process of Economic Policy-Making During the Clinton Administration. In Jeffrey Frankel and Peter R. Orszag eds. American Economic Policy in the 1990s. Cambridge : MIT Press. Porter Roger B. Presidential Decision Making : The Economic Policy Board. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ______. Economic Advice to the President : From Eisenhower to Reagan. Political Science Quarterly ( ) : ______. The Council of Economic Advisers. In Colin Campbell and Margaret Jane Wyszomirski eds. Executive Leadership in AngloAmerican Systems. Pittsburgh : University of Pittsburgh Press ______. Presidents and Economists : The Council of Economic Advisers. American Economic Review ( ) : Romer Christina D. Back from the Brink. In Asli Demirg -Kunt Douglas D. Evanoff and George G. Kaufman eds. The International Financial Crisis : Have the Rules of Finance Changed ? Singapore : World Scientific Publishing Company. | References Rosen Harvey S. and Kristin J. Forbes. The Economic Outlook. Testimony before the Joint Economic Committee. Washington April Schultze Charles L. The CEA : An Inside Voice for Mainstream Economics. Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : Stein Herbert. Presidential Economics : The Making of Economic Policy from Roosevelt to Reagan and Beyond. Washington : American Enterprise Institute ______. The Washington Economist : What Economic Advisers Do. American Enterprise Institute ______. A Successful Accident : Recollections and Speculations about the CEA. Journal of Economic Perspectives ( ) : ______. The Fiscal Revolution in America : Policy in Pursuit of Reality Washington : American Enterprise Institute Stevenson Betsey. The Role of the Council of Economic Advisers in Bringing Economic Research to Policy Making. Speech at the Federal Reserve. Washington. May Stiglitz Joseph. Looking Out for the National Interest : The Principles of the Council of Economic Advisers. American Economic Review ( ) : The Economist. Ranking CEAs : The best since the 1960s ? Free Exchange. February Tobin James and Murray Weidenbaum eds. Two Revolutions in Economic Policy : The First Economic Reports of Presidents Kennedy and Reagan. Cambridge : MIT Press Tollestrup Jessica. History and Authority of the Joint Economic Committee. Congressional Research Service Tyson Laura D Andrea. From Stagnation to Renewed Growth. Challenge ( ) : Wallich Henry C. The German Council of Economic Advisers in an American Perspective. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics ( ) : Wehrle Edmund F. Guns Butter Leon Keyserling the AFL-CIO and the Fate of Full-Employment Economics. Historian ( ) : References | Weidenbaum Murray L. An Economist in Government : Views of a Presidential Adviser. Contemporary Issues Series Center for the Study of American Business ______. The Role of the President s Council of Economic Advisers : Theory and Reality. Presidential Studies Quarterly ( ) : ______. The Role of the Council of Economic Advisers. The Journal of Economic Education ( ) : ______. The Employment Act of : A Half Century of Presidential Policymaking. Presidential Studies Quarterly ( ) : White Lawrence J. Reforming Regulation : Processes and Problems Englewood Cliffs N.J : Prentice-Hall Inc | References A P P E N D I X A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT ON THE ACTIVITIES OF THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS DURING letter of transmittal Council of Economic Advisers Washington D.C. December Mr. President : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely yours Jason Furman Chairman Sandra E. Black Member Jay C. Shambaugh Member Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L. Smith Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L. Seevers William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel Charles L. Schultze William D. Nordhaus Lyle E. Gramley George C. Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L. Weidenbaum William A. Niskanen Jerry L. Jordan Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July | Appendix A November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date Martin Feldstein William Poole Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore Michael L. Mussa Michael J. Boskin John B. Taylor Richard L. Schmalensee David F. Bradford Paul Wonnacott Laura D Andrea Tyson Alan S. Blinder Joseph E. Stiglitz Martin N. Baily Alicia H. Munnell Janet L. Yellen Jeffrey A. Frankel Rebecca M. Blank Martin N. Baily Robert Z. Lawrence Kathryn L. Shaw R. Glenn Hubbard Mark B. McClellan Randall S. Kroszner N. Gregory Mankiw Kristin J. Forbes Harvey S. Rosen Ben S. Bernanke Katherine Baicker Matthew J. Slaughter Edward P. Lazear Donald B. Marron Christina D. Romer Austan D. Goolsbee Cecilia Elena Rouse Katharine G. Abraham Carl Shapiro Alan B. Krueger James H. Stock Jason Furman Betsey Stevenson Maurice Obstfeld Sandra E. Black Jay C. Shambaugh Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chair Member Member Chairman Member Member Chair Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Chair Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Member Member October December April July August February June October November November February July July June June January February April October August August May May July November May November November February June November November February July January March September March April April November February August August July August August July January January May September January August June January January April June February August August August March July January January January February November July February June June January July March January January September August February April May August May August August Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Council of Economic Advisers was established by the Employment Act of to provide the President with objective economic analysis and advice on the development and implementation of a wide range of domestic and international economic policy issues. The Council is governed by a Chairman and two Members. The Chairman is appointed by the President and confirmed by the United States Senate. The Members are appointed by the President The Chairman of the Council Jason Furman was confirmed by the Senate on August as the 28th Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. Furman has served the President since the beginning of the Administration previously holding the position of Principal Deputy Director of the National Economic Council and Assistant to the President. Immediately prior to the Administration Furman was Economic Policy Director for the President s campaign in and a member of the Presidential Transition Team Furman held a variety of posts in public policy and research before his work with President Obama. In public policy Furman worked at both the Council of Economic Advisers and National Economic Council during the Clinton administration and also at the World Bank. In research Furman was a Senior Fellow at the Brookings Institution and the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities and also has served in visiting positions at various universities including NYU s Wagner Graduate School of Public Policy. Furman has conducted research in a wide range of areas such as fiscal policy tax policy health economics Social Security and domestic and international macroeconomics. In addition to numerous articles in scholarly journals and periodicals Furman is the editor of two books on economic policy. Furman holds a Ph.D. in economics from Harvard University Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | The Members of the Council Sandra E. Black was appointed by the President on August She is on leave from the University of Texas Austin where she holds the Audre and Bernard Rapoport Centennial Chair in Economics and Public Affairs and is a Professor of Economics. She received her B.A. from the University of California Berkeley and her Ph.D. in economics from Harvard University Jay C. Shambaugh was appointed by the President on August He is on leave from George Washington University where he is a Professor of Economics and International Affairs. Dr. Shambaugh received a B.A. from Yale an M.A.L.D. from The Fletcher School at Tufts University and a Ph.D in Economics from the University of California Berkeley Betsey Stevenson resigned as Member of the Council on August to return to the University of Michigan where she is Associate Professor of Public Policy and Economics Maurice Obstfeld resigned as Member of the Council on August to join the International Monetary Fund as Economic Counsellor and Director of Research while on leave from the University of California Berkeley where he is Professor of Economics Areas of Activities A central function of the Council is to advise the President on all economic issues and developments. In the past year as in previous years advising the President on policies to spur economic growth and job creation and evaluating the effects of these policies on the economy have been priorities The Council works closely with various government agencies including the National Economic Council the Office of Management and Budget White House senior staff and other officials and engages in discussions on numerous policy matters. In the area of international economic policy the Council coordinates with other units of the White House the Treasury Department the State Department the Commerce Department and the Federal Reserve on matters related to the global financial system Among the specific economic policy areas that received attention in were : college affordability and quality ; health care cost growth and the Affordable Care Act ; infrastructure investment ; regulatory measures ; trade policies ; poverty and income inequality ; unemployment insurance and the minimum wage ; labor force participation ; job training ; corporate taxation ; regional development ; the economic cost of carbon pollution ; renewable fuel | Appendix A standards ; energy policy ; intellectual property and innovation ; and foreign direct investment. The Council also worked on several issues related to the quality of the data available for assessing economic conditions The Council prepares for the President the Vice President and the White House senior staff a daily economic briefing memo analyzing current economic developments and almost-daily memos on key economic data releases. Chairman Furman also presents a monthly briefing on the state of the economy and the Council s energy analysis to senior White House officials The Council the Department of Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget the Administration s economic troika are responsible for producing the economic forecasts that underlie the Administration s budget proposals. The Council initiates the forecasting process twice each year consulting with a wide variety of outside sources including leading private sector forecasters and other government agencies The Council was an active participant in the trade policy process participating in the Trade Policy Staff Committee and the Trade Policy Review Group. The Council provided analysis and opinions on a range of trade-related issues involving the enforcement of existing trade agreements reviews of current U.S. trade policies and consideration of future policies. The Council also participated on the Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee helping to examine the ways in which exports may support economic growth in the years to come. In the area of investment and security the Council participated on the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States ( CFIUS ) reviewing individual cases before the committee The Council is a leading participant in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) an important forum for economic cooperation among high-income industrial economies. Chairman Furman is chairman of the OECD s Economic Policy Committee and Council Members and staff participate actively in working-party meetings on macroeconomic policy and coordination and contribute to the OECD s research agenda The Council issued a wide range of reports in In February the Council released a report on the use of big data and its effects on differential pricing. That same month CEA analyzed the effects of conflicted investment advice on retirement savings and its role in lower investment returns for American families. In March the Council celebrated the Affordable Care Act s ( ACA ) fifth anniversary with a report analyzing progress on coverage cost and quality. The Council in recognition of Equal Pay Day released an issue brief on the gender pay gap recent trends and explanations for these developments Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | In May the Council issued a report on the economic benefits of U.S trade focusing on the positive gains from trade integration. Also in May in tandem with the Domestic Policy Council and the Office of Management and Budget the Council released a report on rural child poverty. There the Council analyzed poverty measurement tools and policy levers targeted at rural poverty. In June the Council reported on U.S. petroleum consumption and the decrease in domestic petroleum consumption in recent years In July the Council continued analysis of the ACA and released a report on the consequences of State decisions to not expand Medicaid finding that millions of Americans are denied health care coverage as a result of these choices The Council focused in on investments in children and youth releasing a July report on the economic costs of youth disadvantage and gaps in opportunity for young men of color. The Council also focused on macroeconomic monitoring issuing a report on long-term interest rates and an issue brief on improving the measurement of economic growth by examining Gross Domestic Output which combines measurement of income and production. The Council produced a July issue brief on the digital divide and the unevenly distributed benefits of access to the Internet. A framework for policymakers was released that same month in partnership with the Departments of Labor and Treasury on occupational licensing and the inefficiencies and inequities incurred by current licensing regimes In August the Council expanded its work on gender equality releasing an issue brief on opportunities for women in business the strides made by women in the labor market and barriers that remain for women in business careers. In the fall the Council focused on institutions of higher education in the United States releasing a report on using federal data to measure and improve their performance. In support of broader efforts around worker voice the Council issued an October issue brief on worker voice in a time of rising inequality focusing on increasing wage and income inequality and the role of unions in wage distribution. In December the Council released an issue brief on fines fees and bails and the system of payments in the criminal justice system that disproportionately impact low-income Americans. Finally in December the Council released a report on food insecurity focusing on the long-term benefits of the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program in reducing poverty in the United States. All of the aforementioned reports can be found on the Council s website and some of them are incorporated into this annual report as well. ( http : //www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/ cea/factsheets-reports. ) The Council continued its efforts to improve the public s understanding of economic developments and of the Administration s economic | Appendix A policies through briefings with the economic and financial press speeches discussions with outside economists and regular updates on major data releases and postings of CEA s Reports on the White House and CEA blogs The Chairman and Members also regularly met to exchange views on the economy with the Chairman and Members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Public Information The Council s annual Economic Report of the President is an important vehicle for presenting the Administration s domestic and international economic policies. It is available for purchase through the Government Printing Office and is viewable on the Internet at www.gpo.gov/erp The Council frequently prepared reports and blog posts in and the Chairman and Members gave numerous public speeches. The reports posts and texts of speeches are available at the Council s website www whitehouse.gov/cea. Finally the Council published the monthly Economic Indicators which is available online at www.gpo.gov/economicindicators The Staff of the Council of Economic Advisers The staff of the Council consists of the senior staff senior economists staff economists research economists research assistants and the administrative and support staff. The staff at the end of was : Senior Staff Andrea Taverna Chief of Staff Matthew Fiedler Chief Economist Steven N. Braun Director of Macroeconomic Forecasting Anna Y. Lee Director of Finance and Administration Adrienne Pilot Director of Statistical Office Senior Economists Kenneth Gillingham Energy Environment Laura Giuliano Labor Education Gregory Leiserson Tax Retirement Budget Timothy A. Park Agriculture Infrastructure Evaluation Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | Nirupama S. Rao Labor Education Katheryn N. Russ International Trade Finance Claudia Sahm Macroeconomics Housing Robert C. Seamans Innovation Technology Industrial Organization Staff Economists Amy Filipek Macroeconomics Housing Martha Gimbel Labor E. Mallick Hossain Macroeconomics Retirement Rahul Rekhi Health Budget Gabriel Scheffler Health Labor Emily Weisburst Labor Criminal Justice Research Economists Lydia Cox Energy International Trade Harris R. Eppsteiner Labor Immigration Samuel Himel Housing Infrastructure Industrial Organization Emma Rackstraw Labor Education Jason Sockin Macroeconomics Infrastructure Research Assistants Ayushi Narayan Education Agriculture William Weber Macroeconomics International Trade Samuel Young Heath Tax Statistical Office The Statistical Office gathers administers and produces statistical information for the Council. Duties include preparing the statistical appendix to the Economic Report of the President and the monthly publication Economic Indicators. The staff also creates background materials for economic analysis and verifies statistical content in Presidential memoranda The Office serves as the Council s liaison to the statistical community Brian A. Amorosi Statistical Analyst Jonathan Sheppard Economic Statistician | Appendix A Office of the Chairman and Members Jeff Goldstein Special Assistant to the Chairman Eric Van Nostrand Special Assistant to the Chairman and Staff Economist Jamie Keene Special Assistant to the Members Administrative Office The Administrative Office provides general support for the Council s activities. This includes financial management human resource management travel operations of facilities security information technology and telecommunications management support Doris T. Searles Administrative and Information Management Specialist Interns Student interns provide invaluable help with research projects dayto-day operations and fact-checking. Interns during the year were : Gisel Acquatella Jonathan Adelman Joshua Allyn Hunter Baehren Shantanu Banerjee Olga Baranoff Jeffrey Bryant Cherie Chung Jasper Clarkberg Neha Dalal Yasmine Di Giulio Jelicia Diggs Tyler Finn John Hassett Apsara Iyer Madeleine Jones Samantha Kagan Sylvia Klosin Jessica Kong Maxwell Liebeskind Jonathan Mallek Siddharth Mandava Noah Mathews Julienne Pasichow Jana Parsons Kavi J. Patel Matthew Schneider Annemarie Schweinert Hershil Shah Andrew Smith and Brian Wolfe Departures in The senior economists who resigned in ( with the institutions to which they returned after leaving the Council in parentheses ) were : Jane Dokko ( Brookings Institution ) Joshua Linn ( Resources for the Future ) Cynthia Nickerson ( USDA ) Jennifer Poole ( American University ) Timothy Simcoe ( Boston University ) Linda Tesar ( University of Michigan ) and Abigail Wozniak ( University of Notre Dame ) The staff economist who departed in was Timothy Hyde The research economists who departed in were Krista Ruffini Brian Moore and Susannah Scanlan Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | Jessica Schumer resigned from her position as Chief of Staff and General Counsel. Jordan Matsudaira resigned from his position as Chief Economist. Matthew Aks resigned from his position as Special Assistant to the Chairman and Research Economist. Wenfan Chen resigned from her position as Economic Statistician. Noah Mann resigned from his position as Policy Analyst. Katherine Rodihan resigned from her position as Special Assistant to the Members | Appendix A A P P E N D I X B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION C O N T E N T S Page GDP INCOME PRICES AND SELECTED INDICATORS B Percent changes in real gross domestic product  B Gross domestic product  B Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes  B Growth rates in real gross domestic product by area and country  B Real exports and imports of goods and services  B Corporate profits by industry  B Real farm income  B New private housing units started authorized and completed and houses sold  B Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and people by race  B Changes in consumer price indexes  LABOR MARKET INDICATORS B Civilian labor force  B Civilian unemployment rate  B Unemployment by duration and reason  B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry  B Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries  B Productivity and related data business and nonfarm business sectors  GOVERNMENT FINANCE INTEREST RATES AND MONEY STOCK B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years  B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years  B Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years  Contents | GOVERNMENT FINANCE INTEREST RATES AND MONEY STOCK Continued B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years  B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) basis  B State and local government revenues and expenditures fiscal years  B U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation  B Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities  B Bond yields and interest rates  B Money stock and debt measures  | Appendix B General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals due to rounding Because of the formula used for calculating real gross domestic product ( GDP ) the chained ( ) dollar estimates for the detailed components do not add to the chained-dollar value of GDP or to any intermediate aggregate The Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) no longer publishes chained-dollar estimates prior to except for selected series Because of the method used for seasonal adjustment the sum or average of seasonally adjusted monthly values generally will not equal annual totals based on unadjusted values Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) Data in these tables reflect revisions made by source agencies through February unless otherwise noted Excel versions of these tables are available at www.gpo.gov/erp General Notes | GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators Table B Percent changes in real gross domestic product [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product Fixed investment Nonresidential Total See next page for continuation of table | Appendix B Gross private domestic investment Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential Change in private inventories                                                                    Table B Percent changes in real gross domestic product Continued [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Net exports Exports Imports                                                                    Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local Final Gross sales to Final Gross sales of domes- private domestic tic domestic pur- domestic income product chases purchas- ( GDI ) ers Average of GDP and GDI     Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Personal consumption expenditures plus gross private fixed investment Gross domestic income is deflated by the implicit price deflator for GDP Note : Percent changes based on unrounded GDP quantity indexes Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Table B Gross domestic product [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential Change in private inventories Billions of dollars                p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Billions of chained ( ) dollars                p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  See next page for continuation of table | Appendix B Table B Gross domestic product Continued [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total                p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p                 p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Total National Nondefense defense State and local Final Gross sales to Final Gross sales of domes- private domestic tic domestic pur- domestic income product chases purchas- ( GDI ) ers Average of GDP and GDI Billions of dollars         Billions of chained ( ) dollars Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Personal consumption expenditures plus gross private fixed investment For chained dollar measures gross domestic income is deflated by the implicit price deflator for GDP Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Table B Quantity and price indexes for gross domestic product and percent changes [ Quarterly data are seasonally adjusted ] Percent change from preceding period Index numbers = Gross domestic product ( GDP ) Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Personal consumption expenditures ( PCE ) Real GDP ( chaintype quantity index ) GDP chaintype price index GDP implicit price deflator PCE chaintype price index Quarterly percent changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Gross domestic product ( GDP ) Gross domestic PCE purchases Real GDP less price ( chainfood and index type energy quantity price index ) index GDP chaintype price index GDP implicit price deflator Personal consumption expenditures ( PCE ) PCE chaintype price index Gross domestic PCE purchases less price food and index energy price index Table B Growth rates in real gross domestic product by area and country [ Percent change ] Area and country World  Advanced economies  Of which : United States  Euro area  Germany  France  Italy  Spain  Japan  United Kingdom  Canada  Other advanced economies  Emerging market and developing economies  Regional groups : Commonwealth of Independent States  Russia  Excluding Russia  Emerging and Developing Asia  China  India  ASEAN-5  Emerging and Developing Europe  Latin America and the Caribbean  Brazil  Mexico  Middle East North Africa Afghanistan and Pakistan  Saudi Arabia  Sub-Saharan Africa  Nigeria  South Africa  annual average All figures are forecasts as published by the International Monetary Fund. For the United States advance estimates by the Department of Commerce show that real GDP rose percent in For includes data for : Austria Belgium Cyprus Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Portugal Slovak Republic Slovenia and Spain Includes Georgia,Turkmenistan and Ukraine which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States but are included for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure Data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis and output growth is based on GDP at market prices Consists of Indonesia Malaysia Philippines Thailand and Vietnam Note : For details on data shown in this table see World Economic Outlook October and World Economic Outlook Update January published by the International Monetary Fund Sources : International Monetary Fund and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Table B Real exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Year or quarter                 p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Imports of goods and services Goods Total Total Durable goods Goods Nondurable goods Services Total Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services. Repairs and alterations of equipment are also included in services Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Table B Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Year or quarter SIC :                                     NAICS :                  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  Total Financial Total Total Federal Reserve banks Nonfinancial Other Total Manufacturing TransWholeporta- Utilities sale tion trade Retail trade Information Other Rest of the world                                                                         Data on Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) basis include transportation and public utilities. Those on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) basis include transporation and warehousing. Utilities classified separately in NAICS ( as shown beginning ) SIC-based industry data use the SIC for data beginning in and the SIC for prior data. NAICS-based data use NAICS Note : Industry data on SIC basis and NAICS basis are not necessarily the same and are not strictly comparable Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Table B Real farm income [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ] Income of farm operators from farming Gross farm income Year Value of agricultural sector production Total                                                                  p  Total Crops Animals and animal products Farm-related income Direct Federal Government payments Production expenses Net farm income The GDP chain-type price index is used to convert the current-dollar statistics to = equivalents Crop receipts include proceeds received from commodities placed under Commodity Credit Corporation loans The value of production equates to the sum of cash receipts home consumption and the value of the change in inventories Includes income from forest products sold the gross imputed rental value of farm dwellings machine hire and custom work and other sources of farm income such as commodity insurance indemnities Note : Data for are forecasts Source : Department of Agriculture ( Economic Research Service ) | Appendix B Table B New private housing units started authorized and completed and houses sold [ Thousands ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] New housing units started Type of structure Year or month Total                                            p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  p  Nov Dec p  New housing units authorized Type of structure unit to units                         units or more Total unit to units units or more New housing units completed New houses sold Authorized by issuance of local building permits in permit-issuing places : places beginning with ; for ; for ; for ; for ; and for Monthly data do not meet publication standards because tests for identifiable and stable seasonality do not meet reliability standards Note : One-unit estimates prior to for new housing units started and completed and for new houses sold include an upward adjustment of percent to account for structures in permit-issuing areas that did not have permit authorization Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Table B Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and people by race Families People below poverty level Below poverty level Race Hispanic origin and year Number ( millions ) TOTAL ( all races )           WHITE non-Hispanic           BLACK           ASIAN           HISPANIC ( any race )           Median Female money householder Total income no husband ( in present Number ( milPercent dollions ) Number lars ) Number ( milPercent ( milPercent lions ) lions ) Median money income ( in dollars ) of people years old and over with income Males All people Yearround full-time workers Females All people Yearround full-time workers $ $ $ $ $ The term family refers to a group of two or more persons related by birth marriage or adoption and residing together. Every family must include a reference person Adjusted by consumer price index research series ( CPI-U-RS ) Data for American Indians and Alaska natives native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders and those reporting two or more races are included in the total but not shown separately Beginning with data for the upper income interval used to calculate median incomes was expanded to $ or more Reflects implementation of Census 2010-based population controls comparable to succeeding years The Current Population Survey ( CPS ) Annual Social and Economic Supplement ( ASEC ) included redesigned income questions which were implemented to a subsample of the addresses using a probability split panel design. These data are based on the ASEC sample of addresses that received income questions similar to those used in the ASEC and are consistent with data in earlier years These data are based on the ASEC sample of addresses that received redesigned income questions and are consistent with data in later years The CPS allows respondents to choose more than one race. Data shown are for white alone non-Hispanic black alone and Asian alone race categories. ( Black is also black or African American. ) Family race and Hispanic origin are based on the reference person Note : Poverty thresholds are updated each year to reflect changes in the consumer price index ( CPI-U ) For details see publication Series P on the Current Population Survey and Annual Social and Economic Supplements Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) | Appendix B Table B Changes in consumer price indexes [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] December to December                                                                      All items less food and energy All items Total Shelter Medical care                  Apparel Energy Food New vehicles  Total At home  Away from home Total Gasoline                   C-CPI-U                                                      Includes other items not shown separately Data beginning with incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners costs Commodities and services Household energy--electricity utility ( piped ) gas service fuel oil etc.--and motor fuel Chained consumer price index ( C-CPI-U ) introduced in Reflects the effect of substitution that consumers make across item categories in response to changes in relative prices. Data for are subject to revision Note : Changes from December to December are based on unadjusted indexes Series reflect changes in composition and renaming beginning in and formula and methodology changes in Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) GDP Income Prices and Selected Indicators | Labor Market Indicators Table B Civilian labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Employment Total Total NonAgricultural agricultural Not in labor force Civilian labor force participation rate Civilian employment/ population ratio                                  Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over                                                                          Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Not seasonally adjusted Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force See next page for continuation of table | Appendix B Table B Civilian labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Employment Total Total NonAgricultural agricultural Unemployment Not in labor force Civilian labor force participation rate Thousands of persons years of age and over                           : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Civilian employment/ population ratio Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent Beginning in data for agricultural employment are for agricultural and related industries ; data for this series and for nonagricultural employment are not strictly comparable with data for earlier years. Because of independent seasonal adjustment for these two series monthly data will not add to total civilian employment Note : Labor force data in Tables B through B are based on household interviews and usually relate to the calendar week that includes the 12th of the month. Historical comparability is affected by revisions to population controls changes in occupational and industry classification and other changes to the survey. In recent years updated population controls have been introduced annually with the release of January data so data are not strictly comparable with earlier periods. Particularly notable changes were introduced for data in the years and For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see Employment and Earnings or concepts and methodology of the CPS at http : //www.bls.gov/cps/documentation.htm # concepts Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Civilian unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month                                             : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  All civilian workers Males Total years Females years and over Total years years and over Both sexes years By race Hispanic Married Women or men who Black or Latino spouse maintain White African Asian ethnic- present families Ameriity can                              Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified Beginning in persons who selected this race group only. Prior to persons who selected more than one race were included in the group they identified as the main race. Data for black or African American were for black prior to See Employment and Earnings or concepts and methodology of the CPS at http : //www.bls.gov/cps/documentation.htm # concepts for details Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race Not seasonally adjusted Note : Data relate to persons years of age and over See Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) | Appendix B Table B Unemployment by duration and reason [ Thousands of persons except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Duration of unemployment Year or month                                             : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Reason for unemployment Average Median ( mean ) duration duration ( weeks ) ( weeks ) Job losers On layoff Total Other Job ReNew leavers entrants entrants Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not sum to totals Beginning with includes unemployment durations of up to years ; prior data are for up to years Beginning with job losers and persons who completed temporary jobs Note : Data relate to persons years of age and over See Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry [ Thousands of jobs ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Private industries Year or month                                            p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec p  Total nonagricultural employment Goods-producing industries Total private Total Mining and logging Private service-providing industries Trade transportation and utilities Manufacturing Construction Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Total Total Retail trade Includes wholesale trade transportation and warehousing and utilities not shown separately Note : Data in Tables B and B are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period that includes the 12th of the month. Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B through B ) which include proprietors self-employed persons unpaid family workers and private household workers ; which count persons as See next page for continuation of table | Appendix B Table B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of jobs ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Private industries Continued Government Private service-providing industries Continued Year or month Information                                            p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec p  Financial activities Professional and business services Education and health services Leisure and hospitality Other services Total Federal State Local Note ( cont d ) : employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; which are based on a sample of the working-age population ; and which count persons only once as employed unemployed or not in the labor force. In the data shown here persons who work at more than one job are counted each time they appear on a payroll Establishment data for employment hours and earnings are classified based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) For further description and details see Employment and Earnings Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Production and nonsupervisory employees All employees Year or month                                            p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec p  Average weekly hours                                    Average hourly earnings Average weekly earnings Level Percent change from year earlier Current Current Current dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars                                    $                                    $                                    $                                    $                                                                         Average weekly hours Average hourly earnings Average weekly earnings Level Percent change from year earlier Current Current Current dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars $ $ $ $ Production employees in goods-producing industries and nonsupervisory employees in service-providing industries. These groups account for four-fifths of the total employment on private nonfarm payrolls Current dollars divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( CPI-U ) on a = base Current dollars divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers ( CPI-W ) on a = base Note : See Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) | Appendix B Table B Productivity and related data business and nonfarm business sectors [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Labor productivity ( output per hour ) Year or quarter                                                 p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Output Hours of all persons Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm Busi- Nonfarm ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business ness business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector Hours at work of all persons engaged in sector including hours of employees proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data Wages and salaries of employees plus employers contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed Hourly compensation divided by consumer price series. The trend for is based on the consumer price index research series ( CPI-U-RS ) The change for prior years and recent quarters is based on the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( CPI-U ) Current dollar output divided by the output index Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Government Finance Interest Rates and Money Stock Table B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Total Fiscal year or period                            Transition quarter                                         ( estimates )  ( estimates )  Receipts Outlays On-budget Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Federal debt ( end of period ) Off-budget Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Gross Federal Held by the public Note : Fiscal years through were on a July June basis ; beginning with October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis. The transition quarter is the three-month period from July through September See Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year for additional information Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget | Appendix B Addendum : Gross domestic product Table B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years [ Percent ; fiscal years ] Outlays Fiscal year or period                                 Transition quarter                                         ( estimates )  ( estimates )  Receipts National defense Total Surplus or deficit ( ) Federal debt ( end of period ) Gross Federal Held by public Note : See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Government Finance Interest Rates and Money Stock | Table B Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Receipts ( on-budget and off-budget ) Fiscal year or period                            Transition quarter                                         ( estimates )  ( estimates )  Total Individual income taxes Corporation income taxes Social insurance and Other retirement receipts Outlays ( on-budget and off-budget ) InternaMedi- Income Social Net Depart- tional Health care secu- secu- interrity rity est ment of affairs Total Defense military Surplus or deficit ( ) ( onOther budget and offbudget ) National defense Total Note : See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget | Appendix B                             Table B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Actual Description RECEIPTS OUTLAYS AND SURPLUS OR DEFICIT Total : Receipts  Outlays  Surplus or deficit ( )  On-budget : Receipts  Outlays  Surplus or deficit ( )  Off-budget : Receipts  Outlays  Surplus or deficit ( )  OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD Gross Federal debt  Held by Federal Government accounts  Held by the public  Federal Reserve System  Other  Estimates     RECEIPTS BY SOURCE Total : On-budget and off-budget  Individual income taxes  Corporation income taxes  Social insurance and retirement receipts  On-budget  Off-budget  Excise taxes  Estate and gift taxes  Customs duties and fees  Miscellaneous receipts  Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System  All other  Legislative proposals       OUTLAYS BY FUNCTION Total : On-budget and off-budget  National defense  International affairs  General science space and technology  Energy  Natural resources and environment  Agriculture  Commerce and housing credit  On-budget  Off-budget  Transportation  Community and regional development  Education training employment and social services  Health  Medicare  Income security  Social security  On-budget  Off-budget  Veterans benefits and services  Administration of justice  General government  Net interest  On-budget  Off-budget  Allowances      Undistributed offsetting receipts  On-budget  Off-budget  Includes Undistributed Allowance for Immigration Reform Note : See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget Government Finance Interest Rates and Money Stock | Table B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) basis [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Year or quarter Current receipts                                                   p   : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p   Current expenditures Federal Government Net government saving ( NIPA ) Current receipts     Current expenditures Net Federal Government saving ( NIPA ) State and local government Current receipts     Current expenditures Net State and local government saving ( NIPA ) Addendum : Grantsin-aid to State and local governments   Note : Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal current expenditures and State and local current receipts. Total government current receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Table B State and local government revenues and expenditures fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year                                                             Total Property taxes Sales and gross receipts taxes Individual income taxes General expenditures by function Corpora- Revenue tion from net Federal income Governtaxes ment All other Total Education Highways Public welfare All other Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See Note Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded Includes motor vehicle license taxes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues Includes intergovernmental payments to the Federal Government Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans services air transportation sea and inland port facilities parking facilities police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development solid waste management financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other government administration interest on general debt and other general expenditures not elsewhere classified Note : Except for States listed data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregation of data for government fiscal years that ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years ; Texas used August and Alabama and Michigan used September as end dates. Data for and earlier years include data for government fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Government Finance Interest Rates and Money Stock | Table B U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] End of fiscal year or month                                        : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Marketable Total Treasury securities outstanding Total Treasury Treasury Treasury bills notes bonds Nonmarketable Treasury inflation-protected securities Total Notes Bonds                                                              Total U.S savings securities Foreign series Government account series Other Data beginning with January are interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing securities ; prior data are interest-bearing securities only Data from to and to include Federal Financing Bank securities not shown separately. Beginning with data for January includes Floating Rate Notes not shown separately Through series is U.S. savings bonds. Beginning includes U.S. retirement plan bonds U.S. individual retirement bonds and U.S. savings notes previously included in other nonmarketable securities Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreign-currency-denominated issues Includes depository bonds ; retirement plan bonds through ; Rural Electrification Administration bonds ; State and local bonds ; special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks ; for the period July through February depositary compensation securities ; and beginning August Hope bonds for the HOPE For Homeowners Program Note : The fiscal year is on an October September basis Source : Department of the Treasury | Appendix B Table B Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities [ Billions of dollars ] End of month : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  Total public debt Federal Reserve and IntragovernTotal mental privately holdheld ings Held by private investors Pension funds Depository institutions  U.S savings bonds Private State and local governments Insurance companies Mutual funds State and local governments Foreign and international Other investors        Face value Federal Reserve holdings exclude Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements Includes U.S. chartered depository institutions foreign banking offices in U.S. banks in U.S. affiliated areas credit unions and bank holding companies Current accrual value includes myRA Includes Treasury securities held by the Federal Employees Retirement System Thrift Savings Plan G Fund. Includes money market mutual funds mutual funds and closed-end investment companies Includes nonmarketable foreign series Treasury securities and Treasury deposit funds. Excludes Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements in custody accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Estimates reflect benchmarks to this series at differing intervals ; for further detail see Treasury Bulletin and http : //www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/pages/index.aspx Includes individuals Government-sponsored enterprises brokers and dealers bank personal trusts and estates corporate and noncorporate businesses and other investors Note : Data shown in this table are as of January Source : Department of the Treasury Government Finance Interest Rates and Money Stock | Table B Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( at auction ) 3-month 6-month 3-year                                                                                  Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Constant maturities       10-year 30-year                                        Aaa Baa Highgrade Newmunicipal home bonds mort ( Stangage dard & yields Poor s ) Prime rate charged by banks Discount window ( Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) Primary credit Adjustment credit                                                                                      Federal funds rate         High bill rate at auction issue date within period bank-discount basis. On or after October data are stop yields from uniform-price auctions. Before that date they are weighted average yields from multiple-price auctions See next page for continuation of table | Appendix B Table B Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Constant maturities 3-month 6-month 3-year : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Highgrade Newmunicipal home bonds mort ( Stangage dard & yields Poor s ) 10-year 30-year Aaa Baa Prime rate charged by banks Discount window ( Federal Reserve Bank Federal of New York ) funds rate Primary Adjustment credit credit High-low Year and month Bills ( at auction ) High-low High-low                                                             Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Department of the Treasury. The 30-year Treasury constant maturity series was discontinued on February and reintroduced on February Beginning with December data for corporate Aaa series are industrial bonds only Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning with January not strictly comparable with prior rates For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for are ranges of the rate in effect during the period Primary credit replaced adjustment credit as the Federal Reserve s principal discount window lending program effective January Since July the daily effective rate is an average of the rates on a given day weighted by the volume of transactions at these rates. Prior to that date the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day s transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Housing Finance Agency Moody s Investors Service and Standard & Poor s Government Finance Interest Rates and Money Stock | Table B Money stock and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures except debt end-of-period basis ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] M1 Year and month December :                                          : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  M2 Debt Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits M1 plus savings deposits retail MMMF balances and small time deposits Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors                   Percent change From previous period From year or months earlier M1 M2 Debt                   Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) Savings deposits include money market deposit accounts Consists of outstanding debt securities and loans of the U.S. Government State and local governments and private nonfinancial sectors. Quarterly data shown in last month of quarter. End-of-year data are for fourth quarter Annual changes are from December to December ; monthly changes are from six months earlier at a simple annual rate Annual changes are from fourth quarter to fourth quarter. Quarterly changes are from previous quarter at annual rate Note : For further information on the composition of M1 and M2 see the H.6 release of the Federal Reserve Board Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System | Appendix B