Economic Report of the President Together with The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers March Economic Report of the President Together with The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers March x Contents Economic Report of the President. The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers. Introduction Chapter Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Chapter Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs. Chapter Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American. Chapter Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets. Chapter Unleashing the Power of American Energy. Chapter Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape. Chapter  Adapting to Technological Change with Artificial Intelligence while Mitigating Cyber Threats. Chapter Markets versus Socialism. Chapter Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America.. Chapter The Year in Review and the Years Ahead.. References Appendix A  Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During Appendix B S  tatistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production. ____________ * For a detailed table of contents of the Council s Report see page iii Economic Report of the President x Economic Report of the President To the Congress of the United States : For the past two years my Administration has been focused on strengthening the United States economy to enable greater opportunity and prosperity for all Americans. During my first year in office we began by building a foundation of progrowth policies. We initiated sweeping regulatory reform issuing deregulatory actions for every new one added and signed into law the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act the biggest package of tax cuts and tax reform in our country s history. Consumer and business confidence skyrocketed as we reversed incentives that had driven away businesses investment and jobs for many years. With these cornerstones of a robust economy in place we restored enthusiasm for doing business in America. This has achieved enormously positive results for American workers and families. The United States economy has created million jobs since I was elected to office. Wage growth continued in with the lowest-earning workers experiencing the strongest gains. By the fourth quarter of real disposable personal income per household was up more than $ from the end of The national unemployment rate reached a nearly 50-year low of percent in September hovering at or below percent for consecutive months the longest streak in nearly five decades. Opportunity is expanding so fast that there are more job openings in our economy than there are current job seekers. These positions will be filled as more Americans join the labor force or rejoin it after years of discouragement and pessimism. In January more than percent of workers entering employment were previously out of the labor force and the labor force participation rate reached percent the highest since For the second consecutive year economic growth has either matched or surpassed my Administration s forecast and the economy has grown at a percent rate over the last four quarters. This progress is remarkable. It is a victory for all Americans now benefiting from a strengthened economy. But the greatest triumph of all is this : we have created an era of opportunity in which Americans left behind by previous Administrations are finally catching up and even getting ahead. An Economic Agenda for the Success of Every American An economic agenda that enables struggling Americans to succeed begins with the creation of opportunities. Years of misguided policies however diminished opportunity disregarded the importance of American workers for our country s success and turned millions of our hard-working citizens into collateral damage. On a massive scale jobs were lost as unfair trade deals Economic Report of the President | gutted American manufacturing and a backward tax code drove away businesses and investment. The American people suffered the consequences of past leaders unalloyed aspirations for global trade ; which enriched other nations and impoverished our working families as we increasingly imported goods formerly made here by American workers. Those seeking hope from Washington received dismissive explanations. They were told that low growth and meager opportunity were the new normal that nothing could be done to stop the damage. Meanwhile economic hardship derailed families and communities : Hopelessness deepened and drug abuse and other maladies spread. Our country could not achieve its highest economic potential with a workforce hollowed out by the mistaken policies of the past policies that treated our citizens as an afterthought hurt our most vulnerable workers and crippled our economy. Over the past two years my Administration has implemented a pro-growth policy agenda that puts Americans first and creates conditions that enable all our citizens to succeed. By strengthening the United States economy we have empowered many groups that historically have had a harder time getting ahead. Unemployment among those without a high school degree is the lowest in nearly years. In the past year the unemployment rate among women fell to percent matching its lowest rate since Teenage unemployment reached its lowest rate in nearly years. My Administration has presided over the lowest unemployment rates for people with disabilities on record. Poverty rates for both black Americans and Hispanic Americans reached record lows in Homelessness among veterans fell by percent in the past year. The bottom percent of earners are experiencing the highest wage growth on record and we have lifted nearly million Americans off food stamps since my election. Revitalized American manufacturing something once thought impossible has restored opportunities for American blue-collar workers. In the first two years of my Administration we have created manufacturing jobs at six times the pace of the previous Administration s last two years for a total of nearly half a million jobs. Blue-collar workers on average are on track to see almost $ more in annual wages. The success of America s workers is essential to the success of our country. We will continue to prioritize workforce development in the years ahead and we will keep fighting on behalf of all Americans seeking opportunities to contribute. In establishing the National Council for the American Worker my Administration is emphasizing the importance of results-driven job training and reskilling programs ; we must equip our students and workers with competitive skills adapted to our rapidly changing economy. This initiative has already secured commitments from the private sector to invest in over million retraining opportunities. An economic agenda that lifts all Americans must also address the destructive effects that over-incarceration has on our families and our communities. With the enactment of the First Step Act of we have achieved | Economic Report of the President a bipartisan victory for criminal justice reform. The First Step Act modifies sentencing for less serious crimes and prioritizes rehabilitation to enable former prisoners to reenter society as productive law-abiding citizens. Well-designed prison programs that help bring families together and give reformed prisoners the tools to find work are crucial for reducing the costs of crime and our over-incarceration. Finally we remain committed to encouraging self-sufficiency and advocating for work as the best way to foster human dignity and escape poverty. In our strengthened economy long-awaited job opportunities have become available to millions of Americans who are eager to support themselves. Although help must be accessible to those who are struggling expanding work requirements can further reduce both poverty and dependency among those able to work. Over half of all nondisabled working-age adults receiving food stamps are not working. By finding ways to put their talents to productive use we would both enrich our society and help them live more fulfilling lives. My Administration values the capabilities of all Americans and we will continue to implement a pro-growth pro-opportunity agenda that puts self-sufficiency within reach. Investing in Innovation and the Future of American Greatness To maintain economic momentum and expand opportunity in our Nation we will continue to champion American innovation and entrepreneurship. Smart deregulation and technological advances have unleashed American energy dominance and made American energy the way of the future. The United States is now the world s single largest producer of crude oil and natural gas. Our strength in the energy sector has invigorated our economy created jobs and reduced our dependence on energy from countries that do not share our values. The instinct to invent and create has driven America forward since its founding and has enabled our country to export ideas that have rapidly improved the world. To do right by our researchers and inventors we must hold foreign nations to account for stealing our intellectual property and forcing technology transfers. To do right by American taxpayers and consumers we must continue fighting for lower pharmaceutical drug prices and end global free-riding on Americans transformative research. And to bolster growth we must continue to unleash the power of possibility by revolutionizing our Nation s technological capabilities within the industries of the future including artificial intelligence advanced manufacturing and 5G technology. By reducing the costs and confines of oppressive growth-killing regulation we have improved the ability of American entrepreneurs to start and expand their businesses. Many aspiring entrepreneurs however live in areas of our country that are starved of the capital that entices business investment and creates jobs. The Investing in Opportunity Act part of our historic tax reform law is addressing this problem. It is using tax incentives to draw investment into Opportunity Zones areas struggling with higher unemployment and Economic Report of the President | poverty. These areas are experiencing increases in commercial real estate transactions as investors seize on the potential for Opportunity Zones to reignite the American Dream for those who have been left behind. Our dedication to investing in a brighter future must be paired with a commitment to fixing past mistakes. We have made significant strides to reverse the damage of trade policies that harmed our country for many years. We renegotiated the destructive North American Free Trade Agreement and reached a new agreement the United States Mexico Canada Agreement. We also negotiated a revised United States Korea Free Trade Agreement. At the time of this Report s publication we are conducting negotiations with China the European Union and Japan. In addition we intend to begin negotiations with the United Kingdom as soon as it leaves the European Union. With these historic achievements we have begun an era of trade policy that finally puts the interests of the United States and our hard-working families first. To improve the welfare of our Nation and its citizens we are redoubling our efforts to fix an immigration system that has been broken for decades. The chaos at our Southern Border comes at an intolerable cost to American citizens who deserve peaceful prosperous communities. We can not tolerate the crime drug smuggling illegal entry and human trafficking enabled by a porous border. The current system that allows dangerous gang members into our society strains public services and rewards those who ignore our laws over those who respect our citizenship process is simply unsustainable for our Nation. We must have an orderly immigration system that honors United States citizenship as the unrivaled privilege we all know it to be. As shown in the Report that follows we are ushering in an era of renewed dedication to our citizens. It is my great honor to champion the American people and to make their success and well-being my top priority. This progrowth pro-opportunity agenda celebrates the irreplaceable value of America s working families and embraces the extraordinary possibilities for American ingenuity to improve the human condition. It is an economic agenda that lays the foundation for the future of American greatness. The White House March | Economic Report of the President The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers x Letter of Transmittal Council of Economic Advisers Washington March Mr. President : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely yours Kevin A. Hassett Chairman Richard V. Burkhauser Member Tomas J. Philipson Member Economic Report of the President | Council of Economic Advisers Washington March Mr. President : In the chapters that constitute this Report the Council of Economic Advisers provides a detailed account of the U.S. economy in and offers analysis of the Administration s economic policy agenda for the years ahead. In preparing the Economic Report of the President the Council strives to incorporate the most recent data available at the time of the Report s statutorily mandated transmittal to Congress and to ensure through internal processes that our analysis of these data adheres to the strictest standards of verification and replication. Due to delayed data releases owing to a partial government shutdown from December to January it was not possible for the Council to incorporate preliminary estimates of gross domestic product and personal income and outlays in the fourth quarter of while upholding our replication procedures and a production schedule required to comply with the statute. However I am pleased to report in this letter that the data confirm and reinforce the findings of this Report and do not materially alter its conclusions. Sincerely yours Kevin A. Hassett Chairman Economic Report of the President | Introduction In accordance with the Employment Act of the purpose of this Report is to provide the U.S. Congress with timely and authoritative information concerning economic developments and economic trends for the preceding year and prospectively for the years ahead. As required by the Employment Act the Report also sets forth the Administration s program for achieving the chartered purpose of : Creating and maintaining in a manner calculated to foster and promote free competitive enterprise and the general welfare conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment opportunities including selfemployment for those able willing and seeking to work and to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power ( 79th U.S. Congress ) In the chapters that constitute this Report we present evidence that the Trump Administration s policy actions and priorities are thus far delivering economic results consistent with the mandate. For the second consecutive year the U.S. economy outperformed expectations and broke from recent trends by a substantial margin. In June the Congressional Budget Office projected that during the four quarters of real gross domestic product ( GDP ) would grow by percent the unemployment rate would decline by percentage point to percent and employment growth would average jobs per month. Instead real GDP in the first three quarters of grew at a compound annual rate of percent above the Trump Administration s own fourth quarter over fourth quarter forecast for the second successive year the unemployment rate declined by percentage point to a near-50-year low of percent and employment growth averaged jobs per month. Growth in labor productivity which averaged just percent between : Q3 and : Q4 doubled to percent in Capital expenditures by nonfinancial businesses rose percent at a compound annual rate through : Q3. Figures I-1 through I-4 show that the strong economic performance in and was not merely a continuation of trends already under way during the postrecession expansion but rather constituted a distinct break from the previous pace of economic and employment growth since the start of the current expansion in : Q3. The figures depict observed outcomes before ( blue ) and after ( red ) the election with the dotted lines representing the projected trend estimated on the basis of preelection data. Consistent with conclusions in the Economic Report of the President investment manufacturing employment worker compensation and new startups have all risen sharply in the two years since the election. Economic Report of the President | Figure I-2. Durable Goods Manufacturing Employment Figure I-X. I-1. Real Private Figure Nonresidential Fixed Investment Real Private Nonresidential Fixed Investment Employment ( thousands ) Employment ( thousands ) Dollars ( billions ( billions,2012 ) ) Dollars : Q3 Dollars ( billions ) : Q4 : Q4 Election : Q3 Nov. Nov. Nov. Nov. : Q4 Figure I-4. Average Weekly Earnings of Goods-Producing Employees Figure I-3. New Business Applications Number Numberofofapplications applications Dec-18 Dollars perpeweek Dollars r we e k : Q3 Dec-18 : Q4 : Q4 : Q4 : Q4 : Q4 : Q4 Election Preelection trend Nov. Nov. Nov. Nov. Preelection Postelection Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; U.S. Census Bureau ; CEA calculations. Note : All trends are estimated over a sample period covering the entire preelection expansion from : Q3 ( July ) to : Q4 ( November ) Figure I-4 represents the average nominal weekly earnings of goods producing production and nonsupervisory employees in nominal dollars. Trends are estimated on compound annual growth rates and levels reconstructed from projected rates. | Economic Report of the President In addition overall economic output by the third quarter of was $ billion or percent larger than projected by the : Q3 : Q4 trend with the compound annual growth rate up percentage points over trend. Higher output growth was driven by a marked rise in real private investment in fixed assets which was percent over the projected trend as of the third quarter. In the first three quarters of the contribution of real private nonresidential fixed investment to GDP growth rose from percentage point the average of the preceding expansion to percentage point while investment as a share of GDP rose to its second-highest level for any calendar year since Real private nonresidential fixed investment by nonfinancial businesses rose percent at a compound annual rate through : Q3 climbing to a level percent above that projected by the : Q3 : Q4 trend. As of December average nominal weekly earnings of goods producing production and nonsupervisory workers had risen $ above trend on an annualized basis. In the chapters that follow we demonstrate that these departures from the recent trend are not accidental but rather reflect the Trump Administration s deliberate measures to create and maintain conditions under which the U.S. economy can achieve maximum employment production and purchasing power. Specifically a unifying theme throughout this Report is that these conditions are generally achieved by providing maximum scope for the efficiency of free enterprise and competitive market mechanisms and ensuring that these mechanisms are operative in both domestic and global markets. Beginning with chapter Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act we use currently available data to examine the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act s ( TCJA s ) anticipated and observed effects with particular attention to the relative velocities of adjustment along each economic margin. We find that by lowering the cost of capital the TCJA had an instant and large effect on business expectations with firms immediately responding to the TCJA by upwardly revising planned capital expenditures employee compensation and hiring. We also observe revised capital plans translating into higher capital expenditures and real private investment in fixed assets with nonresidential investment in equipment structures and intellectual property products growing at a weighted average annual rate of about percent from : Q4 through : Q3 climbing to $ billion over the pre-TCJA expansion trend of : Q3 through : Q4. ( Equipment investment trends are calculated through : Q3 because the TCJA s allowance of full expensing of new equipment investment was retroactive to September ) In addition to tallying more than million workers receiving bonuses directly attributed to the TCJA with an average bonus size of $ we also estimate that real disposable personal income per household rose to $ over the trend by the third quarter of or percent of the CEA s estimated long-run effect of $ per Economic Report of the President | household. In real terms median usual weekly earnings of all full-time wage and salary workers were up $ over trend on an annualized basis. We also report evidence of a reorientation of U.S. investment from direct investment abroad to investment in the United States as the TCJA attenuated incentives to shift productive assets and profits to lower-tax jurisdictions. Specifically in the first three quarters after the TCJA s enactment U.S. direct investment abroad declined by $ billion while direct investment in eight identified tax havens declined by $ billion. In the first three quarters of U.S. firms repatriated almost $ billion in overseas earnings. Based on extensive evidence from a large body of corporate finance literature we conclude that shareholder distributions through share repurchases are an important margin of adjustment to a simultaneous positive shock to cash flow and investment constituting the primary mechanism whereby efficient capital markets reallocate capital from mature cash-abundant firms without profitable investment opportunities to emerging cash-constrained firms with profitable investment opportunities. In chapter Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs we examine the Administration s important deregulatory efforts which have also led to improved performance over the previous two years. We develop a framework to analyze the cumulative economic impact of regulatory actions on the U.S. economy. As the first Administration to use regulatory cost caps to reduce the cumulative burden of Federal regulation the Trump Administration in and issued more deregulatory actions than regulatory actions and reversed the long-standing trend of rising regulatory costs. By raising the cost of conducting business regulation can prevent valuable business and consumer activities. More important however we also stress that regulations in one industry affect not only the regulated industry or sector but also the economy as a whole. We find that this implies that official measures understate regulatory costs and therefore also understate the regulatory cost savings of the Trump Administration s regulatory reforms because they do not account for relevant opportunity costs especially those accruing outside the regulated industry. The official data show that from through the annual trend was for regulatory costs to grow by an average of $ billion each year. In contrast in and Federal agencies took deregulatory actions that resulted in costs savings that more than offset the costs of new regulatory actions. The official data show that in fiscal year the deregulatory actions saved $ billion in annualized regulatory costs ( with a net present value of $ billion ) ; and in fiscal year the deregulatory actions saved $ billion in annualized regulatory costs ( with a net present value of $ billion ) Looking at just three important deregulatory case studies the CEA calculates that the three actions will reduce annual regulatory costs by an additional $ billion. | Economic Report of the President Chapter Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American discusses the dramatic effect the revival of the economy has had on labor markets. Consistent with the robust pace of economic growth in the United States the labor market is the strongest that it has been in decades with an unemployment rate that remained under percent for much of Employment is expanding and wages are rising at their fastest pace since Whenever both quantity and price go up in a market this must be partly driven by a rise in demand. This suggests that an important change in the labor market has been an increase in the demand for labor induced potentially by a supplyside expansion enabled by tax reform and deregulation. Although the low unemployment rate is a signal of a strong labor market there is a question as to whether the rapid pace of hiring can continue and whether there are a sufficient number of remaining potential workers to support continued economic growth. This pessimistic view of the economy s potential however overlooks the extent to which the share of prime-age adults who are in the labor market remains below its historical norm. As is explored in chapter potential workers could be drawn back into the labor market through Administration policies designed to reduce past tax and regulatory distortions and to encourage additional people to engage in the labor market. Policies examined in this chapter that intend to increase labor force participation include reducing the costs of child care working with the private sector to increase employer training and reskilling initiatives and pursuing criminal justice reform to increase labor force engagement among affected communities. We also highlight the potential benefits of reducing occupational licensing and incentivizing investment in designated Opportunity Zones to improve economically distressed areas as provided for in the TCJA. In chapter Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets we seek to address the mandate for this Report to analyze how to foster and promote free and competitive enterprise to a greater extent in the U.S. healthcare sector. We discuss the rationales commonly offered for government intervention in healthcare and explain why such interventions often and unnecessarily restrict choice and competition demonstrating that the resulting government failures are frequently more costly than the market failures they attempt to correct. In light of recent public proposals to dramatically increase government intervention in healthcare markets such as Medicare for All we also analyze how these proposals eliminate or decrease choice and competition. As a result we find that these proposals would be inefficient costly and likely reduce as opposed to increase the population s health. Funding them would create large distortions in the economy with the universal nature of Medicare for All constituting a particularly inefficient way to finance healthcare for lower- and middle- income people. Economic Report of the President | We contrast such proposals with the Trump Administration s actions that are increasing healthcare choice and competition for healthcare. We focus on the elimination of the Affordable Care Act s individual mandate penalty which will enable consumers to decide for themselves what value they attach to purchasing insurance and which we project will generate $ billion in value over years. Expanding the availability of association health plans and short-term limited-duration health plans will increase consumer choice and insurance affordability. We find that taken together these three sets of actions will generate a value of $ billion over the next decade. On the pharmaceutical front the Food and Drug Administration is increasing price competition by streamlining the drug application and review process at the same time that record numbers of generic drugs are being approved price growth is falling and consumers have already saved $ billion through the first year and a half of the Administration. In addition the influx of new brand name drugs resulted in an estimated $ billion in annual benefits to consumers in Chapter Unleashing the Power of American Energy discusses the important role of energy markets in the new economic revival and the Administration s goal of stimulating free market innovation to enable U.S. energy independence. Coal production stabilized in and after a period of contraction in and The United States is now a net exporter of natural gas for the first time in years and petroleum exports are increasing at a pace that suggests positive net exports by Taking advantage of America s abundant energy resources is a key tenet of the Trump Administration s plan for long-term economic growth as well as national security. This is best achieved by recognizing that price incentives and the role of technological innovation which is guided by the price incentive in a market economy like that of the United States are critical for understanding the production of both renewable natural resources and nonrenewable natural resources like petroleum. By enabling domestic production the Administration seeks to facilitate the evolution of the U.S. economy s role in global markets. Since the President took office the U.S. fossil fuels sector has set production records. These were led by technological improvements tax changes that lowered the cost of investing in mining structures elevated global prices and deregulatory actions that raised the expected returns of energy projects. Chapter documents deregulatory actions affecting the energy sector that were completed through the end of fiscal year with projected present value savings of over $ billion. In chapter Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape we revisit the causes and consequences of and responses to the financial crisis of In particular we identify that the absence of actuarially fair pricing of implicit government guarantees of financial institutions and markets was a major factor exacerbating the crisis. Unfortunately we also find that the salient | Economic Report of the President legislative response to the crisis the Dodd-Frank Act not only failed to resolve this flaw but also excessively raised regulatory complexity with the increased cost of compliance falling disproportionately on small and midsized financial institutions which account for a disproportionate share of commercial and industrial lending to small and medium-sized enterprises. In addition to articulating the Administration s approach to achieving the Seven Core Principles for financial regulation established by Executive Order chapter also demonstrates how the Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act of released small and medium-sized banks from the more restrictive provisions of Dodd-Frank while preserving heightened regulatory oversight of genuinely systemically important financial institutions. Again reflecting the CEA s mandate to evaluate current and foreseeable trends in the levels of employment production and purchasing power chapter Adapting to Technological Change with Artificial Intelligence while Mitigating Cyber Threats analyzes how technological change in information technology is likely to affect future U.S. labor markets. We begin by reviewing the latest developments in artificial intelligence ( AI ) and automation concluding that a narrow static focus on possible job losses leads to a misleading picture of the likely effects of AI on the Nation s economic well-being. Technological advances might eliminate specific jobs but they do not generally eliminate work and over time they will likely greatly increase real wages national income and prosperity. For example technological change enabled many agricultural economies to transition from having a majority of the economy being devoted to food production to a small percentage of the economy being able to better feed its population than before. Automation can complement labor adding to its value and even when it substitutes for labor in certain areas it can lead to higher employment in other types of work and raise overall economic welfare. That appears likely to be the case as AI applications diffuse through the economy in the future though important new challenges will arise concerning cybersecurity. Indeed AI appears poised to automate or augment economic tasks that had long been assumed to be out of reach for automation. Despite the economic resurgence of the past two years there has been a rise in interest in vacating the free enterprise principles that have been instrumental to that recovery and in turning instead to more socialized production methods that have generally been abandoned in countries that have tried them. Consistent with the mandate for this Report we therefore turn in chapter Markets versus Socialism to reviewing the empirical evidence on the economic effects of varying degrees of socialization of productive assets and the income generated by those assets. Hayek ( ) argued that the essential role of a competitive market price mechanism is to communicate dispersed and often incomplete knowledge whereby firms will expand and consumers Economic Report of the President | contract activity when prices are high and vice versa when prices are low with both sides of the market thereby being guided by prices to equate demand with supply. We find that experiences of socialism that do not use prices to guide production and consumption this way have generally been characterized by distorted incentives and failures of resource allocation in some extreme instances on a catastrophic scale. In addition to quantifying the human and economic costs of highly socialist systems we also estimate the effects of more moderate degrees of socialization. We find that even among market economies average income and consumption are lower in those with relatively high levels of government taxes and transfers as shares of output such as Denmark Sweden Norway and Finland than in the United States. This is because the relatively high average tax rates on middle incomes that finance this Nordic model also disincentivize generating income in the first place. Finally we estimate that if the recent U.S. proposals for socialized medicine in terms of Medicare for All were implemented and financed by higher taxes GDP would decline by percent or about $ per person in In chapter Reducing Poverty and Improving Self-Sufficiency in America we discuss the impact of the revival of the economy more specifically on low-income households and the Trump Administration s approach to escaping poverty through economic growth and work-based public policies. President Lyndon B. Johnson declared a War on Poverty in January When using a full-income measure of poverty that is capable of capturing success in the War on Poverty we find that poverty declined from percent in to percent in This far exceeds the decline from to percent according to the Official Poverty Measure. However victory was not achieved by making people self-sufficient as President Johnson envisioned but rather through increased government transfers. A new war on poverty should seek to further reduce material hardship based on modern standards but should do so through incentives to achieve work and self-sufficiency. We discuss the Trump Administration s important actions along these lines : expanding work requirements for nondisabled working-age welfare recipients in noncash welfare programs ; increasing child care assistance for low-income families ; and increasing the reward for working by doubling the Child Tax Credit and increasing its refundability. Finally in chapter The Year in Review and the Years Ahead we analyze important macroeconomic developments in and present the Trump Administration s full policy-inclusive economic forecast for the next years including risks to the forecast. Overall assuming full implementation of the Trump Administration s economic policy agenda we project real U.S. economic output to grow at an average annual rate of percent between and We expect growth to moderate from just over percent in and as the capital-to-output ratio asymptotically approaches its | Economic Report of the President new postbusiness tax reform steady state and as the near-term effects of the TCJA s individual provisions on the rate of growth dissipate into a permanent level effect. Partially offsetting this moderation are the expected contributions of the supply-side effects of the Trump Administration s current and future deregulatory actions as discussed in chapter ; the permanent extension of the personal income tax provisions of the TCJA as discussed in chapter ; and the Administration s infrastructure proposal as analyzed in the Economic Report of the President. In chapter we also explore potential downside risks to the forecast including nonimplementation or repeal of the Trump Administration s economic policy agenda slowing economic growth in major economies outside the United States and the possible adverse economic effects of recent public proposals for Medicare for All and a top marginal income tax rate of percent. Collectively the chapters that constitute this Report demonstrate that the strong economic performance in and constituted a sharp break from the previous pace of economic and employment growth since the start of the present expansion reflecting the Administration s reprioritization of economic efficiency and growth over alternative policy aspirations that subordinated growth. We further demonstrate that a unified agenda of tax regulatory labor healthcare financial and energy market reforms that enhance the role of market prices is a more efficient and effective approach to unleashing the growth potential of the U.S. economy. The CEA s mandate under the Employment Act of is to advise on how best to achieve maximum employment production and purchasing power. To this end this Report provides evidence supporting the CEA s endorsement of free competitive enterprise relying on market prices to guide economic activity over alternatives demanding increased socialization of productive assets and a consequently diminished role for market prices. Economic Report of the President | x Contents Chapter : Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Output and Investment. Labor Market Effects. International Developments. The Deemed Repatriation of Accumulated Foreign Earnings.. Share Repurchases and Capital Distributions. Conclusion. Chapter : Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs.. Principles of Regulation and Regulatory Impact Analysis. Public Goods and Private Markets The Process of Doing Regulatory Impact Analysis The Current Regulatory Landscape.. Federal Regulatory and Deregulatory Actions The Trump Administration s Regulatory Cost Caps Are Reducing Costs. Why More Deregulation ? Estimates of the Aggregate Cost of Regulation.. The Need to Level the Playing Field for Deregulation The Cumulative Economic Impact of Regulation. The Effects of Regulation Are Transmitted through Markets.. The Cumulative Burden I : Within Industry. The Cumulative Burden II : Costs along the Supply Chain Lessons Learned : Strengthening the Economic Analysis of Deregulation. Diagnosing Market Failure.. The Costs of Regulatory Actions That Are Correct on Average.. Examples of the Excess Burdens of Regulatory Actions. The Burdens of Nudge Regulatory Actions Expanding Use of Regulatory Impact Analysis Case Studies of Deregulatory Actions and Their Benefits and Costs. Case Study : Association Health Plans.. Case Study : Short-Term Limited-Duration Insurance Plans. Case Study : Specifying the Joint Employer Standard Conclusion. Economic Report of the President | Chapter : Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American. Long-Run Trends in Adult Employment Labor Force Participation and Wage Earnings.. Employment and Labor Force Participation. Wages and Labor Earnings.. Prime-Age Employment by Gender.. Barriers to Work from Child Care Expenses. Policies to Reduce Barriers to Work Resulting from Child Care Expenses. Prime-Age Employment by Race Ethnicity and Education. Increasing Workers Skills and Closing Skill Mismatches. Reforming Occupational Licensing. Employment Experiences in Rural Areas. Policies to Enhance Rural Communities.. Conclusion. Chapter : Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets. Rationales for the Government s Healthcare Interventions That Restrict Competition and Choice. Uncertainty Third-Party Payments and the Problem of Moral Hazard Asymmetric Information Barriers to Market Entry. The Inelastic Demand for Healthcare.. Healthcare Is Not Exceptional. Redistribution and Merit Goods Current Proposals That Decrease Choice and Competition. Implications for the Value of the Program and Health Outcomes Economies of Scale and Administrative Costs in Insurance Cross-Country Evidence on the Effects of Universal Healthcare on Health Outcomes and the Elderly.. The Lower Quality of Universal Coverage in Terms of Reduced Availability A U.S. Single-Payer System Would Have Adverse Long-Run Effects on Global Health through Reduced Innovation. Financing Medicare for All The Administration s Actions to Increase Choice and Competition in Health Insurance. The Stability of the Nongroup Health Insurance Market Setting the Individual Tax Mandate Penalty to Zero. A Cost-Benefit Analysis of Setting the Individual Mandate Tax Penalty to Zero. Improving Competition to Lower Prescription Drug Prices.. Lowering Prices through Competition. | Economic Report of the President The Administration s Efforts to Enhance Generic and Innovator Competition. Estimated Reductions in Pharmaceutical Drug Costs from Generic Drug Entry Estimates of the Value of Price Reductions from New Drugs. Conclusion. Chapter : Unleashing the Power of American Energy.. U.S. Fuel Production Reached Record Levels in U.S. Oil Production Is At an All-Time High. The Natural Gas Revolution Rolls On. Coal Production Is Recovering after the Slump. U.S. Fuels in the Global Marketplace.. U.S. Oil Exports Are At an Unprecedented High. After Years the U.S. Is Again a Net Exporter of Natural Gas Coal Exports. Strategic Value. Energy Policy. Increasing Access to Production. Electricity Generation. Deregulation. Environmental Implications. Conclusion. Chapter : Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape. The Causes and Consequences of the Systemic Crisis. The Boom/Bust Cycle in Residential Real Estate. Implicit Government Support That Undermined Market Discipline.. An Ineffective and Uncoordinated Regulatory Response The Consequences of the Financial Crisis.. The Consequences of the Dodd-Frank Act. Addressing Systemic Risk. Dodd-Frank s Ill-Considered Approach. Dodd-Frank s Consequences.. A More Measured Approach to Financial Regulation. Core Principles for Regulating the U.S. Financial System. Recommendations for Meeting the Core Principles. Conclusion. Chapter : Adapting to Technological Change with Artificial Intelligence while Mitigating Cyber Threats. What Is Artificial Intelligence ? Machine Learning. Applications of AI Technology. Economic Report of the President | Technological Progress and the Demand for Labor.. A Brief History of Technological Change and Work. Effects of Technological Progress on Investment and Wages Trade between People and Machines.. The Uneven Effects of Technological Change.. Differential Effects by Occupation and Skill. The Scale and Factor-Substitution Effects of an Industry s Technological Progress When Will We See the Effects of AI on the Economy ? Cybersecurity Risks of Increased Reliance on Computer Technology. Assessing the Scope of the Cyber Threat Potential Vulnerabilities by Industry The Role of Policy.. Policy Considerations as AI Advances : Preparing for a Reskilling Challenge. The Administration s Policies to Promote Cybersecurity. The Administration s Policies to Maintain American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence. The Administration s Implementation of the National Cyber Strategy Further Artificial Intelligence and Future of Work Policy Considerations. Conclusion. Chapter : Markets versus Socialism. The Economics of Socialism. The Socialist Economic Narrative : Exploitation Corrected by Central Planning The Role of Incentives in Raising and Spending Money The Economic Consequences of Free Goods and Services. Socialism s Track Record. State and Collective Farming. Unintended Consequences. Lessons Learned.. Central Planning in Practice The Case of Venezuela Today : An Industrialized Country with Socialist Policies.. Economic Freedom and Living Standards in a Broad Cross Section of Countries. The Nordic Countries Policies and Incomes Compared with Those of the United States. Measuring Tax Policies in the Nordic Countries.. Measuring Regulation in the Nordic Countries Income and Work Comparisons with the United States. | Economic Report of the President Returns to Free Higher Education in the Nordic Countries.. Socialized Medicine : The Case of Medicare for All Medicare for All from an International Perspective Effects on Overall Economic Activity.. Conclusion. Chapter : Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America. The Success of the War on Poverty. The Elements of a Poverty Measure. The Inability of Existing Poverty Measures to Assess the War on Poverty. The Full-Income Poverty Measure.. The Failure to Promote Self-Sufficiency. Trends in Self-Sufficiency. Work among Nondisabled Working-Age Recipients of Key Welfare Programs. A New War on Poverty. The Success of Welfare Reform. Lessons from Welfare Reform for Work Requirements in Noncash Programs. Complementing Work Requirements with Work Supports and Rewards. Benefits for Children. Conclusion. Chapter : The Year in Review and the Years Ahead. Output.. Consumer Spending. Government Purchases.. Net Exports. The Trade Year in Review.. U.S. Trade Policy in Section : Solar Cells and Large Residential Washing Machines. Section : Steel and Aluminum. Section : China. Trade Agreements.. Case Study : The Universal Postal Union.. Policy Developments. Fiscal Policy Monetary Policy. Productivity. Inflation. Financial Markets. Economic Report of the President | Equity Markets. Interest Rates and Credit Spreads. The Global Macroeconomic Situation.. Developments in The Outlook. GDP Growth during the Next Three Years. GDP Growth over the Longer Term. Upside and Downside Forecast Risks. Conclusion. References.. Appendixes A. B. Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production. Figures 1-i 1-ii 1-iii 1-iv Adjustment Dynamics to a New Steady-State Capital Output Ratio. Percentage of NFIB Survey Respondents Planning Capital Expenditures in the Next to Months Percentage of NFIB Survey Respondents Reporting That Now Is a Good Time to Expand Morgan Stanley s Capex Plans Index Core Capital Goods Orders Growth in Real Nonresidential Fixed Investment : Q4 : Q3. Forecast Errors for Equipment Investment and Price Structural VAR and Narrative Estimates versus Actual. Growth in Real GDP : Q4 : Q3 Month Percentage Change in National Real Housing Price Indices Four Quarter Percentage Change in Regional Real Housing Price Indices National Home Ownership Rate Distribution of Announced Tax Reform Bonuses Net Percentage of NFIB Survey Respondents Planning to Raise Worker Compensation in the Next Months Net Percentage of NFIB Survey Respondents Planning to Increase Employment Total Private Job Openings Above-Trend Real Labor Compensation and Wage Growth Real U.S. Repatriated Earnings and Share Repurchases Real Nonfinancial Corporate Share Repurchases Real Corporate Net Dividends | Economic Report of the President 1-v 2-i 3-i 3-ii 3-iii Real Private Nonresidential Fixed Investment by Noncorporate Businesses Real Venture Capital Investment Gross Foreign Sales of U.S. Corporate Stocks The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act : Farm Estates Exempted from Filing and Paying Estate Taxes Economically Significant Final Rules Presidential Year OMB-Reviewed Final Rules by Agency Real Annual Costs of Major Rules Fiscal Years Cumulative Costs of Major Rules Fiscal Years Small Business Optimism Index Distorted Allocation of Resources Among Industries. How Industry Regulation Affects the Aggregate Factor Market. Labor Force Participation Rate and Employment-to-Population Ratio Adult Population by Age ( Years ) Labor Force Participation Rate by Age ( Years ) Nominal Weekly Wage Growth Among All Adult Full-Time Wage and Salary Workers Nonfarm Business Sector Real Output per Hour Share of Adults Starting Work Who Were Not in the Labor Force Rather Than Unemployed Labor Force Participation Rate and Employment-to-Population Ratio for Prime-Age Adults by Gender Labor Force Participation Rates Among Prime-Age Women by Marital and Parental Status Child Care Costs as a Percentage of States Median Hourly Wage Number of States and Average Center-Based Child Care Cost by Minimum Staff-to-Child Ratio and Age Group. Employment-to-Population Ratio for Prime-Age Adults by Race Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Adults by Race Employment-to-Population Ratio for Prime-Age Males by Race Employment-to-Population Ratio for Prime-Age Females by Race Rate of Imprisonment by Gender and Race Employment-to-Population Ratio for Prime-Age Adults by Education Level Employment Growth by Industry Relative to Total Adult Population Growth Job Opening Rates by Industry Q4 : Public Expenditures on Active Labor Market Programs Expenditures on Education and Skills Training by Age and Source Workers with a Professional License or Certification by Occupation and Education Level Economic Report of the President | 5-i 5-ii 5-iii Employment-to-Population Ratio for Prime-Age Adults by Geography Industry Employment by Geography Educational Attainment in Rural versus Urban Areas Manufacturing Employment Growth Goods Producing Employment Growth Average Survival from a Cancer Diagnosis Seniors Who Waited at Least Four Weeks to See a Specialist during the Past Two Years Effect of U.S. Drug Price Controls on Global Longevity Among Those Age Premium Costs as a Function of Household Income Nominal Gross Premiums per Member per Year for Subsidized Enrollees Benefits of Setting the Individual Mandate Penalty to Zero Price of Prescription Drugs Relative to the PCE Generic Drug Price Relative to Brand Name Price New Generic Drug Applications Approved New Drug Applications and Biologics License Applications Approved Price Decline Due to Generic Drug Entry Price Reductions from Brand Name Entry Energy Content of U.S. Fossil Fuels Production U.S. Monthly Crude Oil Production Crude Oil Production in the United States Russia and Saudi Arabia OPEC Crude Oil Production vs. Production Targets U.S. Lower-48 Production versus Hubbert s Peak Oil Prediction U.S. Natural Gas Trade and Withdrawals U.S. Monthly Trade in Natural Gas U.S. Quarterly Coal Disposition Changes in AEO Natural Gas Forecast versus U.S. Crude Oil and Finished Product Exports U.S. Crude and Petroleum Product Exports U.S. Petroleum Trade Balance Real U.S. Refiners Acquisition Costs and Recessions Historic and Projected LNG Export Revenue Export Prices for U.S. LNG by Destination U.S. Quarterly Coal Exports Iranian Crude Oil Exports OPEC Spare Production Capacity and Crude Oil Prices Northern Alaska the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and the Coastal Plain Area. Alaska Crude Oil Production and Arctic National Wildlife Refuge Production Forecasts CEA Estimates of Federal Electricity Generation Subsidies by Fuel Type for Fiscal Year | Economic Report of the President 5-iv 5-v 6-i 6-ii 6-iii 7-i Average Total Cost for Investor-Owned Utilities by Fuel Type Energy Intensity of GDP Annual World Carbon Dioxide Emissions Sulfur Dioxide Emissions and Rainwater Acidity Global Marine Fuel Sulfur Limits S&P CoreLogic Case-Shiller Home Price Index National Value Increase in S&P CoreLogic Case-Shiller Home Price Index by City The Rise in Subprime and Alt-A Loans Leading into the Financial Crisis Decrease in S&P CoreLogic Case-Shiller Home Price Index by City Percentage of U.S. Conventional Subprime Mortgages Days or More Past Due Share of U.S. Home Mortgage Debt Held by Financial Sectors Gross Repurchase Agreement Funding to Banks and Broker-Dealers National and Long-Term Unemployment Rate Tier Capital Ratios of U.S. G-SIBs Liquid Assets of U.S. G-SIBs Average Economic Growth by Expansion Period Consolidation in U.S. Banking and Thrift Industries Share of Industry Assets Held by U.S. Banking Organizations That Became the Four Largest by Error Rate of Image Classification by Artificial Intelligence and Humans The Effect of AI on the Amount of Capital and the Distribution of Factor Incomes Precision Agriculture Use in Peanuts and Soybeans Share of Respondents Reporting Income from Ride-Sharing Platforms in the Past Year Cybersecurity Breaches That Were Made Public Industries That Are Most Lacking DMARC Protocol Among Fortune Companies by Value Added DMARC Protocol Use Across Government Agencies Supply-and-Demand Ratio for Cybersecurity Jobs Four Ways to Spend Money Annual Trend of Births and Deaths in Ukraine by Gender Birthrates and Death Rates in China Total Production of Petroleum and Other Liquid Fuels The Progressivity of Personal Income Tax Structures in the Nordic Countries and the United States Average Annual Cost of a Honda Civic in the United States versus Denmark Real Income and GDP per Capita of People of Nordic Ancestry by Place of Residence Economic Report of the President | 9-i 9-ii Net Lifetime Private Financial Returns from Attaining Tertiary Education Percentage of U.S. Population Enrolled in Noncash Welfare Programs Price Indices of Various Inflation Measures Percentage of the Population Living in Poverty Based on Various Measures Percent of the Population Living in Poverty Based on Official Poverty Measure and the Full-Income Poverty Measure Percentage of the Population Living in Poverty Crosswalk from the Official Poverty Measure to the Full-Income Poverty Measure Individual-Level Posttax Posttransfer Household Size-Adjusted Income Distribution Including In-Kind Transfers and Market Value of Health Insurance Using PCE Inflation. Percentage of Nondisabled Working-Age Adults Living in a Household That Receives Assistance during the Year Percentage of Nondisabled Working-Age Adults Employed by Gender Hours Worked among December Nondisabled Working-Age SNAP Recipients January to December Female Employment by Marital Status and Youngest Child s Age and Number of States with Welfare Reform States with Medicaid Waivers Implemented Approved and Pending States Waiving SNAP Time Limit for Able-Bodied Adults ( ) Without Dependents Fourth Quarter of Fiscal Year Earned Income Tax Credit Schedule by Number of Children and Filing Type Tax Year Child Tax Credit for a Family with Two Children Unmarried and Married Parents Under Previous Law and Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) Evolution of Blue Chip Consensus Forecasts for Real GDP Growth during the Four Quarters of and Personal Saving Rate Consumer Sentiment Consumption and Wealth Relative to Disposable Personal Income Government Purchases as a Share of Nominal GDP Contribution of Net Exports to U.S. Real GDP Growth The Federal Reserve s Total Assets Consumer Price Inflation The CBOE s Market Volatility Index North American Investment Grade and High Yield Credit Default Swap Spreads U.S. Treasuries Yield Curve Foreign Real GDP and U.S. Real Export Growth China s Broad Credit and Activity Proxy Nonperforming Loans and Return on Assets for China s Commercial Banks | Economic Report of the President Emerging Market Credit to Nonfinancial Corporations Forecast for Growth Rate of Real GDP Number of Prime-Age Females by Marital and Parental Status EITC Benefits for a Married Couple with Two Children Based on the Additional Earnings from a Second Full-Time Worker Adult Waiting Times for Nonemergency or Elective Surgery Adult Waiting Times for Specialist Appointments during the Past Two Year IRS Reporting of Individual Mandate Payments Agricultural Production in Cuba After the Nationalization of Farms Tax Policies in the United States and the Nordic Countries All-In Average Personal Income Tax Rate Less Transfers at the Average Wage Regulation Policies in the United States and the Nordic Countries Actual Individual Consumption per Head at Current Prices and Purchasing Power Parity Relative Income Inequality National Accounts with and without Medicare for All Basic Elements of Poverty Measures. Number of People by Welfare Receipt Age and Disability Status December Percentage of Nondisabled Working-Age Adults Working Various Weekly Average Hours by Welfare Receipt December Number of Nondisabled Working-Age Adults by Welfare Program Receipt by Category December Timeline of Trade Events Year-over-Year Real GDP Growth for Selected Areas and Countries Administration Economic Forecast Supply-Side Components of Actual and Potential Real Output Growth Tables Boxes The Mortgage Interest Deduction and the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Corporate Bonuses Wage Increases and Investment since the TCJA s Passage. The TCJA s Provisions Shift the United States toward a Territorial System of Taxation. Estate Taxes and Family Farms. The Terminology of Federal Regulatory Actions. Economic Regulation and Deregulation. Small Businesses and the Regulatory Burden. Notable Deregulatory Actions. Retrospective Regulatory Review. Economic Report of the President | Opportunity Costs Ride Sharing and What Is Not Seen. The Opioid Epidemic and Its Labor Market Effects. Employment Rates among Black Men. The President s National Council for the American Worker. Strengthening Local Economies through Opportunity Zones. Additional Regulatory Reforms. OPEC s Oil Production Cuts The Important Economic Effects of State Regulation on Energy Production. The Federal Role in Promoting Domestic Fuels Production : The Case of Alaska. Long-Term Improvements in Environmental Quality. International Environmental Standards and Liquid Fuels Markets : IMO Defining Subprime Alt-A and Nontraditional Mortgages. Measuring Regulatory Burden on the Financial Sector. Evaluating the Costs and Benefits of Bank Regulations Restoring Market Discipline in Banking. Factors Driving the Long-Term Consolidation in Banking. DARPA : Strategic Investments in Artificial Intelligence and Cybersecurity Technological Change in Agriculture and Rural America Educating the Cyber Workforce of Tomorrow Estonia : A Case Study in Modern Cybersecurity Practices What Is Medicare for All ? The CEA s Role at the Beginning of the War on Poverty. Obtaining Better Evidence through Better Data Medicaid Community Engagement Demonstration Projects. Addressing Problems with SNAP Work Requirement Waivers. Mitigating Trade Retaliation for Agricultural Producers USMCA and U.S. Auto Manufacturing. USMCA and Canadian Dairy. | Economic Report of the President x Chapter Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act The Economic Report of the President citing an extensive literature of over peer-reviewed studies provided evidence that before the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) the U.S. economy and U.S. workers had been adversely affected by the conjunction of rising international capital mobility and increasingly uncompetitive U.S. business taxation relative to the rest of the world. The Report concluded that the results of the convergence of these two trends were deterred capital formation in the United States an absence of capital deepening and consequently stagnant wage growth. Considering the weight of evidence in support of these observations the Report projected that the business and international provisions of the TCJA would raise the target U.S. capital stock reorient U.S. capital away from direct investment abroad in low-tax jurisdictions and toward domestic investment and raise worker compensation and household income through both a short-run bargaining channel and long-run capital deepening channel. Finally the Report noted that reductions in effective marginal personal income tax rates could be expected to induce positive labor supply responses. In this chapter we evaluate each of these anticipated effects of the TCJA on the basis of currently available data and with particular attention to the relevant time horizons of each margin of adjustment to the positive tax shock. We find that firms responded immediately to the TCJA by upwardly revising planned capital expenditures employee compensation and hiring. We further find that real private investment in fixed assets rose at an annual rate of about percent from the fourth quarter of through the third quarter of to $ billion ( about percent ) above the level reconstructed from the projected trend of the preceding expansion during which fixed investments grew at an annual rate of about percent. In addition to reporting a tally of over million workers receiving an average bonus of nearly $ we also estimate that as of the third quarter of real disposable personal income per household was up $ over the trend. Expressed as a perpetual annuity this corresponds to a lifetime pay raise of about $ for the average household a $ trillion boost to total real disposable personal income across all households. Finally we report that the flow of U.S. direct investment abroad declined by $ billion while U.S. direct investment in eight identified tax havens declined by $ billion as U.S. multinational enterprises redirected capital investment toward the domestic economy. Applying insights from a large body of corporate finance literature we then discuss channels particularly shareholder distributions through which we expect repatriations of past corporate earnings previously held abroad in low-tax jurisdictions to be efficiently reallocated by capital markets from cash-abundant to cash-constrained firms. O n December President Trump signed into law the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) With an estimated $ trillion in gross tax cuts accompanied by $ trillion in new revenue over years and with fundamental changes to itemization and a movement toward a territorial system of corporate income taxation the TCJA arguably constituted the most significant combination of tax cuts and comprehensive tax reform in U.S. history. The TCJA was motivated by four principal objectives : tax relief for middleincome families simplification of the personal income tax code economic growth through business tax relief and increased domestic investment and repatriation of overseas earnings. First accordingly in the personal income tax code the standard deduction was approximately doubled by the TCJA thereby exempting a greater share of middle-class incomes from Federal income tax liability altogether and simplifying tax filing for millions of American taxpayers who would previously have had to itemize deductions. The law also lowered marginal personal income tax rates across nearly all brackets and raised and expanded eligibility for the Child Tax Credit. Second the law eliminated certain deductions that disproportionately benefited higher-income households while capping | Chapter others such as the Mortgage Interest Deduction and State and Local Tax Deduction that similarly skewed toward the highest-income tax filers. Third to address the previous relative international uncompetitiveness of U.S. business taxation the TCJA lowered the top marginal Federal statutory corporate tax rate from percent the highest in the developed world to percent. In addition the TCJA introduced a percent deduction for most owners of pass-through entities and generally allowed for immediate full expensing of new equipment investment. Fourth to encourage repatriation of past overseas earnings of U.S. multinational enterprises previously held abroad in low-tax jurisdictions and to prevent future corporate profit shifting through the mispricing of intellectual property products and services the TCJA applied a low or percent tax on previously untaxed deferred foreign income and introduced a trio of new mechanisms to deter artificial corporate profit shifting. In the Economic Report of the President the Council of Economic Advisers estimated that these provisions of the TCJA would : Raise real capital investment by lowering the user cost of capital and thus raising the target steady-state flow of capital services. Raise the growth rate of U.S. output in the short run through both supply- and demand-side channels ; and in the long run through a supply-side channel. Raise worker compensation and household income both through a short-run profit-sharing channel and a long-run capital deepening channel raising the steady-state level of capital per worker. Incentivize higher labor force participation. Reorient U.S. capital investment away from direct investment abroad and toward domestic investment. Induce large-scale repatriation of past overseas earnings of U.S. multinational enterprises previously held in low-tax jurisdictions. In this chapter we evaluate these estimates and projections utilizing data available since the TCJA became law and with particular attention to the relevant time horizons of different margins of adjustment to a positive tax shock. Consistent with projections reported in the Economic Report of the President we find that output and investment accelerated in response to the reduction in the user cost of capital and more importantly rose substantially above the trend. Real gross domestic product ( GDP ) growth rose percentage point above the recent trend while capital expenditures by nonfinancial businesses were up percent over the trend. We also find that real disposable personal income rose above the trend especially as forward-looking firms raised near-term compensation to retain similarly forward-looking workers in a tightening labor market. As of : Q3 we estimate that real disposable personal income per household was up about $ over the trend while real median usual earnings of full-time wage and salary workers were up $ on an annualized basis. We furthermore report Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | survey data indicating that these margins of adjustment were immediately anticipated by marked shifts in business expectations in response to the TCJA. In addition we report that in the first three quarters of alone $ billion in overseas corporate dividends including earnings previously reinvested abroad were repatriated to the United States out of an upper-bound estimated total stock of as much as $ trillion and that U.S. direct investment abroad declined by $ billion as U.S. multinational enterprises redirected capital investment toward the domestic economy. We then discuss how repatriation affects the distribution of corporate earnings to shareholders and how efficient capital markets utilize shareholder distributions to reallocate capital from established cash-abundant firms without profitable investment opportunities to more dynamic cash-constrained firms with profitable investment opportunities. Finally we also report the results of several simple simulations estimating the implied effects on long-run Federal government tax revenues of the higher economic growth that has thus far been observed since the TCJA s enactment. In summary we find that the U.S. economy is responding auspiciously to the positive tax shock of the TCJA along multiple margins and in patterns that are both broadly and specifically consistent with projections reported in the Economic Report of the President. Looking ahead we suggest that making permanent the TCJA provisions that are currently scheduled to expire would improve the long-run potential growth of the U.S. economy. Output and Investment Changes in corporate income tax rates and depreciation allowances can induce large investment effects through their effect on the user cost of capital as demonstrated by Cummins and Hassett ( ) ; Auerbach and Hassett ( ) ; Cummins Hassett and Hubbard ( ) ; Caballero Engel and Haltiwanger ( ) ; Djankov and others ( ) ; and Dwenger ( ) Essentially the user cost of capital is the rental price of capital corresponding to the minimum return on investment required to cover taxes depreciation and the opportunity costs of investing in physical capital accumulation versus financial alternatives. By increasing ( or decreasing ) the after-tax rate of return on capital assets a decrease ( increase ) in the tax rate on corporate profits decreases ( increases ) the before-tax rate of return required for the marginal product of new physical assets to exceed the cost of producing and using these assets thereby raising ( lowering ) firms demand for capital services. As documented in the Economic Report of the President early empirical estimates of the user-cost elasticity of investment ( e.g. Eisner and Nadiri ) were much smaller than the neoclassical benchmark of unit elasticity ( Jorgenson ; Hall and Jorgenson ) and were often outperformed by simple accelerator models of investment. However subsequent studies ( e.g. | Chapter Goolsbee ; and Cummins Hassett and Oliner ) demonstrated that estimates likely suffered from considerable omitted variable bias owing to ( ) unobserved firm heterogeneity ; ( ) mismeasurement of investment fundamentals resulting in attenuation bias ; and ( ) the correlation of statutory changes in corporate income tax rates depreciation allowances and tax credits with cyclical factors. Studies that successfully achieve identification particularly by exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in the user cost of capital in the cross section of asset types ( e.g. Cummins and Hassett ; Auerbach and Hassett ; Cummins Hassett and Hubbard ; and Zwick and Mahon ) or by utilizing micro-level panel data ( e.g. Caballero Engel and Haltiwanger ; Dwenger ; and Zwick and Mahon ) accordingly estimate much higher user-cost elasticities of investment. Indeed Dwenger ( ) is unable to reject the null hypothesis that the user-cost elasticity is not statistically different from the neoclassical benchmark of This implies that a tax change that lowers the user cost of capital by percent would raise demand for capital services by up to percent. Following Devereux Griffith and Klemm ( ) and Bilicka and Devereux ( ) and assuming a consensus estimated user-cost elasticity of investment of in the Economic Report of the President the CEA calculated that the corporate income tax provisions in the TCJA would on average lower the user cost of capital and thus raise demand for services by approximately percent. Using the Multifactor Productivity Tables from the Bureau of Labor Statistics in a growth accounting framework to increment the Congressional Budget Office s June 10-year GDP growth projections by the additional contribution to output from a larger target capital stock and assuming constant capital income shares the CEA then calculated that the steady-state U.S. economic output would be between about and percent higher in the long run. More formally DeLong and Summers ( ) derive the adjustment dynamics by beginning with this identity : Yt = ( r ) Kt where Y is output r is the social net rate of return is the economic depreciation rate and K is the capital stock. The gross increase in Y produced by an increase in K is the gross rate of return on capital multiplied by the increase in K. The capital stock of an economy initially in the steady state that receives a permanent boost I to its gross investment therefore evolves according to : Kt = I Kt That is the increase in the capital stock is equal to new gross investment minus depreciation of the preceding period s capital stock. In the first period the entire increase in investment translates into an increase in the capital stock : Kt = I such that Yt = ( r ) I. In the second period Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | investment will still be higher by I but because K1 > K0 depreciation will also be higher. The increase in the capital stock will therefore be smaller : K2 = ( I K1 ) = ( I I ) = ( ) I and Y2 = ( r ) ( ) I. Successive increases in the capital stock will accordingly diminish with the sum of changes gradually converging to a steady-state value K * : K * = I/ And the cumulative change in output converges to a new steady-state level : Y * = I ( r ) / An increase in investment equal to percentage point of output can therefore induce up to a ( r ) / percentage-point increase in the steady-state level of output and up to a ( r ) / t increase in the growth rate of output over a period of t years. In the absence of capital adjustment costs the standard neoclassical model therefore predicts an immediate jump in investment in the first period though with no effect on the rate of growth of investment thereafter. The level effect however is permanent such that the capital-to-output ratio and the ratio of the flow of new investment to the outstanding capital stock gradually approach their new steady-state levels as illustrated with a hypothetical example in figure Economic research ( e.g. Hartman ; Abel ; Caballero ; and Bar-Ilan and Strange ) suggests that the costs associated with adjusting capital stocks may result in short-run adjustment lags. Consequently we would expect the first margin of adjustment to a positive tax shock to capital investment to be expectations which unlike capital and labor market contracts are instantaneously flexible. Consistent with this anticipated effect figure reports the percentage of businesses in the National Federation of Independent Business s ( NFIB s ) monthly survey reporting plans to raise capital expenditures in the next to months reported as a 3-month centered moving average to smooth out random noise. Figure shows two marked upward shifts in the percentage of firms reporting planned increases in capital investment first at the moment of Donald Trump s election to the U.S. Presidency ; and second at the moment of the TCJA s passage. These increases followed two years during which the percentage of firms reporting plans to raise capital expenditures was essentially flat. Reinforcing this pattern figure reports the percentage of NFIB respondents reporting that now is a good time to expand. Once again the survey data reveal two marked spikes first after the election of President Trump ; and second after the TCJA s passage. After the TCJA s passage the percentage of respondents reporting that now was a good time to expand broke the survey s previous record to set a new all-time high. Meanwhile in : Q1 the Business Roundtable ( ) survey of CEOs reported record highs for their capital spending index and the percentage | Chapter  $ "     % 0./ ( ) /   )  ( $   / *       /    /  /    $ /  '   0/+0/    / $ * It  Kt Percentage of the capital stock per year Years K  Y Years of I to build K Years  *        '  '  / $ * )  * /    % 0./ ( ) /  / *    )  ./    ./  /   ! /      ) /    ' $ )  $ )  / #    * ./  * !    $ /  '   ( $ ) "  r   =  )    )  $ ) $ / $  '    $ /  ' * 0/+0/   / $ *  * !  Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act |  $ "     ) /  "  * !         * )  ) /.   '  ) ) $ ) "    $ /  '   )  $ /0-  $ )  / #   3/   / *    * ) / #  Percent  '  / $ * )          *      *   *     / $ * )  '     / $ * )  * !  )  )  ) /   $ )            '  '  / $ * )  * /    /   ) /     ) /   ( * ) / #  ( * $ ) "    "           0/.   )   *     /      $ "     ) /  "  * !         * )  ) /.   * -/ $ ) "   #  /   *      * *    $ (  / *    )   Percent  '  / $ * )      Previous all-time high     *      *   *     / $ * )  '     / $ * )  * !  )  )  ) /   $ )            '  '  / $ * )  * /    /   ) /     ) /   ( * ) / #  ( * $ ) "    "           0/.   )   *     /  | Chapter    reporting rising capital spending in the next months. Through : Q3 both series remained higher than at any point since : Q2. Also in : Q1 the percentage of respondents to a National Association of Business Economists ( ) survey reporting rising capital expenditures on information and communication technology hit a record high and has remained well above the previous average since the question entered the survey. Broader survey results reflect the same pattern. Figure reports the centered 3-month moving average of Morgan Stanley s Planned Capital Expenditures ( Capex Plans ) Index which tracks what business firms will probably spend in coming months. Again after two years of decline we observe two marked spikes after the election of President Trump and the TCJA s passage. Indeed at the start of the index set its all-time high. Over time as actual investment begins to reflect investment plans we would expect these indices as well as other survey responses to edge back as more respondents report plans to leave investment unchanged once the new higher level of investment is attained. An additional short-run margin of adjustment succeeding the adjustment of expectations but preceding the adjustment of actual physical capital stocks is new capital goods orders as reported by purchasing managers. Figure reports core capital goods orders in billions of dollars from January through November Once again after two years of declines we observe two sharp spikes in capital goods orders within months of investmentrelevant events first after President Trump s election ; and second after the TCJA s passage. Despite expected adjustment costs and investment lags in the transition to a higher-target capital stock the first three quarters after the TCJA s passage saw a notable acceleration in investment. Figure reports growth in real private nonresidential fixed investment from the time of the TCJA s passage until the third quarter of both for nonresidential investment overall and for the major subcomponents of structures equipment and intellectual property products expressed as compound annual growth rates to smooth substantial quarterly volatility with investment being the most volatile component of GDP. On a downward trend since we again observe a marked reversal with private nonresidential fixed investment overall as well as investment in each subcomponent of investment up over preelection and pre-TCJA trends. Indeed if we regress the compound annual growth rate of private nonresidential fixed investment on a linear time trend over the sample period : Q3 : Q4 ( : Q3 for equipment ) and we project this trend into and reconstruct levels from forecasted growth rates we find that as of : Q3 overall private nonresidential fixed investment was up $ billion ( percent ) over the trend. Among nonfinancial businesses overall capital expenditures were up percent over the trend. Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | Figure Morgan Stanley s Capex Plans Index Index Election TCJA May-18 May Nov. May Nov. May Sources : Bloomberg ; CEA calculations. Note : Morgan Stanley s Planned Capital Expenditures ( Capex Plans ) Index tracks what firms plan to spend in coming months. TCJA = Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Data represent a centered 3month moving average.  $ "    *    $ /  '  * *      Dollars ( billions )  '  / $ * )     *  *    )          '  '  / $ * )  * /    * " * *   $ )  '0   ) * )  ! )    $ /  '  " * *    '0  $ ) "   $   ! /    /   ) /     ) /   ( * ) / #  ( * $ ) "    "  /-0 )   / $ ) "  $ )   * (            0/.   )   *     /  | Chapter  $ "    * 2/ #  $ )    '   * ) $  ) / $  '   $   ) ./ ( ) /      /0  '  " * 2/ # Compound annual growth rate  /-0  /0-   ' ' ) * ) $  ) / $  '  ! $  $ ) ./ ( ) /      /- )   " * 2/ #  $ ( ) / ) / ' '  /0  '  * -/4 *   /.  *     * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /   #  ./-0  /0-   )   $ ) / ' '  /0  '  * -/4  *   /.  pre-     /- )  s     '  '  /   on the sample     #  $ ( ) /  pre-TCJA trend is   '  '  /  on the sample    because  ! 0' '  ) $ ) "    /- *   / $  / *   +/ (    The data for s/-0  /0-   )  $ ) / ' '  /0  '  * -/4  *   /s  ) /     -/   * ( * )    ) )  '  " * 2/ #  /   $ ( ) /   /   ) /     -/   * ( * )    ) )  '  " * 2/ #   /   #  *  ' '  rates for the ) * ) $  ) / $  ' ! $   $ ) ./ ( ) /  /- )    )     /0  '   * ( * )    ) )  '  " * 2/ #      '  '  /      * )    $ " # /     "  * !  / #  ./-0  /0-  $ ( ) /   )   $ ) / ' '  /0  '  * -/4  *   /  components. Equipment investment in particular exhibited a pronounced spike in the fourth quarter of as both the House and Senate versions of the TCJA bill which were respectively introduced on November and November stipulated that full expensing for new equipment investment would be retroactive to September This created a strong financial incentive for companies to shift their equipment investment to the fourth quarter of so as to deduct new equipment investment at the old percent statutory corporate income tax rate. After the initial spike in the rate of growth in fixed investment standard neoclassical growth models would predict a return of the rate of growth to its pre-TCJA trend but from a higher post-TCJA level with the capital-to-output ratio thereby asymptotically approaching its new higher steady-state level. More revealingly considering higher-resolution data at the detailed asset level we observe that asset types exhibiting larger residuals from an AR ( n ) step-ahead forecast of the user cost of capital also experienced larger forecast errors for real investment in Following Cummins Hassett and Hubbard ( ) figure reports autoregressive forecast errors for each disaggregated equipment investment series against forecast errors for the detailed assetlevel user cost of capital assuming equity financing. As can be observed in the figure there is a negative correlation between forecast errors for the user cost of capital and investment consistent with larger declines in the user cost of capital inducing larger increases in demand for capital services. Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act |  $ "    *   ./   *  ! *   $ ( ) /  ) ./ ( ) /   )    $  ) ./ ( ) /    * ./ Residual  / #  * ( +0/   )  $ ) ! * (  / $ * ) $ #  ' *  $ ) " $ ( ) /  )  0./- $  '   ) * -/  / $ * )  / #  *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /   $   '.  ! * (   0/ * " $  ! *   ./.  * !  " * 2/ #   /  * !    #   $  " " "  /   $ ( ) /  $ ) ./ ( ) /  $    ' * //    "  $ ) ./  $   '.  ! * (   0/ * " $  ! *   ./.  * !  / #   ) /   #  ) "  $ )  / #  $ ( ' $ ! $     * ./  * !    $ /  '     /  /4+  Finally though the projected increase in steady-state output is predominantly a long-run effect deriving from a higher flow of capital services as the economy transitions to a higher steady-state target capital stock already in we observe the effects on growth of higher investment demand after corporate tax reform and robust consumer spending followed the enactment of the TCJA s individual provisions. During the quarters between the start of the current expansion in : Q3 and the TCJA s enactment in : Q4 the average contribution of real private nonresidential fixed investment to GDP growth was percentage point. But in the first three quarters after the TCJA s passage the contribution of real private nonresidential fixed investment to GDP growth rose to percentage point. As a share of GDP private nonresidential fixed investment in the first three quarters of attained its second-highest level since As documented in the Economic Report of the President the principal challenge for estimating the effect of changes in corporate and personal income tax rates on economic growth is that the timing of tax changes tends to correlate with cyclical factors. Specifically legislators tend to lower tax rates during periods of economic contraction and raise rates during periods of economic expansion which can negatively bias estimates of the effects of changes in marginal tax rates on investment and output. Two recent empirical approaches to addressing this threat to identification are structural vector autoregression ( SVAR ) and the use of narrative history | Chapter to identify exogenous tax shocks ; both approaches were reviewed in the Report and estimates from this literature were applied to the TCJA. The SVAR approach which was pioneered by Blanchard and Perotti ( ) identifies tax shocks by utilizing information about fiscal institutions to distinguish between discretionary and automatic or cyclical tax changes. Meanwhile the narrative approach which was initiated by Romer and Romer ( ) relies on a textual analysis of tax debates to identify exogenous tax changes with political or philosophical rather than economic motivations. More recently Mertens and Ravn ( ) have developed a hybrid of both approaches that utilizes Romer and Romer s narrative tax shock series as an external instrument to identify structural tax shocks. Using the estimated revenue effects of the TCJA from the Joint Committee on Taxation ( JCT ) Mertens ( ) applies estimated coefficients from the SVAR and narrative approaches to a tax cut of the TCJA s magnitude. He calculates that effects based on aggregate tax multiplier estimates by Blanchard and Perotti ( ) Romer and Romer ( ) Favero and Giavazzi ( ) Mertens and Ravn ( ) Mertens and Ravn ( ) and Caldara and Kamps ( ) imply a cumulative effect on GDP between and of percent. Applying estimated impacts based on responses to individual marginal tax rates from Barro and Redlick ( ) and Mertens and Montiel Olea ( ) he calculates a cumulative effect by of percent. Finally applying estimated effects of disaggregated individual and corporate tax multipliers from Mertens and Ravn ( ) he calculates the cumulative effect on GDP between and of individual tax reform to be percent and the cumulative effect of business tax reform to be percent. As shown in figure actual GDP growth in was consistent with these estimated effects. Between : Q4 and : Q4 the compound annual growth rate of real GDP averaged just percent slowing to and percent in and respectively. After increasing to percent in GDP was on pace in the first three quarters of to grow by percent over the four quarters of the calendar year for the first time since Moreover this growth represented a sharp divergence from the trend. Regressing the compound annual growth rate of GDP on a time trend over a pre-TCJA expansion sample period : Q3 : Q4 projecting this trend into and reconstructing levels from forecasted growth rates we find that as of : Q3 GDP growth in was up percentage point over the trend. Although it is difficult to empirically disentangle the TCJA s effects on growth from the effects of the Trump Administration s other economic policy initiatives to date particularly deregulatory actions the estimates reported in chapter Deregulation That Frees the Economy of the Economic Report of the President suggest that these actions likely contributed less than percentage point to growth in Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | We also estimate the TCJA s effect on growth by calculating the divergence of observed growth from a : Q3 baseline forecast as discussed in chapter of this Report and chapter The Year in Review and the Years Ahead of the Economic Report of the President. To construct this baseline we treat the TCJA as an unanticipated shock arriving in the fourth quarter of Adapting the approach of Fernald and others ( ) we then decompose pre-2017 : Q4 growth rates into trend cyclical and higher-frequency components using Okun s law and a partial linear regression model with a frequency filter to estimate the long-run growth rate. We then estimate an unrestricted vector autogressive model ( VAR ) on detrended growth rates through : Q3 of real GDP the unemployment gap the labor force participation rate real personal consumption expenditures and the yield spread of 10-year over 3-month Treasuries. We determine optimal lag length by satisfaction of the Akaike and Hannan-Quinn information criteria. Postestimation and VAR forecasting we then add the estimated long-run trend. Relative to this baseline forecast observed output growth was up percentage points at a compound annual rate as of : Q3. Figure compares these two estimated effects of the TCJA to the SVAR and narrative estimates reported by Mertens ( ) Another approach to evaluate the TCJA s effect on growth is to compare the Congressional Budget Office s ( CBO ) final pre-TCJA 10-year economic projection with the post-TCJA actuals. In June the CBO forecasted real GDP growth of percent in with real private nonresidential fixed investment growing by just percent. If GDP growth during the four quarters of was instead percent as the U.S. economy was on pace to achieve through : Q3 and if it were to then immediately revert to the CBO s June forecast in economic output would be percent higher than projected. If GDP were to simply grow by percent in by the CBO s upwardly revised August forecast of percent in and if it were to then revert to the pre-TCJA projection in economic output would be percent higher than projected in line with the CEA s initial estimates. Data available through : Q3 therefore suggest that estimates from the Tax Policy Center ( ) Penn-Wharton Budget Model ( percent ) JCT ( percent on average over years implying a 10-year level effect of percent ) and Tax Foundation ( percent ) may constitute lower bounds. The preliminary evidence is however consistent with a more recent analysis by Lieberknecht and Wieland ( ) who employ a two-country dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model to estimate a long-run GDP effect of percent. An important implication of higher-than-projected growth is Federal government revenue. The JCT estimated the TCJA s conventional revenue cost at $ trillion over years and a dynamic estimate of $ trillion after accounting for higher revenue due to economic growth net of increased interest payments. If the TCJA s effect on economic growth exceeds the JCT s estimate the actual long-run revenue cost may be lower. | Chapter  $ "    * 2/ #  $ )    '        Actual growth Actual growth Compound annual growth rate Trend growth           *     * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /    /   ) /     * ( * )    ) )  '  " * 2/ #   /  *  / #  " $ )   -/   #     '  / $ * )  /- )   * %  / $ * )  $    '  '  /   ! *      #        /- )   * %  / $ * )  $    '  '  /   ! *    The cumulative effect of higher near-term growth on revenue can be illustrated by calculating the difference between the CBO s final pre-TCJA ( June ) 10-year projections of growth and revenue advancing from : Q4 actuals and the CBO s final pre-TCJA 10-year economic projections updated with actual GDP data and April CBO revenue projections. Fiscal year revenue-to-GDP projections are converted to calendar years by assigning percent of the subsequent fiscal year to the current calendar year. First we assume that actual nominal GDP growth in the four quarters of achieved its : Q1 : Q3 annualized pace of percent. Second we assume that actual nominal GDP growth in achieves the Administration s current projection of percent. Third we assume that thereafter growth reverts to the pre-TCJA trajectory projected by the CBO. Fourth we assume that the ratio of revenue to GDP was as projected by the CBO in April In this simulation Federal tax revenue would be about $ billion higher over the years through This macroeconomic feedback alone would thereby offset more than one-third of the conventional cost of the law. Because increased growth in calendar year was likely augmented by other legislative and Administration policies as well as nonpolicy economic factors we also estimate the likely macroeconomic feedback of higher growth by applying the estimated coefficients from Romer and Romer ( ) and Mertens ( ) to GDP growth in and and assuming April revenue-to-GDP projections. This approach yields an estimated cumulative revenue effect of between $ and $ billion over years or between $ Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act |  $ "    /-0  /0-  '       )      / $   ./ $ (  /     /0  '   "     '      )    (   '  )  #     )    * // $    *   )    $   $   -/ )   )    * ) / $ '   '    -/ )   )     )   * (   )    * (    *   )     ' $  &   -/ )   )    * ) / $ '   '    -/ )   )     )   -/ )   )     )   '  / $  / *     /- )   '  / $  / *          ' $ ) Percentage points  *    -/ )        '  '  / $ * ) Note : VAR = vector autoregression. The : Q3 : Q4 trend is estimated on compound annual growth rates and levels reconstructed from projected rates. The CEA s : Q3 baseline is estimated using a VAR and statistical frequency filter as described in chapter of this Report. Mertens ( ) compiles references to estimates from other papers ( these other estimates are shown in this figure ) Mertens and Olea ( ) provide two estimates from the same paper. and $ billion over years if the level effect persists. Excluding Mertens s ( ) international estimations which treat deemed repatriation an effective reduction in the implicit tax liability of U.S. multinational enterprises as a tax increase the approach suggests a cumulative revenue feedback over years of $ billion. Because these empirically estimated growth effects only extend for three years whereas the increased flow of capital services as the economy transitions to a higher steady-state capital-to-labor ratio is a long-run effect the corresponding revenue effects may constitute a lower bound ( box ) Because the TCJA was passed by Congress under the budget reconciliation process the bill s conventional revenue cost as estimated by its official scorer the JCT could not exceed $ trillion over years. As a result several provisions of the TCJA are scheduled to expire by the end of fiscal year Specifically many of the provisions affecting the personal income tax code are due to expire on December whereas among corporate income tax provisions bonus depreciation particularly for equipment investment is set to begin phasing out on January and to fully phase out on December Using a neoclassical growth model Barro and Furman ( ) estimate that making the TCJA s temporary business provisions permanent would raise long-run GDP by percentage points above their baseline law-aswritten estimate and by percentage point over years. Using a more | Chapter Box The Mortgage Interest Deduction and the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act Before the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act discussions of potential changes in the mortgage interest deduction ( MID ) raised concern about possible future effects on home value and homeownership ( NAR ) The National Association of Realtors commissioned a study that forecasted a percent decline in home prices in the short run resulting from proposals in the TCJA that included at the time changes to the MID ( PwC ) The TCJA did not eliminate the MID but it did reduce the maximum mortgage eligibility by $ ( CEA ) In addition the TCJA included a doubling of the standard deduction which was projected to reduce taxable units claiming the MID and increase tax units utilizing the standard deduction ( CEA 2017b ) The MID is a regressive subsidy with greater benefit for those with mortgages on more expensive homes in part because individuals with higher incomes are more likely to itemize their deductions rather than opt for the standard deduction. The incentive provided by the MID for more expensive homes has ramifications for the housing market. Earlier CEA analyses and reviews of the literature note that the MID is not associated with higher home ownership rates even though that was a central goal for maintaining the policy ( CEA 2017b ) Furthermore given the incentive for larger and/or more expensive home purchases the MID inflates housing prices. The impact of the MID on housing prices is found to vary across different housing markets depending on the elasticity of housing supply. A market with a more inelastic supply would face greater downward pressure on housing prices than a market with elastic supply as a result of an elimination of the MID. Furthermore earlier CEA analyses comparing home ownership rates in the United States with those in Canada and other countries belonging to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development found the MID to be neither necessary nor sufficient for relatively higher home ownership rates ( CEA 2017b ) The final TCJA legislation which was signed into law in December did not eliminate the MID though as noted above both the change in the amount of mortgage debt for which interest can be deducted and the doubling of the standard deduction would result in fewer tax filers utilizing itemized deductions and the MID. Given this policy change examining the reaction of both homeownership rates and housing prices across the country and across different markets can provide insight into the predicted effects detailed above. In the first months of though housing prices continued to increase the pace of housing price growth ticked slightly down. In the first three quarters of homeownership rates slightly increased. Housing prices measured by a number of housing price indices have increased nationally since In the first months of real house price indices continued to increase though the pace of annual growth slowed slightly. The 12-month percentage change among three of the four real house Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | price indices displayed in figure 1-i decreased in though they have remained positive. At the city level the reaction of housing prices varied in the first three quarters of As noted above how housing prices respond to a change in use of the MID is dependent on the elasticity of housing supply. In markets where housing supply is less responsive such as San Francisco housing prices would be expected to react more to changes in use of the MID versus a housing market with a less-regulated supply such as Dallas. Though the real housing price indices in both San Francisco and Dallas continued to increase in the first three quarters of the annual change in Dallas s real housing price indices continued on the downward trend that was evident before the TCJA s passage. The pace of annual change in San Francisco however quickened in the first three quarters of after the TCJA s passage ( figure 1-ii ) Contrary to a report commissioned by the National Association of Realtors in May which predicted that MID reforms similar to that ultimately enacted by the TCJA would cause a short-run decline in national home prices of percent housing prices have increased in some markets ( PwC ) Homeownership rates nationally had trended down for several years though they saw a reversal in when rates began to move upward for the first time since After the TCJA s passage homeownership continued to increase nationally through the first three quarters of ( figure 1-iii ) Faster  $ "  $   * ) / #    ) /  "   #  ) "  $ )    / $ * )  '    '  * $ ) "   $   )  $   Percent     *  $ ' ' *    Standard & Poor s  * * " $   *  CoreLogic ; Standard & Poor s ; Zillow ; Federal Housing Finance Agency ( FHFA ) ; Bureau of   * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /           0/.   )   *     / | Chapter  $ "  $ $  Four-   -/    ) /  "   #  ) "  $ )   " $ * )  '    ' * $ ) "   $   )  $   Percent        )    )  $  *   ' '   *      '  * $ ) "   $ )  )    " )      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /           0/.   )   *     /  $ "  $ $ $    / $ * )  '  * (   ) # $    /  Percent      *    )     * /          0/.   )   *     / Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | economic growth resulting from the TCJA would be expected to shift the demand curve for housing outward. U.S. fiscal policy continues to implicitly subsidize owner-occupied housing by excluding imputed rental income from income taxation and through direct and indirect financial support of government-sponsored mortgage enterprises as discussed in chapter of this Report. User cost calculations reported by Poterba and Sinai ( ) suggest that the implicit subsidy of untaxed imputed rent is times that of the MID with the magnitude of the differential impact increasing in household income. Feldman ( ) and Passmore Sherlund and Burgess ( ) meanwhile find that government sponsorship of the Federal National Mortgage Association and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation lower mortgage rates by to basis points. richly specified two-country dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model Lieberknecht and Wieland ( ) find that making the temporary provisions permanent would raise the long-run growth effect from to percent. We can also estimate the effect on output of making permanent the TCJA s provisions currently set to expire in by calculating the static budget impact in and and applying the estimated impact multipliers reported by Mertens ( ) Specifically calculating the change from in the JCT s ( ) static revenue estimate for and dividing by the Administration s projection for GDP in and reversing the sign and applying the estimated tax multipliers indicate a cumulative impact of up to percentage point by the end of Labor Market Effects In the Economic Report of the President the CEA demonstrated that due to the high mobility of capital relative to labor the incidence of corporate income taxation is increasingly borne by labor though there is an important distinction between short- and long-run economic incidence. In the short run increases ( or decreases ) in corporate income taxation are largely borne by current owners of corporate capital through a decline ( rise ) in asset values and by investors through lower ( higher ) after-tax rates of return. However the CEA estimated that in the long run labor bears a majority of the burden of corporate income taxation as an increase ( decrease ) in the effective tax rate on capital income from marginal investment lowers ( raises ) steady-state demand for capital services. The consequent decline ( rise ) in the capital-to-labor ratio lowers ( raises ) labor productivity and thus depresses ( lifts ) labor compensation. Consistent with this investment channel Giroud and Rauh ( ) employing Romer and Romer s ( ) narrative approach to estimate the effects of State-level corporate income tax changes find short-run statutory corporate | Chapter tax elasticities of both employment and establishment counts of about and elasticities of over a 10-year horizon. Moreover a broad survey of empirical studies of the incidence of corporate income taxation reported in the Economic Report of the President indicates that workers ultimately bear between and percent of the economic burden of corporate taxation with more recent studies generally constituting the upper bound of this range reflecting growing international capital mobility. The studies that were cited suggest a corporate income tax elasticity of wages of between and with estimated tax semielasticities from to as large as Applying these estimated elasticities to the TCJA the CEA calculated that a permanent 14-percentage-point reduction in the Federal statutory corporate tax rate would raise average annual household income by between $ and $ in the long run with an average estimate of $ Dropping the two lowest and two highest estimates suggests a tighter range between $ and $ Although these are long-run estimated wage effects resulting primarily from a gradual transition to a new steady state with a higher capital-to-labor ratio even in the short term we would expect to observe forward-looking firms revising their labor market expectations. Models of rent sharing indicate that in the short run workers stand to benefit from increased profits accruing to their parent employer through a bargaining channel. This model does not make any predictions about changes in employment levels. Arulampalam Devereux and Maffini ( ) present a model of rent sharing in which changes in the corporate tax rate expensing provisions and overall marginal tax rates ( from various and sundry other tax provisions ) all serve to affect the wage. The model supposes a single union representing all wage earners. How the model s predictions would change under different bargaining arrangements is not clear though in each case the signs of the first derivative on corporate tax rates longer depreciation schedules and overall marginal tax rates are all negative such that the TCJA is predicted to unambiguously increase workers wages through the bargaining channel. This theory accords with the empirical evidence first noted by Krueger and Summers that more profitable industries tend to use some of their rents to hire better quality labor and share some of their rents with their workers ( Krueger and Summers ; also see ) More recent studies of intraindustry wage differentials confirm that rent sharing remains a feature of the U.S. labor market ( Barth et al. ; Card et al. ; Song et al. ) In the results of the research by Arulampalam Devereux and Maffini ( ) the wage is roughly equal to the weighted average of the outside wage option of the employer and some share of the firm s location-specific profit. Changes in expensing provisions affect the profits over which employers and employees bargain even in the absence of changes in the target capital stock as do other adjustments outside the corporate income tax rate that Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | serve to affect the firm s tax liability. Arulampalam and her colleagues note that if cost reductions induced by the tax law are fully passed on to consumers in the output market the profits over which to bargain are unchanged. Finally Arulampalam and colleagues result highlights the role of the corporate tax rate itself in the wage bargain. Higher values of raise the value of the firm s outside option ( here relocation to another tax jurisdiction ) and lower bargained wages. Lowering reduces the value of the firm s outside option ( in this case another tax jurisdiction ) and thus increases worker wages. Each of these effects is immediate manifesting in higher worker wages as soon as the impact of changes in corporate taxes on firm profits is known with some certainty. Thus the spate of bonus and increased wage announcements immediately after the TCJA s enactment reported in box is consistent with the rent-sharing model of worker wages. It is also consistent with survey data that were gathered immediately after the TCJA s passage. Figures and report the net percentage of NFIB survey respondents reporting plans to raise worker compensation and increase employment over the next three months expressed as a three-month centered moving average to smooth random monthly volatility. As with planned capital expenditures the survey results indicate two marked upward shifts in compensation and hiring plans the first after the election of President Trump and the second after the TCJA s passage. In August the net share of independent businesses reporting plans to increase employment in the next three months set a new alltime record whereas in October the net share of independent business reporting plans to raise worker compensation in the next three months broke a 28-year record to set a new all-time high. Reinforcing the private survey data and consistent with the research of Giroud and Rauh ( ) data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Job Openings and Labor Turnover survey also show a sharp uptick in labor demand after the TCJA s passage. Figure reports total private job openings from through After leveling off in at between about and million private job openings surged after the TCJA s passage topping million by August In addition during the entire pre-TCJA expansion real nonproduction bonuses per hour grew at a compound annual rate of percent. Since the TCJA came into effect they have risen $ per worker on an annual basis or by percent. Available labor earnings data are also consistent with the CEA s projections. Relative to a time trend estimated over the entire pre-TCJA expansion sample period ( : Q3 : Q4 ) as of : Q3 real disposable income per household was up $ over the trend. Expressed as a perpetual annuity this corresponds to a lifetime pay raise of about $ for the average household assuming the real discount rate currently implied by Shiller s cyclically adjusted earnings-to-price ratio for the Standard & Poor s ( S&P ) of percent. Across all households this constitutes a $ trillion boost to household | Chapter Box Corporate Bonuses Wage Increases and Investment since the TJCA s Passage In a dynamic competitive economy like that of the United States firms compete for workers. And a robust academic literature pioneered by one of President Obama s CEA chairs Alan Krueger shows that more profitable employers pay higher wages. Why ? Because a firm that attempts to pay a worker less than he or she is worth will quickly lose the worker to a competitor. In a tight labor market wage bargaining models predict that firms will respond to a profits windfall by raising wages and bonuses to attract and retain talent. The CEA has already tallied companies that have offered bonuses and/or increased retirement contributions since the TCJA was enacted. The total number of workers receiving a bonus or increased retirement contribution now stands at over million with an average bonus size of $ ( figure 1-iv ) Additional workers are seeing higher take home pay given that nearly companies have announced increases in wages with of these firms announcing minimum wage increases. Walmart the Nation s largest private employer has announced an increase in the starting wage of its workers of $ an hour for the first six months and $ thereafter. For a full-time employee working hours a week this means up to $ a year in additional pay. These pay increases are for those earning Walmart s minimum wage so as a share of income the gains are substantial at least percent. Many other employers have done the same as Walmart including BB&T the 11th-largest bank by assets in the United States where full-time workers who are paid the bank s minimum wage will see a $ increase in their annual income. Nearly percent of firms announcing minimum wage hikes have provided increases of at least $ Hard-working Americans are also seeing savings in their electricity bills thanks to the TCJA. More than companies have pledged to pass tax savings on to their customers in the form of reduced tax rates a practice that will pass savings on to millions. The President s promise to lower corporate taxes and reduce red tape has led American businesses to a surge in investment and since the TCJA became law the CEA has tallied over $ billion in new corporate investment announcements attributable to it. Likewise the March Morgan Stanley composite Planned Capital Expenditures ( Capex Plans ) Index marked a record high in a series that began years ago. As discussed earlier in this chapter the official investment statistics show that this investment boom is already taking hold. This is welcome news ; according to the CEA s calculations a return to the historical rate of capital deepening in the United States would give households a boost of $ in annual wage and salary income by The bottom line is that the TCJA s enactment in December gave a much-needed boost to American workers who in recent years have endured Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | Figure 1-iv. Distribution of Announced Tax Reform Bonuses Number of companies $ $ $ or greater Less than $ $ $ $ $ Sources : Americans for Tax Reform ; CEA calculations. Note : This figure does not encompass all companies that have announced tax reform benefits. Benefits related to retirement wage increases and ambiguous bonus announcements are excluded. chronic underinvestment due to a corporate tax code that discouraged domestic capital formation. With investment growth now accelerating in response to the corporate tax cuts we should consider the recent spate of bonus and wage hike announcements as merely a down payment on a longoverdue raise for American households. income. As discussed above this effect is expected to grow over time through increased capital deepening raising capital per worker labor productivity and wages. Though long-run capital deepening is expected to further raise real disposable personal income this effect will be partially offset if the personal income tax cuts currently scheduled to expire after are not extended or made permanent through new legislation. Figure reports compound annual growth rates in real median weekly earnings of full-time wage and salary workers and real average weekly earnings of production and nonsupervisory employees in manufacturing since the TCJA s enactment relative to the recent trend. On an annualized basis real median usual earnings for full-time wage and salary workers were up $ over the trend while real average earnings for production and nonsupervisory employees in the manufacturing sector specifically were up $ ( box ) In the longer run as articulated by the CEA ( 2017a ) and in the Economic Report of the President we expect wage gains to be driven primarily by increased investment raising the target capital stock and thus the | Chapter  $ "    /    ) /  "  * !         * )  ) /.   '  ) ) $ ) "  / *    $   * -&   * ( )  / $ * )  $ )  / #   3/    * ) / #  Percent  '  / $ * )      Previous all-time high     *      *      *   *     / $ * )  '     / $ * )  * !  )  )  ) /   $ )            '  '  / $ * )  * /    /   ) /     ) /   ( * ) / #  ( * $ ) "    "  /-0 )   / $ ) "  $ )    (             0/.   )   *     /    $ "    /    ) /  "  * !         * )  ) /.   '  ) ) $ ) "  / *  )     ( ' * ( ) /  Percent  '  / $ * )      Previous all-time high     *      *      *   *     / $ * )  '     / $ * )  * !  )  )  ) /   $ )            '  '  / $ * )  * /    /   ) /     ) /   ( * ) / #  ( * $ ) "    "  /-0 )   / $ ) "  $ )    (             0/.   )   *     /   Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act |  $ "    * /  '   $  /  *    ) $ ) "  Millions  '  / $ * )       *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * )  * /    /   ) /     ) /   ( * ) / #  ( * $ ) "    " /-0 )   / $ ) "  $ )    (             0/.   )   *     / steady-state level of capital per worker and consequently labor productivity. Already in we observe evidence of this mechanism operating. During the pre-TCJA expansion in : Q3 : Q4 growth in business sector labor productivity averaged percent compared with a pre-2008 postwar average of percent. Growth in nonfarm business sector labor productivity averaged percent during the pre-TCJA expansion compared with a pre-2008 postwar average of percent. In contrast in the first three quarters of business sector labor productivity grew at an annual rate of percent double the rate of the pre-TCJA expansion. Labor productivity in the nonfarm business sector grew at an annual rate of percent. Finally as noted in the Economic Report of the President Keane and Rogerson ( ) demonstrate that because incremental human capital acquired through employment raises expected future earnings the net present value of which varies inversely with age older and relatively more experienced workers can be expected to have larger labor supply responses to changes in marginal personal income tax rates than younger less experienced workers. Indeed we observe this effect in the data. Regressing the employment-to-population of over-55-year-olds on a linear time trend fully interacted with a binary variable for post-TCJA over a sample period July December we estimate a positive coefficient on the interaction term and we can reject the null hypothesis of no slope change with percent confidence. In | Chapter  $ "     *  )     '    *  * ( )  / $ * )   )     "   * 2/ # Dollars ( annualized ) $ $   '    "  &'4   ) $ ) "  ! * (  ) !   /0- $ ) "  *   / $ * )   )  ) * ) $ *  ( ' *   '  (  $  )   '  &'4   ) $ ) "  ! * ! 0' ' / $ (   "   )    '   * -&  *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /   #  /- )   $    '  '  /   ! *     +/ (    ! *  ( * ) / # '4    /   / # * " #      (    ! *  ( * ) / # '4    /    ) )  ' $     * ' '    (    * -& &   contrast we can not reject the null hypothesis with a similar level of confidence for other age cohorts which suggests that the TCJA may have had a specific positive effect on labor force participation among near-retirement and retirement-age workers at the margin. Although there is some evidence ( e.g. Blau and Robins ; Whittington ; and Haan and Wrohlick ) that expansion of the Child Tax Credit may positively affect the long-run potential labor supply through the fertility channel the data that are currently available do not permit evaluation of this hypothesis. However there is also evidence ( e.g. Blau and Robins ; Whittington ; Averett Peters and Waldman ; and Haan and Wrohlick ) of positive labor supply responses among females to decreases in the effective cost of child care through public subsidies. Consistent with this literature female labor force participation among those age years rose percentage point in percentage points above the trend during the period : Q3 : Q4. In contrast overall female labor force participation rose percentage point ( percentage points over the trend ) while male labor force participation among those age rose just percentage point ( percentage point above the trend ) The elimination of personal exemptions may have partially offset any maternal-specific labor supply effects of the Child Tax Credit s expansion though this offsetting effect would have been mitigated by the near doubling of the standard deduction. Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | International Developments In the Economic Report of the President the CEA reported that an additional margin along which changes in corporate income tax rates can affect economic growth is through the propensity for multinational enterprises to engage in profit shifting across international tax jurisdictions. One technique for effecting such profit shifts is the use of international transfer pricing of intellectual property assets between U.S. multinational enterprises and their subsidiaries in lower-tax jurisdictions. Though transfer pricing is intended by tax authorities to be conducted on an arm s length transactional basis in practice the pricing of relatively untraded or otherwise illiquid proprietary intellectual property is often opaque with the result that firms may systematically underprice the value of the transferred asset. Guvenen and others ( ) estimate that such profit shifting by multinational enterprises results in substantial U.S. economic activity being imputed to overseas affiliates and therefore has been understating the United States GDP particularly since the 1990s. These researchers correct for this mismeasurement by reweighting the consolidated firm profits that should be attributed to the United States by apportioning profits according to the locations of labor compensation and sales to unaffiliated parties. Applying these weights to all U.S.-based multinational enterprises and aggregating to the national level the authors calculate that in about $ billion in official foreign profits could have been properly attributed to the United States. Importantly the Economic Report of the President documented that the propensity to engage in international profit shifting is highly responsive to effective marginal corporate income tax rate differentials. For example Hines and Rice ( ) estimate a tax semielasticity of profit shifting of indicating that a 1-percentage-point decrease in a country s corporate tax rate is associated with an increase of percent in reported corporate income. Before the TCJA the United States had one of the highest statutory corporate income tax rates among the countries that belong to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and U.S. multinational enterprises therefore faced strong incentives to report profits in lower-tax jurisdictions. Hines ( ) Phillips and others ( ) and Zucman ( ) each rank the top jurisdictions they quantitatively identify as tax havens. In these rankings economies Bermuda Hong Kong Ireland Luxembourg the Netherlands Singapore Switzerland and the U.K. Caribbean islands appear on all three lists. As of these jurisdictions with a combined population of just percent ( million ) of the world s population and percent of global output accounted for percent of the United States direct investment abroad position on a historical cost basis. After the TCJA s passage in the first two quarters of U.S. direct investment in these jurisdictions declined by $ billion ( box ) | Chapter The Deemed Repatriation of Accumulated Foreign Earnings In addition to reduced incentives to shift corporate earnings on a flow basis the TCJA also included provisions designed to incentivize the repatriation of past earnings previously held abroad. In particular the TCJA imposed a one-time tax which it termed deemed repatriation on past post-1986 earnings that were being held abroad regardless of whether these earnings are repatriated. With a tax of percent on earnings representing liquid assets such as cash and percent on earnings representing illiquid noncash assets payable over eight years deemed repatriation was intended to incentivize the reallocation of past corporate earnings from investment in low-yield assets in low-tax jurisdictions to real investment in U.S.-based fixed assets. Indeed on a directional basis outbound U.S. direct investment consequently declined by $ billion in the first three quarters of as U.S. multinational companies redirected investment toward the domestic economy. Although the precise volume of total accumulated U.S. corporate earnings held abroad is difficult to estimate we can calculate an approximation by summing the net flow of earnings reinvested abroad since as reported in table of the Bureau of Economic Analysis International Transactions Accounts through This calculation suggests that a maximum cumulative total of $ trillion was held abroad by U.S. multinational enterprises as of : Q4. Of this sum $ billion or percent was repatriated in the first three quarters of alone including both the flow of current earnings and the distribution of past earnings. The trend in the volume of quarterly repatriations through : Q3 suggests that this pace can be expected to abate in Although the distribution of past earnings between cash and noncash investments abroad is similarly difficult to assess Credit Suisse ( ) recently estimated that percent of overseas earnings of nonfinancial S&P companies were held in the form of cash. The share percent of the U.S. direct investment position accounted for by the eight small jurisdictions identified by Hines ( ) Phillips and others ( ) and Zucman ( ) as tax havens is therefore consistent with the Credit Suisse estimate. Assuming a percent cash share of a $ trillion stock deemed repatriation could raise as much $ billion in additional tax revenue by before reduced credits for foreign taxes are paid. This constitutes an extreme upper-bound estimate of potential revenue from deemed repatriation because the cumulated flow of reinvested earnings may include defunct firms and/or firms that have since been acquired by other foreign-based firms. But there are also reasons to expect that the JCT and the Bureau of Economic Analysis s ( BEA s ) estimates of $ and $ billion respectively may be conservative. Specifically data revisions since the JCT and BEA estimations as well as the inclusion of reinvested earnings in : Q4 yield a substantially larger tax base for the deemed repatriation tax. Second private sector estimates ( Credit Suisse ) suggest calculations based on the Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | Box The TCJA s Provisions Shift the United States toward a Territorial System of Taxation Accompanying the substantial reduction in the U.S. corporate tax rate as part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act were provisions that shifted the United States away from a worldwide system of taxation and toward a territorial system. The provisions of the Global Intangible Low-Tax Income ( GILTI ) the Foreign Derived Intangible Income ( FDII ) and the Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax ( BEAT ) aim to address the incentives for U.S. firms to shift profits abroad. Profit-shifting has become increasingly costly in recent decades with estimated revenue loss increasing times between and rising by an estimated $ to $ billion or to percent of the U.S. corporate income tax base ( Clausing ) A total of percent of the profit shifted abroad by U.S. firms in was to tax haven countries. The previous worldwide system taxed U.S. firms on their global profits though most profits earned abroad by U.S. firms were only taxed once they were repatriated to the United States. Evidence from surveyed U.S. tax executives indicated that U.S. firms exposed themselves to nontax costs to avoid taxes on repatriated income ( Graham Hanlon and Shevlin ) The United States was one of just nations among countries belonging to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development with a worldwide tax system before the TCJA s passage. As a result U.S. firms were left at a potential competitive disadvantage to other OECD-country firms competing in overseas markets that were generally not subject to home-country taxes on profits earned abroad ( Pomerleau ) The inclusion of the GILTI FDII and BEAT in the TCJA shifted the United States toward a hybrid territorial system lowering incentives for U.S.-based firms to shift profits out of the country. The GILTI and FDII are complementary provisions that address the tax system s treatment of intangible income. The GILTI is a tax at a reduced rate on the foreign profits of a U.S. firm earned with respect to activity of its controlled foreign corporations in excess of a percent return where percent is the rate of return attributable to depreciable tangible assets in a competitive market. A rate of return in excess of percent is attributed to mobile income from intellectual property or other intangible assets. The FDII also addresses profits from intangible assets including intellectual property but with respect to U.S. firms excess returns related to foreign income earned directly. The FDII provides for a reduced tax rate on foreign-derived U.S. income in excess of the percent rate of return associated with tangible assets ( Pomerleau ) Together the GILTI and FDII are intended to neutralize the role that tax considerations play in choosing the location of intangible income attributable to foreign market activity. The BEAT establishes a tax on U.S. firms with revenue of $ million or more and base erosion payments generally in excess of percent of total deductions. Base erosion payments are generally certain deductible payments that a U.S. firm makes to related and controlled foreign corporations. | Chapter The BEAT discourages firms from profit-shifting to lower-tax foreign jurisdictions by applying the percent BEAT tax rate generally to both taxable income and base erosion payments made by the firm ( Pomerleau ) The percent rate started phasing in from percent in and will end up rising to percent in The BEAT GILTI and FDII contribute to reshaping the incentives the firms face in determining the location of assets as well as new investment when considering after-tax income. When coupled with the notable reduction in the corporate tax rate this shift toward a territorial system of taxation may contribute to the TCJA s supply-side effect on changing the growth rate of U.S. output. The growth in the intellectual property component of real nonresidential business fixed investment is above the recent trend ( see figure in the main text ) Investment in real intellectual property products grew at the fastest pace since in the first three quarters after the TCJA s passage at a compound annual rate. Further by disincentivizing profit shifting the provisions could have a positive impact on the corporate income tax base. The GILTI modeled with the reduction of both the corporate income tax rate and the rate for repatriated income is estimated to increase the corporate tax base by $ billion resulting in $ billion in additional U.S. revenues ( Clausing ) cash share of total assets less equity of U.S.-majority-owned foreign affiliates as reported in the BEA s Activities of U.S. Multinational Enterprises accounts may substantially underestimate the share of cumulated reinvested earnings liable for the deemed repatriation taxation at the percent rate. During the temporary two-year repatriation holiday introduced by the Homeland Investment Act ( HIA ) of U.S. multinational firms repatriated $ billion of which about $ billion or percent of the about $ trillion in then-accumulated overseas earnings is attributed to the HIA ( Redmiles ; Herrick ) However though many authors have attempted to draw comparisons between the HIA and the TCJA ( e.g. Gale et al. ; and Herrick ) aside from introducing an incentive to repatriate the two laws are otherwise generally incommensurable. Most importantly the comparison is invalid because the TCJA in addition to deemed repatriation also permanently lowered the user cost of capital whereas the HIA a temporary tax cut on past earnings did not. Though the Jobs and Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of had expanded first-year depreciation allowances for certain properties increased Section expensing and cut the dividend tax rate for individual shareholders these provisions were all temporary expiring respectively in December December and December Thus the bonus depreciation introduced in expired before the HIA came into effect while Section Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | expensing applied for only half the duration of the repatriation holiday and the dividend tax cut applied to no more than three or four years of the lives of assets newly installed during the HIA repatriation holiday. In addition under the new view of dividend taxation the tax advantage of financing marginal investment out of retained earnings or low-risk debt exactly offsets the double taxation of subsequent dividends. As a result among firms financing marginal investment out of retentions and paying dividends out of residual cash flows taxes on dividends have no impact on investment incentives ( King ; Auerbach ; Bradford ; Auerbach and Hassett ; Desai and Goolsbee ; Chetty and Saez ; Yagan ) This contrasts to the traditional view in which marginal investment is financed through variations in the level of new shares. Under the new view of dividend taxation we would therefore expect the impact of the HIA on U.S. domestic investment to have been limited to cash-constrained firms. Consistent with the new view Dharmapala Foley and Forbes ( ) find that the HIA had no significant effect on domestic investment employment or research and development in part because most U.S. multinationals were not financially constrained at the time and because repatriated earnings were generally distributed to shareholders through share repurchases particularly among firms with stronger corporate governance. Among firms with low investment opportunities and high residual cash flows stronger corporate governance would indeed predict higher shareholder distributions given that weakly governed managers may face incentives to raise executive compensation or embark on risky or otherwise low-return acquisitions. Blouin and Krull ( ) also find that on average firms that repatriated in response to the HIA had lower investment opportunities and higher free cash flows than nonrepatriating firms and relatively increased share repurchases by about $ billion though this had no significant effect on dividend payments. In contrast to Dharmapala Foley and Forbes ( ) but consistent with the new view Faulkender and Petersen ( ) find that the HIA had a large positive effect on domestic investment by previously capital-constrained firms though unconstrained firms accounted for the majority of repatriations. Faulkender and Petersen s findings suggest that domestic and foreign internal funds are not perfectly fungible and that lowering the cost of repatriating foreign income reduces the cost of financing marginal investment with internal foreign funds. Consistent with the imperfect fungibility of domestic versus foreign internal funds Desai Foley and Hines ( ) find that high corporate tax rates encourage borrowing through trade accounts with U.S. multinational firms employing trade credit to reallocate capital between locations with differing tax rates. These researchers conclude that the additional corporate borrowing through trade accounts is comparable in magnitude to the additional borrowing through bank loans and debt issuance associated with higher corporate tax rates. | Chapter Reinforcing Faulkender and Petersen s results and in contrast to Dharmapala Foley and Forbes ( ) Dyreng and Hills ( ) find that employment increased in the geographic region surrounding the headquarters of repatriating multinational enterprises in the three years immediately after the HIA s inception and that the effect of repatriation on employment was increasing in the amount repatriated. Dyreng and Hills observe that the positive employment effect was strongest when the geographic region is defined as a 20-mile radius around the headquarters of repatriating firms with estimates indicating that employment rose by more than three employees for every $ million repatriated in response to the HIA. Share Repurchases and Capital Distributions Research conducted by the Federal Reserve shows that coinciding with repatriated earnings in the first quarter in there was a substantial increase in share repurchases conducted by U.S. multinational firms ( Smolyansky Suarez and Tabova ) This analysis further shows that the increase in share repurchases was concentrated in the top firms in terms of total cash held abroad. Figure shows the elevated level of real repatriated earnings by U.S. firms coincident with an increase in real share repurchases relative to total assets. The large positive shock to share repurchases centralized in the top cash-held-abroad U.S. firms after the TCJA s enactment has garnered an extensive discussion on the impact of share repurchases. As noted in more recent research a common critique is that each dollar used to buy back a share is a dollar that is not spent on business activities that would otherwise stimulate economic growth though people seem to forget some of the very basic lessons of financial economics when it comes to share repurchases ( Asness Hazelkorn and Richardson ) Jensen s ( ) free cash flow hypothesis outlined the agency conflicts that arise between shareholders and corporate managers when firms have substantial cash flow in excess of that required to fund all projects that have positive net present values when discounted at the relevant cost of capital. Jensen notes that managers of a firm with large free cash flows may use those excess flows to pursue low-return acquisitions rather than distributing residual cash to shareholders. He further suggests that agency conflicts between managers and shareholders are greater within firms with larger free cash flows as the problem is how to motivate managers to disgorge the cash rather than investing it at below the cost of capital or wasting it on organization inefficiencies ( Jensen ) Jensen s seminal hypothesis informs the later literature by underscoring how excess or free cash flows if unable to be invested in projects with a positive net present value may incur economic costs and lead to agency conflicts. Dittmar and Mahrt-Smith ( ) find evidence in support of Jensen s hypothesis. Consistent with Dharmapala Foley and Forbes s ( ) observation Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act |  $ "     '      /- $  /     ) $ ) "   )    #     #    * /  '   '   /- $  /    ) $ ) "  ' ! /   $   / $ *  * !   '  ) * ) ! $ )  )  $  '   * *  /  #    #   / * / * /  '   /.  $ " # /   $ Dollars ( billions ) Ratio                 *     '     *       * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * ) that share repurchases in response to the HIA were particularly pronounced among repatriating firms with stronger corporate governance Dittmar and Mahrt-Smith estimate that investors value $ in cash in a poorly governed firm at only $ to $ Contrary to popular myth this is the primary mechanism whereby share repurchases may raise share prices ; repurchases otherwise have no mechanical effect on share price. For example following Cochrane ( ) suppose a company with $ in cash and a factory worth $ and with two outstanding shares each valued at $ uses that $ in cash to repurchase one of the two outstanding shares. The company now has one asset a factory worth $ and one outstanding share worth $ There has been no change in share price or shareholder wealth. However if investors had previously worried that there was a percent chance that corporate management would squander the $ in cash on excessive executive compensation or loss-making investment projects or acquisitions then the two shares would have been valued at $ each. If the company then repurchased one of the two outstanding shares it would have $ in cash a factory worth $ and one outstanding share valued at $ assuming that investors still attach a percent probability to mismanagement. Grullon and Michaely ( ) also provide empirical evidence that supports Jensen s free cash flow hypothesis finding among other results that | Chapter the market reaction to firms announcing share repurchases is more robust if the firm is more likely to overinvest and that repurchasing firms experience substantial reductions in systematic risk and the cost of capital relative to nonrepurchasing firms. Their findings support Jensen s hypothesis that share repurchases are a firm s value-maximizing response when they do not have investments to make that have a positive net present value. Grullon and Michaely ( ) further note that repurchases may be associated with a firm s transition from a higher growth phase to a lower growth phase. As firms become more mature their investment opportunity set becomes smaller. These firms have fewer options to grow and their assets in place play a bigger role in determining their value which leads to a decline in systematic risk. Though share repurchases and dividend payments constitute alternative mechanisms for distributing earnings they are imperfect substitutes. First dividends are subject to personal income tax when received but capital gains are not taxed until realized and therefore many investors prefer share repurchases over dividends because they allow the shareholder to determine when he or she incurs the tax liability. Second in open market repurchases firms do not have to commit to repurchase. Third there is no expectation that distributions through share repurchases will recur on a regular basis in contrast to dividends ( Dittmar ) In practice market participants view changes in the amount of dividends paid to be a signal of management s view of the firm s prospects. Because dividend decreases are viewed negatively firms tend not to raise dividend payments unless management believes they can be maintained. Dividends thus tend to exhibit stickiness increasing when management believes the firm s prospects are sustainably good and decreasing only when absolutely necessary ( Brav et al. ) Brennan and Thakor ( ) Guay and Harford ( ) and Jagannathan Stephens and Weisbach ( ) accordingly find that since the Securities and Exchange Commission legalized share repurchases in they have become firms preferred method for distributing transient nonoperating residual cash flows whereas dividend payments are the preferred method for distributing permanent operating residual cash flows. Thus theory and empirical evidence suggest that among cash-unconstrained firms a large positive shock to cash flow such as from a lowered cost of accessing the accumulated stock of past residual cash flows abroad is likely to be distributed via share repurchases. Among previously cash-constrained firms any profit windfall in excess of positive expected return investment opportunities is also likely to be distributed via share repurchases. Figure reports a pronounced increase in corporate share repurchases after the TCJA s passage with repurchases rising above the recent trend by $ billion as of : Q3. In contrast figure reports that though corporate net dividend payments rose slightly after the TCJA s passage the increase was modest and net dividends were only $ billion above the recent trend. Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act |  $ "     '   * ) ! $ )  )  $  '   * *  /   #     #   Dollars ( billions NSA )  '  / $ * )      *     '     *       * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /       ) * )  * )  ''4    % 0./            0/.   )   *     / Observed share repurchases may be substantially smaller in volume relative to repatriations because under the new view of dividend taxation a simultaneous positive shock to cash flow and investment generates an ambiguous effect on shareholder distributions depending on the relative magnitudes of the coincident shocks. Though the has TCJA created a positive financial windfall both for past residual earnings and future cash flow it has also substantially and permanently lowered the break-even rate of return on marginal investment. Auerbach and Hassett ( ) find that though the probability of share repurchases is higher among firms with a greater cash flow the probability of repurchase activity is lower among firms with more investment and the estimated coefficients on cash flow and investment are of the same absolute magnitude. Indeed a Wald test that the sum of the estimated coefficients on two lags of investment equals ( in absolute value ) the sum of the estimated coefficients on two lags of cash flow is accepted at all standard levels of significance and for every specification estimated and the simple correlation is very close to Auerbach and Hassett ( ) further observe that the probability of repurchase activity is highest among large firms with strong capital market access as indicated by high bond ratings and coverage by multiple analysts. Consistent with these results Hanlon Hoopes and Slemrod ( ) analyzing corporate actions in response to the TCJA find that observed increases in share repurchases after the TCJA s passage were extremely concentrated among a | Chapter  $ "     '   * *  /   /   $ $  )   Dollars ( billions ) SAAR  '  / $ * )      *     '     *       * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /  SAAR = seasonally adjusted annual rate.          0/.   )   *     / very small subset of cash-abundant firms particularly Apple Amgen Bank of America Pfizer and JPMorgan Chase. Excluding already-cash-unconstrained Apple alone from the sample these researchers find that the value of shares repurchased in : Q1 were no higher than the value of shares repurchased in : Q1. The concentration of the increase in the volume of repurchase activity among such a small subset of firms suggests that though these firms may have been cash-unconstrained many other firms faced binding financing constraints. The corporate finance literature therefore strongly suggests that repurchase activity is an integral margin of adjustment to a positive cash flow cum investment shock constituting the primary mechanism whereby efficient capital markets reallocate capital from mature cash-abundant firms without profitable investment opportunities to emerging cash-constrained firms with profitable investment opportunities. For example Alstadsaeter Jacob and Michaely ( ) find that a 10-percentage-point cut in Sweden s dividend tax rate in improved efficiency by inducing capital reallocation from established cash-rich firms to cash-constrained firms. Similarly Fried and Wang ( ) find that non-S&P public firms which are generally younger and faster growing than S&P firms were net importers of equity capital for every year between and with net shareholder inflows into these firms equal to percent of net shareholder distributions by S&P firms. These researchers further observe that a Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act |  $ "     '   $  /   * ) $  ) / $  '   $   ) ./ ( ) /     * )  * *  /   $ )           /- )   * ./    Dollars ( billions SAAR )                        *      '    *     * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /        * )  ''4    % 0./    ) )  '   /  #  /- )   $    '  '  /   ! *     * ( $ )  '   '0    ! '  /   $ ) "  / #   #  $ )  $   $ )   ! *  $  /  ) * ) $  ) / $  '  ! $   $ ) ./ ( ) /          0/.   )   *     /  $ "     '   ) /0-    $ /  '  ) ./ ( ) /          /- )  Dollars ( billions )  * ./                              *     / $ * )  '   ) /0-    $ /  '   *  $  / $ * )    * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $       '  '  / $ * )  * /   #  /- )   $    '  '  /   ! *     *   ! '  /  / #   '   '0  $ )    $ /  $   (   that / #       #  $ )  $   $ )   "   /  / #   (   * ( * )    ) )  '   /  $ )      in             0/.   )   *     / | Chapter  $ "    *   * $ " )    '  * !      * *  /   / *  &. Dollars ( millions )     *  *      '     *          '  '  / $ * )  * /    /   ) /     ) /   ( * ) / #  ( * $ ) "    "  /-0 )   / $ ) "  $ )   * (             0/.   )   *     / substantial fraction of net shareholder distributions by all public companies is reinvested in initial public offerings by newly listing companies as well as in nonpublic firms through venture capital and private equity vehicles. They additionally note that these firms account for more than percent of private nonresidential fixed investment employ nearly percent of U.S. workers and generate almost half of corporate profits. As shown in figures and real private investment by noncorporate businesses and private equity firms rose sharply in Among noncorporate firms in the first three quarters of real nonresidential fixed investment rose percent at a compound annual rate which would constitute the fastest calendar-year growth in noncorporate business investment since if sustained through the fourth quarter ( see box for a discussion of the TCJA and family farms ) Asness Hazelkorn and Richardson ( ) echo Fried and Wang s ( ) findings. In particular they address the myth that share repurchases have come at the expense of profitable investment. They note that funds obtained by the shareholder after a repurchase are often invested elsewhere. This redirection of available capital ensures that capital flows to new investment opportunities. They do note that there is always the possibility for agency issues to create incentives for corporate managers to engage in suboptimal share repurchase decisions though the literature on agency theory finds positive value in paying back free cash flows as much as it does negative ones. Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | Box Estate Taxes and Family Farms A total of percent of U.S. farms are family businesses. Succession planning successfully passing the farm to the next generation is a critically important issue for farm families. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Acts reduced the effective tax rate for family farm households by percent. Williamson and Bawa ( ) researchers at the Department of Agriculture estimate that if the TCJA s estate tax provisions had been in place in family farm households would have faced an average effective tax rate of percent that year instead of percent. The TCJA also doubled the estate value that could be excluded from an individual s estate taxes to $ million. A large portion of a farm s assets are illiquid most often with land as the largest category equaling millions of dollars. Without a significant estate tax exemption farms would sometimes need to be liquidated to meet estate tax liability. President Trump was clear that he wanted to spare farm families from the punitive effects of estates taxes when passing the farm to the next generation. The TCJA achieves this objective by virtually eliminating the need for farms to pay estate taxes. Williamson and Bawa ( ) estimate that if the TCJA s estate tax provisions had been in place in then percent of all farm estates would have had to pay estate taxes and only percent would have had to file an estate tax return. And Williamson and Bawa also estimate that the aggregate tax liability of all farm estates in would have been  $ "   The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act : Farm Estates Exempted from Filing and Paying Estate Taxes  * /  $   / *  ! $ '  $   / *  ! $ '   0/  ) * ' $   $ ' $ /4  *       -/ ( ) /  * !   " $  0'/0-  * /    /        * )   !  (  ./  / | Chapter  $   / *  ! $ '  $ )    /   ' $   $ ' $ /4 reduced from $ million under the previous estate tax rules to $ million under the TCJA ( figure 1-v ) By doubling the estate tax threshold introducing a percent deduction for pass-through income and extending and expanding bonus depreciation for equipment investment the TCJA may also positively affect investment by independent farms. Poterba ( ) demonstrates that the estate tax is effectively a tax on capital income and thus lowers after-tax investment returns particularly as mortality risk is increasing in age among older proprietors. Kotlikoff and Summers ( ) and Gale and Scholz ( ) also highlight the substantial contribution of intergenerational transfers to aggregate capital formation. Especially if the TCJA s provisions that are currently scheduled to expire are made permanent the TCJA can therefore be expected to incentivize new capital formation among independent farms thereby raising productivity and steady-state output. Finally an additional second-order effect of increased repurchase activity in response to repatriation is the impact of share repurchases on measured foreign direct investment. The BEA ( ) defines foreign direct investment as the ownership or control directly or indirectly by a single foreign individual or entity of percent or more of the voting securities of an incorporated U.S. business enterprise or an equivalent interest in an unincorporated U.S. business enterprise. Consequently given that U.S. multinational enterprises employ some fraction of repatriated funds to repurchase outstanding shares some of these shares may have been previously held by foreign entities. Accordingly figure reports the three-month centered moving average of gross foreign sales of U.S. corporate stocks. Consistent with repatriating firms repurchasing shares including shares previously held by foreign entities we observe a substantial spike in gross foreign sales immediately after the TCJA s enactment. Conclusion In the Economic Report of the President the Council of Economic Advisers demonstrated that before the TCJA s enactment the U.S. economy and labor market were adversely affected by the conjunction of rising international capital mobility and increasingly internationally uncompetitive U.S. business taxation with adverse consequences for domestic capital formation capital deepening and wages. Drawing on an extensive academic literature the Report concluded that the TCJA s business and international provisions would raise the target U.S. capital stock reorient U.S. capital away from direct investment abroad in low-tax jurisdictions and toward investment in the United States and raise household income through both a short-run bargaining channel Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act | and a long-run capital deepening channel. The Report also documented that reductions in effective marginal personal income tax rates by the TCJA were expected to induce positive labor supply responses. In this chapter we have used the available data to examine each of these anticipated effects of the TCJA with particular attention to the relative velocities of adjustment along each margin. We find that the TCJA had an immediate and large effect on business expectations with firms immediately responding to the TCJA by upwardly revising planned capital expenditures employee compensation and hiring. We also observe revised capital plans translating into higher private investment in real fixed assets with nonresidential fixed investment growing at an annual rate of about percent in the period : Q4 : Q3 to a level $ billion over the recent trend. In addition to tallying more than million workers receiving bonuses that could be directly attributed to the TCJA with an average bonus of $ we also estimate that as of September real disposable personal income per household had risen $ over the trend during calendar year thus far. As a perpetual annuity this increase in compensation corresponds to a lifetime pay raise of about $ for the average household or $ trillion across all households. Finally we also report evidence of a reorientation of U.S. investment from direct investment abroad particularly in low-tax jurisdictions to investment in fixed assets in the United States. Specifically in the first three quarters after the TCJA s enactment U.S. direct investment abroad declined by $ billion while the U.S. direct investment position in eight identified tax havens declined by $ billion. Citing a large body of corporate finance literature we conclude that shareholder distributions through share repurchases is an important margin of adjustment to a simultaneous positive shock to cash flow and investment constituting the primary mechanism whereby efficient capital markets reallocate capital from mature cash-abundant firms without profitable investment opportunities to emerging cash-constrained firms with profitable investment opportunities. | Chapter x Chapter Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs When appropriate well-designed regulatory actions promote important social purposes including the protection of workers public health safety and the environment. At the same time complying with regulations increases the cost of doing business and results in opportunity costs business and consumer activities that are forgone due to regulation. For decades the regulatory state has expanded and imposed an ever-growing burden of regulatory costs on the U.S. economy. The Trump Administration has taken major steps to reverse the long-standing trend of rising regulatory costs. In and Federal agencies issued many times more deregulatory actions than new regulatory actions. From through the annual trend was for regulatory costs to grow by $ billion each year. In contrast in and Federal agencies took deregulatory actions that resulted in cost savings that more than offset the costs of new regulatory actions ; in fiscal year deregulatory actions saved $ billion in regulatory costs ( in net present value ) and in they saved $ billion. In this chapter we develop a framework to analyze the cumulative economic impact of regulatory actions on the U.S. economy. Regulation affects productivity wages and profits in the regulated industry and in the economy as a whole. Economics tells us that the regulatory whole is greater than the sum of its parts. However Federal regulations have traditionally been considered on a stand-alone basis. The Trump Administration s reform agenda uses regulatory cost caps to reduce the cumulative burden of Federal regulation. In addition to regulation-specific cost-benefit tests the cost caps induce agencies to view all their regulations as a portfolio which is more congruent with the experiences of the households and businesses subject to them. Small business owners consumers and workers gain when less regulation means lower business costs lower consumer prices more consumer choice and higher worker productivity and wages. The chapter discusses a number of notable deregulatory actions during the Trump Administration and gives detailed information about the association health plan rule ; the short-term limited-duration insurance rule ; and the joint employer standard. G overnment regulation is ubiquitous in modern economies. When appropriate well-designed regulatory actions promote important social purposes including the protection of workers public health safety and the environment. As business owners and managers are aware complying with regulations often increases the cost of doing business. Moreover regulatory actions also result in opportunity costs : business and consumer activities forgone due to regulation. Ultimately consumers and workers bear much of the burden because business-entry barriers higher costs and lower productivity are reflected in higher prices limited consumer choice and lower real wages. For decades the regulatory state has expanded and imposed an ever-growing burden of regulatory costs on the U.S. economy. In and the Trump Administration took major steps to reverse the long-standing trend of rising regulatory costs. In fiscal year there were significant deregulatory actions and new significant regulatory actions saving $ billion in regulatory costs ( in net present value ) according to official measures ( OMB 2017a ) In fiscal year there were significant deregulatory actions and new significant regulatory actions saving $ billion ( OMB ) The Trump Administration s regulatory reform agenda uses regulatory cost caps to seek to reduce the cumulative burden of federal regulation. Economics tells us that the regulatory whole is different from the sum of its parts. Households and businesses are required to comply with new regulations along with old ones. Nevertheless Federal regulations have traditionally been considered on a stand-alone basis. Under the Trump administration agencies are now also given regulatory cost caps for the upcoming year. In addition to regulation-specific cost-benefit tests the cost caps induce agencies to view all their regulations as a portfolio which is more congruent with the experience of the households and businesses subject to them. While pursuing their agencyspecific missions for example the Environmental Protection Agency s ( EPA ) mission to protect human health and the environment the regulatory cost | Chapter caps provide the framework for agencies to evaluate regulatory costs to consider deregulatory actions and to set priorities among new regulatory actions. Moreover when the executive branch sets the regulatory cost caps across all federal agencies the caps reflect the priorities and trade-offs imposed by the cumulative regulatory burden on the U.S. economy. The Trump Administration has sought to lift the burden of unnecessary regulatory costs while encouraging Federal agencies to preserve important protections of workers public health safety and the environment. The regulatory reform agenda is guided by cost-benefit analysis a systematic way to balance the benefits of regulatory actions including the value of these important protections with the costs. The regulatory cost caps require prioritization among costly rules. An agency can not meet its cost cap simply by eliminating costly regulatory actions ; it eliminates regulatory actions when the benefits do not justify the costs. Last year we discussed the impact of deregulation on aggregate economic growth ( CEA ) Based on the evidence reviewed we concluded that if the United States adopted product market regulatory reforms over the next decade gross domestic product ( GDP ) could be to percent higher ( CEA ) In this chapter we report on progress and dig deeper into the economic effects of regulation and deregulation. We develop a framework to analyze the cumulative economic impact of regulatory actions on the U.S. economy. Regulation affects the regulated industry and the economy as a whole. Consider the effects of a regulation such as the expansive joint employer standard featured at the end of this chapter that discourages specialization and encourages centralized decisionmaking along an industry s supply chain. Productivity and competition are often greater when separate businesses can specialize in the various tasks required to produce the final consumer good ( Becker and Murphy ) For example some businesses specialize in handling raw materials others in branding and intellectual property others in performing the clerical work and still others in regional retail. But the regulation incentivizes a number of these supply-linked businesses to act as a single large business and as a result forgo many of the productivity gains from specialization and decentralized decisionmaking ( see also chapter of this Report ) Productivity is further sacrificed as capital moves out of the industry. In certain circumstances ( discussed below ) one result can be lower pay for workers even workers outside this sector because the work done in the sector is made less productive due to the regulation and because fewer employers are competing for workers in the sector. Consumers also will pay higher prices due to the regulation s effect on costs and diminished competition in the retail market. Although estimating the benefits and costs of Federal regulatory and deregulatory actions might appear to be a technocratic exercise the principles Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | that underlie the exercise are democratic. To complete an evidence-based cost-benefit analysis requires expertise not only in economic analysis but often also in scientific areas relevant to the regulated industry. Career public servants in the agencies provide the needed expertise ; career public servants in the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs ( OIRA ) within the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) review the completed analyses. A previous OIRA Administrator Cass Sunstein ( ) proclaimed the process as the triumph of the technocrats. However the goal of economic analysis is to estimate the benefits and costs based on the preferences of the people affected by the regulatory actions. Cost-benefit analysis is an attempt to replicate for the public sector the decisions that would be made if private markets worked satisfactorily ( Haveman and Weisbrod ) Cost-benefit analysis uses the information revealed in market transactions to guide public sector decisions. For example a regulatory cost-benefit analysis places a high value on improving health and safety based on empirical evidence that people are willing to pay a great deal to reduce the risks of injury and death. The empirical evidence captures the public s preferences for health and safety not the analyst s. The Trump Administration recognizes that the public including workers consumers and small business owners are key stakeholders in deregulation and actively seeks their feedback on proposed regulatory and deregulatory actions. In the next section we use our economic framework to discuss different types of regulatory actions and when they are needed to improve the economy. We then survey the current regulatory landscape and provide information on the number and costs of Federal regulatory actions and on how the regulatory cost caps are reducing the regulatory burden on the U.S. economy. Following that we use our framework to analyze the cumulative economic impact of regulatory actions. We then discuss lessons from our framework. The chapter concludes with a set of three case studies that illustrate the value of meaningful regulatory reform. The case studies explore different aspects of how Federal deregulatory actions improve productivity and reduce costs for small businesses and their workers. The first case study is about a rule that allows more small businesses to form association health plans to provide lower-cost group health coverage to their workers. The second case study is about a rule that expands consumer options to purchase short-term health coverage. And the third case study is about the reform of the joint employer standard. Regulatory costs and therefore the regulatory cost savings of the Trump Administration s regulatory reforms are understated by the official measures in all three cases because the official measures did not include all the relevant opportunity costs especially those accruing outside the regulated | Chapter industry. The case studies provide guidance on how to strengthen the regulatory analysis of deregulatory actions.1 Principles of Regulation and Regulatory Impact Analysis Although there are tens of thousands of regulatory actions a fairly simple economic framework helps organize their effects. Regulation affects productivity wages and profits in the regulated industry. Then as capital and labor move in response to the compliance costs and incentive effects of the regulation regulation affects productivity wages and profits in the economy as a whole. The effects of regulatory actions taxes and other market distortions accumulate multiplicatively within the industry and along that industry s supply chain through what economists call convex deadweight costs. The concept of convex deadweight costs is a well-established result in the economic analysis of taxation ( Auerbach and Hines ) Taxes impose a burden on the economy in excess of the tax revenues collected ; the excess burden is also known as the deadweight cost the deadweight loss or the welfare loss due to taxation. The deadweight cost function is convex ; if the tax is increased by percent the deadweight costs of the tax increase by more than percent. As we discuss in detail below the regulatory deadweight cost function is also convex. A new regulatory action that increases regulatory costs by percent increases the cumulative regulatory cost burden by more than percent. As we discuss below even though in many cases most of the burden of a regulatory action is outside the regulated industry the burden can be quantified primarily with information about the regulated industry alone. Public Goods and Private Markets The economic framework distinguishes public goods ( and services ) such as clean air from private goods such as automobiles and health insurance. The economic term public good refers to a good of which one person s consumption does not reduce the availability of the good for other consumers and of which it is difficult or impossible to exclude those consumers who do not pay for the good from using it. Due to these properties households and businesses have insufficient incentives to purchase and produce public goods in private markets. For example consumers tend to free-ride on other people s purchases rather than purchase the good for themselves. Although private goods are not necessarily free from market failures individual households and businesses have significant incentives to engage in these activities and they are situated in a chain of economic activity that is critical for understanding The CEA previously released research on topics covered in this chapter. The text that follows builds on the following research paper produced by the CEA : Deregulating Health Insurance Markets : Value to Market Participants ( CEA ) Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | the cumulative effect of regulatory actions. A number of regulatory actions are designed to enhance public goods even while the opportunity cost of such actions includes the loss of the output from private goods. Other regulatory actions are designed to increase the total value of private good production by correcting failures in the markets for private goods. Regulatory actions sometimes combine both these elements ; but even in these cases it helps to examine the economic functions separately. Environmental regulatory actions are an important type of regulatory actions that trade private goods for public goods where environmental quality is the public good. A number of employment regulatory actions are also examples when they restrict employers practices in order to promote say fairness. Regulations of public goods typically although not always involve a loss of private good output usually when these regulations reduce productivity in the process of producing these goods.2 The productivity loss is not by itself an argument against regulations of public goods because the value of the public goods needs to be part of the cost-benefit analysis ; but of course the amounts of losses and gains need to be accurately assessed. Regulations to enhance productivity are assessed on the basis of their productivity effects ; they may reduce productivity in some activities so as to increase it overall. For example regulations designed to prevent a financial crisis enhance productivity. Chapter discusses the Dodd-Frank Act which established a wide range of regulatory mandates to reduce the likelihood and severity of future systemic financial crises. The Trump Administration s financial regulatory approach balances the benefits of preventing financial crises and the regulatory costs that Dodd-Frank imposed on the banking industry on other financial providers and on the public. The Process of Doing Regulatory Impact Analysis Regulatory actions promote important societal goals but not without opportunity costs. Since President Reagan s Executive Order was issued in most Federal agencies have been required to use cost-benefit analysis to strike an appropriate balance in rulemaking ( White House ) Early in their first terms Presidents Clinton Obama and Trump each signed Executive Orders that continued to require most Federal agencies to conduct Regulatory Impact Analyses ( RIAs ) of new and existing rules. Each RIA includes a cost-benefit analysis. Federal independent regulatory agencies such as the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Federal Reserve are not required to conduct RIAs ( OMB 2017b ) Sometimes a regulation prohibits certain types of labor from engaging in private-good production in which case the output effect would come from fewer production inputs rather than less productivity. Some measures of productivity could even be enhanced if the prohibitions apply to the less productive inputs but in this chapter we refer to productivity in the more specific multifactor sense ( BLS 2018b ) | Chapter Federal regulatory cost-benefit analyses are grounded in welfare economics the branch of economics that studies questions about the well-being of a society s members. In principle regulatory cost-benefit analyses should help guide Federal agencies to adopt the set of regulatory actions that net the largest societal benefits over regulatory costs. Key concepts in estimating benefits and costs are willingness to pay and opportunity costs. Federal agencies draw on extensive bodies of economic research that provide estimates of societal willingness to pay for beneficial regulatory outcomes including improvements in health safety and the environment. The agencies also develop estimates of the opportunity costs of regulatory actions. Cost-benefit analyses of deregulatory actions are guided by the same principles of applied welfare economics that guide cost-benefit analyses of regulatory actions. In particular opportunity costs and willingness to pay continue to be the key concepts. The economic concept of sunk costs can also play an important role in analyzing a deregulatory action. Some firms and consumers responses to regulatory actions involve sunk costs that can not be recovered even if the action is subsequently modified or eliminated. As a result the costs savings from a deregulatory action might be less than the costs of the original regulatory action. However the existence of large sunk costs might point to an important source of opportunity cost savings from deregulatory actions. Sunk costs to comply with a regulatory action can serve as a barrier to entry that gives market power to established firms ( Aldy ) Although these firms can not recover their sunk costs a deregulatory action that removes costly requirements can promote the entry of new firms increase competition and decrease prices. The Current Regulatory Landscape This section examines the current regulatory landscape. First it explores current Federal regulatory and deregulatory actions. Then it explains how the Trump Administration s regulatory cost caps are reducing costs. Federal Regulatory and Deregulatory Actions Last year we discussed the various approaches that researchers have taken to the difficult task of quantifying the extent of Federal regulation ( CEA ) One approach is to count the number of pages in the Federal Register or the Code of Federal Regulations. Another approach is to use an index based on textual analysis of keywords in these publications like shall or must that indicate restrictions on the economy. In this subsection we review evidence on the number of rules and estimates of the regulatory costs. From through Federal agencies published over final rules in the Federal Register an average of more than a day. OMB reviews those rules that are considered significant. Figure shows the number of economically Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | Figure Economically Significant Final Rules Presidential Year Number of rules Sources : Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs ; George Washington University Regulatory Studies Center. Note : A presidential year begins in February and ends in January of the subsequent year. The final rule count includes all interim final rules and final rules. significant rules including both regulatory and deregulatory actions that OMB reviewed in each presidential year ( February of the given year through January of the next year ) Throughout this chapter we use regulatory and deregulatory actions as umbrella terms but we use more precise terms when needed ( see box ) Federal regulatory and deregulatory actions cover a wide range of economic activity. Above we make the distinction between regulations to enhance productivity and regulations of public goods. Earlier discussions made a similar distinction between economic and social regulations ( Joskow and Rose ) With the deregulation movement of the 1970s Federal efforts shifted away from economic regulatory actions that restricted entry and regulated prices ( see box ) State and local economic regulation of sectors such as electricity remain common. Currently many Federal agencies issue regulatory actions designed to promote social purposes including the protection of workers public health safety and the environment. Other Federal regulatory actions are designed to improve the functioning of specific sectors of the economy. This Report discusses the economics of sector-specific developments and policies including regulatory and deregulatory actions in its other chapters ; chapter discusses taxes chapter discusses the labor market chapter discusses healthcare chapter discusses energy and chapter discusses banking. In this chapter we focus on crosscutting issues in regulatory and deregulatory actions that are independent of the specific industry being regulated. | Chapter Box The Terminology of Federal Regulatory Actions Agencies in the executive branch issue regulatory actions also called rules to implement Federal legislation passed by Congress. Executive Order established the process for the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs ( OIRA ) within the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) to review proposed and final rules. Under this Executive Order rules may be categorized as significant or economically significant. OIRA coordinates the reviews of all the rules that it deems significant which are specifically defined as rules that are anticipated to Have an annual effect on the economy of $ million or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy a sector of the economy productivity competition jobs the environment public health or safety or State local or tribal governments or communities ; Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency ; Materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements grants user fees or loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof ; or Raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates the President s priorities or the principles set forth in this Executive Order. Economically significant rules are a subcategory of significant rules that meet requirement above of having an annual effect on the economy of $ million or more or having other adverse effects. If a rule is deemed economically significant an assessment of its economic benefits and costs is typically required before it is finalized. The Congressional Review Act ( ) introduced the term major rule to the U.S. Code to categorize certain rules regulated by congressional action. A major rule is essentially an economically significant rule one that is determined by OIRA to likely result in significant adverse economic effects or an annual effect on the economy of $ million or more ( U.S.C. Section [ ] ) However not all economically significant rules are deemed to be major. OIRA formally defined the terms regulatory action and deregulatory action when describing rules to better implement and track the Trump Administration s regulatory reform agenda under Executive Order which requires Federal agencies to issue two deregulatory actions passed for each new regulatory action. Under this Executive Order a regulatory action is a finalized significant rule or guidance document that imposes total costs greater than zero. A deregulatory action can include any agency action that has been finalized and has total costs less than zero ( including significant and nonsignificant rulemaking ; guidance documents ; some actions related to international regulatory cooperation ; and information collection requests that repeal or streamline recordkeeping reporting or disclosure requirements ) Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | Box Economic Regulation and Deregulation Economic regulation refers to the regulation of prices and entry into specific industries. Economic regulation has been used in industries with economies of scale including electricity telephone service and cable television ( Joskow and Rose ) In industries such as these in theory it can make sense to restrict entry to a single firm to take advantage of economies of scale and lower production costs. To prevent the single firm from exploiting its market power and charging higher prices prices are regulated so the firm earns a normal return. Economic regulation has also been used in multifirm industries including airlines banking and trucking. Depending on the industry economic regulations are implemented at the local State and national levels. Although the principles of economic regulation are grounded in economic theory in practice it has not always led to good economic results. In the Council of Economic Advisers described the disappointing performance of economic regulation : Entry is often blocked prices are kept from falling and the industry becomes inflexible and insensitive to new techniques and opportunities for progress ( CEA ) Amid other economic and political developments in the 1970s the failures of economic regulation helped lead to the deregulation movement. Perhaps the most dramatic success story is the deregulation of the airline industry. Rose ( ) refers to it as one of the greatest microeconomic policy accomplishments of the past fifty years and credits deregulation as generating lower average fares ; greater numbers of flights non-stop destinations and passengers ; dramatically different network structures ; and increased productivity. Borenstein and Rose ( ) provide a brief history. In the U.S. government began regulating the airline industry with the Air Mail Act ( Stat. ) This legislation ( and its amendments ) allowed the Post Office to award contracts and created subsidies for mail delivery by private airlines. After mismanagement by the Postmaster General and a desire to regulate a chaotic marketplace Congress passed legislation including the Civil Aeronautics Act of that established the precursor to the Civil Aeronautics Board ( hereafter the Board ) to oversee economic regulation of the nascent industry ( Stat. ) With the Board setting airfare and routes airlines competed on in-flight quality schedule convenience and seat availability. The lack of price competition encouraged airlines to offer more frequent flights with fewer passengers and more amenities. Regulation also encouraged airlines to purchase new aircraft regularly to offer the latest technology rather than allow assets to depreciate because the Board did not allow airlines to charge lower prices for flights on older aircraft ( Borenstein and Rose ) The ratio of passengers to seats available declined with the number of route competitors and route distance ( Douglas and Miller ) The Board tried to maintain the industry s profitability by raising airfares but the airlines responded by increasing flight | Chapter frequency which further decreased passengers per available seat and raised costs closer to the price set by the Board. President Carter appointed the economist Alfred Kahn as chair of the Board in with a mandate to deregulate the airline industry. With rising airfares in regulated markets the Airline Deregulation Act of dismantled the Board and eliminated price controls entry restrictions and regulated networks. After load factors soared and profit yields fell as the airlines began to compete on price. Instead of comparing prederegulation and postderegulation loads profits and prices ideally researchers would compare the outcomes under deregulation to outcomes in a hypothetical counterfactual world where airline deregulation never occurred. Borenstein and Rose ( ) suggest that the Standard Industry Fare Level ( SIFL ) created by the Board to determine airfares prior to deregulation and updated based on input cost and productivity changes provides a useful counterfactual. Compared with the SIFL in actual airfares were percent lower. Using the SIFL counterfactual in airline deregulation created $ billion ( in dollars ) in benefits for consumers ( Borenstein and Rose ) In addition to the Airline Deregulation Act of the deregulation movement under President Ford and President Carter included the Railroad Revitalization and Regulatory Reform Act of the Motor Carrier Act of and the Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of Alfred Kahn ( ) argued that airline deregulation helped make possible the deregulation of these other major industries. Most of the Federal regulatory actions tabulated in the figures in this chapter are not economic regulations but instead are social regulatory actions designed to protect workers public health safety and/or the environment or to promote other social goals. OMB ( ) advises the Federal agencies issuing these regulatory actions that in competitive markets there should be a presumption against price controls production or sales quotas mandatory uniform quality standards or controls on entry into employment or production. In this way the lessons learned in the deregulation movement of the 1970s continue to shape current Federal regulatory practices. Federal regulatory actions range from simple housekeeping to actions that change manufacturing processes business practices and ultimately the prices and availability of consumer goods and services. Between January and November OMB reviewed over significant final rules. The Department of Health and Human Services accounted for percent of the final rules reviewed by OMB followed by the Environmental Protection Agency with percent and the Department of Agriculture with percent. The Department of Transportation and Department of Commerce round out the top five agencies with the most final rules since Together these top five rulemaking agencies accounted for almost half the significant rules Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | reviewed this century while other Federal agencies issued the remainder of the final rules ( figure ) It needs to be noted that an OMB review is currently not required for actions issued by Federal independent regulatory agencies. Until an OMB review was also not generally required for tax regulatory actions taken by the Department of the Treasury. In its annual Reports to Congress OMB provides an accounting of the benefits and costs of selected major rules published in the preceding fiscal year. Figure shows the regulatory costs created by the new rules included in OMB s Reports each year from through and the planned costs from the OMB Regulatory Budget for Figure shows the simple accumulation ignoring interactions of the costs of Federal regulatory actions. Regulatory costs are measured in constant inflation-adjusted dollars and are on an annualized basis to show the ongoing costs that the rules will continue to impose on the economy. We report the midpoints of OMB s ranges of estimated costs. From through the annual trend was for regulatory costs to grow by $ billion each year. If regulatory costs continued to grow at that rate cumulative costs would reach over $ billion by ( figure ) However the regulatory landscape changed in and From to the simple accumulation of regulatory costs totaled $ billion which is just over percent lower than what would have been predicted based on the trend from to ( figure ; also see box on small businesses perspectives on regulatory costs ) The growth in regulatory costs did not just slow down ; it reversed. In fiscal years and deregulatory actions resulted in regulatory cost savings that more than offset the costs of new regulatory actions. Since Federal agencies have used a systematic general framework to estimate the costs of new regulatory actions but over time there have been differences in methodologies and assumptions ( OMB ) With this caveat in mind from through cost savings from deregulatory actions more than offset new regulatory costs in only three years in and which were the first two years of the Reagan Administration ; and in when the Congressional Review Act was used to repeal a costly rule about workplace repetitive-motion injuries ( OMB ) In this chapter we define deregulation as any action by the government that reduces its control over business and consumer decisions. There are several ways to deregulate. Federal agencies deregulatory actions account for most of the cost savings shown in figure Deregulatory actions include revising regulatory processes modifying existing rules and eliminating existing rules. Deregulatory actions also include periodic updates of rules such as fishing quotas or medical reimbursement rates that save regulatory costs. For Because the rule about repetitive-motion injuries was repealed later OMB reports do not include the rule s estimated costs in or the cost savings from its repeal in OMB also revises its estimates when needed. In figures and we use the later reports which do not show a net cost savings in | Chapter Figure OMB-Reviewed Final Rules by Agency HHS % EPA % Remaining agencies % USDA % DOC % DOT % Sources : Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) ; CEA calculations. Note : HHS = Department of Health and Human Services ; EPA = Environmental Protection Agency ; USDA = Department of Agriculture ; DOT = Department of Transportation ; DOC = Department of Commerce. The percentage calculation includes all the final rules reviewed by OMB per agency from January to October Figure Real Annual Costs of Major Rules Fiscal Years Dollars ( billions ) Sources : Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs ( OIRA ) ; CEA calculations. Note : The cost estimates for years are taken from the most recent OIRA Report to Congress with an estimate for that year. The real cost estimate for is a projected estimate from the OIRA Regulatory Budget for fiscal year Annual cost estimates include all major rules for which both benefits and costs have been estimated. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | Figure Cumulative Costs of Major Rules Fiscal Years Dollars ( billions ) Trend Sources : Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs ; CEA calculations. Note : Cumulative costs begin in assuming there are no costs from before fiscal year Data from figure were used to determine the yearly cumulative costs. The trend is calculated for through example the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is required by law to periodically review designations and protections of essential fish habitats. The revision of essential fish habitat designations opened large areas off the coast of New England to commercial sea scallop harvesting resulting in a net economic benefit of $ million. Congress can deregulate by passing legislation that alters the statutory regulatory requirements. The economic deregulation movement of the 1970s involved major legislative actions to deregulate the trucking and airline industries ( see box ) More recently the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of included a provision that removed the tax penalty that enforced the Affordable Care Act s ( ACA ) mandate that individuals had to purchase health insurance ( see chapter ) The Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act modified regulation of the banking industry ( see chapter ) Congress can also use its authority under the Congressional Review Act to eliminate Federal regulatory actions. From through the Congressional Review Act had only been used once in ( mentioned above ) In Congress used the act to overturn rules including the Fair Pay and Safe Workplaces rule and the Stream Protection rule. The deregulatory action for those two rules alone resulted in total cost savings of about $ million. In Congress used the | Chapter Box Small Businesses and the Regulatory Burden Owners of small businesses have their own perspective on regulatory costs. The National Federation of Independent Business ( NFIB ) regularly conducts monthly surveys of small business owners. One monthly NFIB survey question asks small businesses to identify the single most important problem facing [ their ] business. They are given a list of common small business burdens and allowed to write in responses. Between and the election of President Trump the NFIB reported that government regulation was the most frequently cited top concern for small businesses at about percent of the time. ( The last report before the election was in October Survey responses do not distinguish between concerns about Federal regulations versus State or local regulations. ) Since the election regulation has never been the most frequently cited top concern of small businesses. NFIB also conducts monthly surveys assessing small business optimism. Figure 2-i shows an upward recent trend in the NFIB index of small business optimism. Small business optimism began to sharply increase after the November election and has now reached record highs.  $ "  $   (  ' '   $ )   +/ $ ( $ (  )   Index ( = )  '  / $ * )    *  s    / $ * )  '     / $ * )  * !  )  )  ) /   $ )        '  '  / $ * )  * /   /   ) /   ( * ) / #  ( * $ ) "    "   #   $ ) "   ) * /  a  $ * ) Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | act to overturn guidance issued in by the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection.4 Finally deregulation can also result from litigation. The Trump Administration s Regulatory Cost Caps Are Reducing Costs The turnaround in the growth of regulatory costs is the direct result of the regulatory cost caps that were established early in the Trump Administration. In fiscal year there were deregulatory actions and new significant regulatory actions ( 22-for-1 ) saving in net present value $ billion in regulatory costs. Of the deregulatory actions in fiscal year were significant ( 5-for-1 ; see box for a definition of significant actions ) In fiscal year there were deregulatory actions and new significant regulatory actions ( 12-for-1 ) saving in net present value $ billion in regulatory costs. Of the deregulatory actions in fiscal year were significant ( 4-for-1 ) This turnaround reflects President Trump s January Executive Order Reducing Regulation and Controlling Regulatory Costs. This Executive Order requires Federal agencies to eliminate on average two regulatory actions for each new regulatory action and for the first time to meet a regulatory cost cap. In fiscal year the cost cap was set at zero ; the regulatory costs created by any new regulatory actions had to be at least offset by deregulatory actions. In across all agencies the cap was set at a $ billion ( present value ) reduction in regulatory costs. In the first two years under Executive Order Federal agencies have more than met both the two-for-one requirement and the regulatory cost caps. See box for more discussion of notable deregulatory actions. Deregulation has been faster than many experts thought possible. The notice-and-comment requirements build a lot of inertia into the Federal rulemaking process for regulatory and deregulatory actions. Shortly after Executive Order was issued Potter ( ) cautioned that to undo existing regulatory actions could take many many years. The record of deregulatory actions in and allays this concern. Looking to the future for Federal agencies have adopted caps that when met will save another $ billion in projected regulatory costs ( net present value ) In addition in the Department of Transportation and the EPA expect to finalize a proposed rule regarding corporate average fuel economy. The $ billion in regulatory cost savings in ( net present value ) do not include the potential regulatory cost savings from this rule. The Administration notes the impact separately in order to highlight ongoing reform across all agencies ; the cost savings from this onetime deregulatory action are expected to be an order of magnitude larger than other deregulatory actions to date. The act states that Congress has days after the rule is submitted to overturn it ; because the policy guidance had not been submitted to Congress in for review the Congress could overturn it. | Chapter Box Notable Deregulatory Actions Previous administrations have issued costly regulatory actions affecting markets for labor energy insurance education and credit to name a few. These regulatory actions were imposing a large cumulative cost and they reduced economic growth for the reasons examined in this chapter. Many of these actions have been overturned during the Trump Administration. And some of these overturned regulations were also notable even when viewed in isolation. In the labor area the National Labor Relations Board ( NLRB ) had expanded the definitions of joint employer and independent contractor that would have reduced competition and productivity in labor markets as discussed at the end of this chapter. The NLRB had also permitted microunions which means that subsets of employees could organize even if the majority of employees did not want to be represented by a labor union. Several notable regulations from the previous Administration substantially added to employers compliance costs. Its Overtime Rule required employers to track hours worked by a wider range of employees including a number of white-collar workers even though the rule would not substantially increase workers pay as shown by basic economics ( Trejo ) and as verified empirically by an economist at the Department of Labor ( Barkume ) Furchtgott-Roth ( ) details the Trump Administration s changes in these rules as well as changes to other notable rules affecting employers such as the Persuader Rule the Fiduciary Rule and Fair Pay and Safe Workplaces Executive Order. The Federal Communications Commission s Open Internet Order ( commonly called the Net Neutrality rule ) restricted pricing practices by Internet service providers. Like price controls more generally the rule would have resulted in a less productive allocation of resources. The commission repealed the rule in Regulations may be increasing entry barriers and reducing competition in higher education including Gainful Employment Regulations and the Borrower Defense Rule. The Trump Administration s Department of Education is currently reviewing these and other notable regulations. Chapter of this Report discusses how energy productivity has been enhanced by repealing or revising notable prior rules including the Clean Power Plan the Waters of the United States the Waste Prevention Rule the Stream Protection Rule and the closure of an area on the coastal plain of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. The Safer Affordable Fuel Efficient ( SAFE ) Vehicles rule is also discussed below. Notable health insurance deregulations include the setting of the ACA s individual mandate penalty to zero giving small businesses more flexibility to join associated health plans and eliminating previous restrictions on the sales of short-term limited duration insurance ( see the end of this chapter and chapter of this Report ) Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | Regulations had also hindered productivity and competition in the financial and banking sector. Chapter of this Report discusses the Trump Administration s actions to reform implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act nullify the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau s Arbitration Rule and revise the National Credit Union Administration s Corporate Credit Union Rule. The regulatory cost caps establish an incremental regulatory budget and create new incentives for Federal agencies. Rosen and Callanan ( ) provide a useful history and discussion of the idea of a regulatory budget. In the CEA described a regulatory budget as a framework for looking at the total financial burden imposed by regulations for setting some limits to this burden and for making trade-offs within those limits ( CEA ) Instead of establishing a budget limit on total regulatory costs which as the CEA mentioned are hard to measure Executive Order establishes a budget in terms of the incremental costs added or reduced by new actions ; this Executive Order builds on earlier efforts to encourage retrospective regulatory review ( see box ) Within each agency the caps create internal incentives to prioritize costly regulations to limit the compliance costs of new regulatory actions and to remove outdated or inefficient existing actions. Breyer ( ) argued that agencies often suffer from tunnel vision and pursue a single goal too far to the point where it brings about more harm than good. The cost caps help expand an agency s focus of vision. To pursue its agency-specific mission for example the EPA s mission to protect human health and the environment ; under Executive Order the EPA now also has internal incentives to pay greater attention to regulatory costs. For example Rosen ( ) pointed out that given a regulatory budget an excessively costly regulation would come at an opportunity cost to the agency because it would require the agency to forgo other regulatory initiatives. For the same reason the regulatory budget gives the agency incentives to consider deregulatory actions including the removal of outdated or inefficient rules. Although an agency that suffers from tunnel vision might tend to look mainly for opportunities to expand its regulatory portfolio the cost caps shift the agency s focus to how it might alter its regulatory portfolio toward more cost-effective actions. By creating an incremental regulatory budget the cost caps serve a function similar to private businesses accounts and to the Federal government s fiscal budget. Demski ( ) described the managerial uses of business accounting information as focusing on two questions What might it cost ? and Did it cost too much ? The private sector business manager uses the information in the accounts to judge how well the management of each company division | Chapter Box Retrospective Regulatory Review In addition to conducting reviews of new regulatory actions the Executive Orders issued by Presidents Reagan Clinton and Obama instructed Federal agencies to conduct retrospective reviews of currently effective regulatory actions ( respectively Executive Orders and ) The GAO ( ) and Aldy ( ) discuss the history of these efforts in detail. In his State of the Union Address President Obama highlighted the retrospective review of an EPA rule that since the 1970s had defined milk as an oil and forced some dairy farmers to spend $ a year to prove that they could contain an oil spill. The elimination of this requirement was estimated to result in $ million ( in dollars ) annually in regulatory costs savings. But it is perhaps more notable that the requirement was in place for over three decades. A report for the Administrative Conference of the United States assessed the broader impact of President Obama s emphasis on retrospective review ( Aldy ) The study examined all major rules listed in the and OMB Reports to Congress. In and the ratio of deregulatory actions to new regulatory actions was to compared with the ratio of to achieved in ( Including nonmajor deregulatory actions the ratio was to ) A retrospective review yielded cost savings from to However as shown above in figures and the total regulatory costs of major rules grew especially rapidly in and more slowly in the years ; by comparison total regulatory costs fell in and Raso ( ) concluded that retrospective reviews were a credible but small component of the Obama administration s rulemaking efforts. DeMenno ( ) studied public participation in agencies retrospective review processes initiated in She found comments across the agencies in her sample which she described as significantly lower than agencies often receive for rulemakings. The EPA received somewhat over comments and the Department of Education received comments compared with the and comments respectively that these agencies received about the Trump Administration s deregulation initiative. and how well each division s strategy have performed. In a similar way the executive branch can use the information in the incremental regulatory budget to judge how well each agency has performed that is how well each agency uses regulatory actions to improve societal welfare. A key difference between a private business and a Federal agency is that regulatory actions impose unreimbursed costs on private parties to comply with the actions. Because regulatory costs are like a hidden tax the incremental regulatory budget also plays a similar role as the Federal government s fiscal budget. Without a regulatory budget agencies might tend to treat private resources as a free good ( Rosen Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | ) Moreover like the Federal budget the regulatory budget strengthens political accountability and transparency ( Rosen and Callanan ) OIRA sets the regulatory cost caps that will be allowed for each agency. The cost caps may allow an increase or require a net reduction in regulatory costs. The cost caps impose a discipline on Federal agencies but allow for flexibility when agencies identify important new regulatory opportunities to better protect the public. OMB s guidance also allows agencies to accumulate cost savings. Otherwise agencies would have an incentive to enact new regulatory actions at the end of the year so as to use up any regulatory cost savings that exceeded that year s cap. The general public including workers consumers owners of small businesses and other interested parties also contribute to the deregulatory reform process. The Administrative Procedures Act sets out the steps that Federal agencies must follow to take new regulatory and deregulatory actions ( Garvey ) In the first step of the most common notice-and-comment process the agency proposes a rule and invites public comment through a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. Sometimes public comment is solicited even earlier before issuing a prospective rule through an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking. These notices are published in the Federal Register. The public can also view and comment on proposed regulatory and deregulatory actions online via the website regulations.gov. The Trump Administration encourages public input on its deregulation initiatives. The Administration s Executive Order requires Federal agencies to establish Regulatory Reform Task Forces and many agencies task forces issue specific requests for public comment. For instance in response to its request the EPA received more than public comments. After taking into account identical or nearly identical form letters the EPA received unique comments. The Department of Education received over comments in response to its request. The workers consumers and business owners who participate in the regulated markets provided information from their own experiences about the likely effects of deregulation. Several other countries have used regulatory caps similar to the Trump Administration s approach to deregulation ( Gayer Litan and Wallach ; Renda ) Some countries have placed caps on regulatory requirements or actions while others have placed caps on regulatory costs. In the Canadian province of British Columbia required that for every new regulatory requirement two regulatory requirements must be eliminated. After having reduced regulatory requirements by percent by the requirement was changed to a cap of no net increase in regulatory requirements. The provincial government reports that since these steps have reduced regulatory requirements by percent ( British Columbia ) In the Government of Canada ( ) required that for every new regulation ( which are much less numerous than regulatory requirements ) one regulation must be eliminated. | Chapter The Netherlands Denmark Norway and the United Kingdom have adopted targets for net reductions in regulatory costs that is regulatory cost caps ( Renda ) Although Executive Order requires U.S. Federal agencies to estimate reductions in opportunity costs broadly defined other countries focus on narrower measures such as administrative burdens compliance costs or direct costs imposed on businesses ( Renda ) Using narrower measures can have unintended consequences. For example in the United Kingdom requiring large retailers to charge for plastic bags was counted as a reduction in the net costs to businesses even though this cost reduction was exactly offset by the increase in consumer costs ( Morse ) The Trump Administration s deregulatory process established by Executive Order is crafted to achieve significant and sustained progress toward reducing the regulatory burden on the U.S. economy. After reviewing the recent history in the United States and other countries Gayer Litan and Wallach ( ) note the potential of the Administration s deregulation efforts but caution that these efforts might not go far enough or might go too far. The deregulatory actions in and and those planned for show that these efforts are overcoming the inertia built into the Federal rulemaking notice-and-comment process. At the same time the requirement that deregulatory actions must be subject to the same rigorous cost-benefit analysis required of new regulatory actions helps ensure that deregulation will not go too far. Why More Deregulation ? This section seeks to answer the question of why there needs to be more deregulation. First it examines estimates of the aggregate cost of regulation. And second it considers the need to level the playing field for deregulation. Estimates of the Aggregate Cost of Regulation Up to this point we have focused on studies of the burden or costs of Federal regulatory actions. Of course State and local regulatory actions also impose costs. State and local actions are too diverse to easily summarize but examples help illustrate their range. Chapter of this Report describes the extent and variation across States in occupational licensing. In the first half of just under one-quarter of all workers reported that they had an active professional certification or license usually because it is required for employment. As another example State laws regulating the beer industry are so inconsistent that it leads industry leaders to describe the domestic market as like selling in fifty different countries almost ( Morrison ) State regulatory actions often prevent brewers from selling directly to customers. Although there is no conclusive evidence that these laws limit craft beer entrepreneurship statistical Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | associations show that there are more breweries in places that provide easier access to markets for small producers ( Malone and Lusk ) Local regulatory actions add to the cumulative regulatory burden. Last year we discussed the impact of local land use regulations including an estimate that with decreased zoning restrictions in three cities New York San Jose and San Francisco the growth rate of aggregate output between and could have increased enough to increase GDP in by percent ( CEA ) Turning to other local regulations the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation ( 2014b ) ranks U.S. cities on their regulatory environment for small businesses. The study uses the World Bank s Doing Business framework and compiles publicly available information from official U.S. sources ( World Bank ) According to this measure Dallas and Saint Louis impose the lightest regulatory burdens on small businesses whereas New York San Francisco and Los Angeles impose heavy burdens. For example in New York starting a business requires procedures dealing with construction permits requires procedures and registering property requires procedures. In another study the U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation ( 2014a ) examined regulations for food trucks. Boston and San Francisco for example require procedures to open a new food truck compared with Denver s required procedures. Some efforts have been made to estimate the total costs of regulatory actions in the United States. One approach is to build the total cost estimate from the bottom up using regulatory action- and industry-specific estimates of regulatory costs. Taking this approach the costs of Federal social regulation ( i.e. actions designed to promote social purposes including the protection of workers public health safety and the environment ) were estimated to be $ billion in ( in dollars ) ( OMB ) The estimate was built up from earlier studies and then added OMB estimates of the costs of new regulatory actions from to OMB continued to use this approach through when it estimated that the total regulatory costs were in the range of $ billion to $ billion ( in dollars ) We updated the estimated total regulatory costs to by adding OMB s estimates of the costs of new regulatory actions after to the estimate. This exercise yields a midrange estimate that the total regulatory costs in the U.S. in were $ billion ( all costs adjusted to dollars ) Taking the same general approach but using additional sources a study published by the Competitive Enterprise Institute estimated the total costs of social regulations in the U.S. in were $ trillion ( Crews ) OMB and a report by the Congressional Research Service noted important limitations for bottom-up estimates of regulatory costs. First estimated costs are available for only a small fraction of all regulatory actions. Second there are difficult questions about the quality of the original underlying data and analyses ( OMB ; Carey ) Moreover at a conceptual level the simple | Chapter sum of action-specific costs does not necessarily provide an accurate measure of total regulatory costs. A major theme of this chapter is that the cumulative burden of multiple regulatory actions exceeds the simple sum of costs when each action is considered one by one. In light of these limitations OMB ( ) deemphasized estimates of total costs and subsequent OMB Reports no longer included them. Instead the current practice is to focus on the last years of major Federal regulatory actions ( OMB 2017b ) Cross-country comparisons provide a different perspective on the extent of U.S. regulatory actions and on these actions potential to improve economic performance. Cross-country comparisons from a number of different studies suggest that in the recent past the regulatory burden in the United States was lower than in many but not all other countries. The cross-country rankings are not sufficiently current to reflect the Trump Administration s deregulatory actions. In the most recent data the United States was 8th out of the rated economies in the Ease of Doing Business ranking lagging behind New Zealand Singapore Denmark Hong Kong South Korea Georgia and Norway ( World Bank ) The United States is 27th out of countries in the product market regulation ranking by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) ( CEA ) A total of of the top OECD ranked countries have adopted regulatory caps the Netherlands ranked first ; the United Kingdom second ; and Denmark fourth. In last year s Report we estimated that if the United States adopted structural reforms and achieved the same level of product market regulation as the Netherlands U.S. real GDP would be percent higher over years ( CEA ) In the Economic Freedom of the World overall ranking the United States is sixth trailing Hong Kong Singapore New Zealand Switzerland and Ireland. These cross-comparisons also provide the basis for top-down estimates of total U.S. regulatory costs. The Congressional Research Service ( Carey ) describes a prominent example of a top-down estimate from a report for the National Association of Manufacturers ( Crain and Crain ) Crain and Crain use the World Economic Forum s Executive Opinion Survey to develop a proxy measure of the amount of regulation in each of OECD member countries from to ( The proxy measure is not the same as the OECD product market regulation index or the other cross-country indices discussed above. ) They estimate a regression model that shows GDP per capita as a function of the regulation index and a set of control variables that capture other influences on GDP. They find a statistically significant association between their index of 5As noted in chapter of this Report the OECD product market survey was limited to the State of New York and therefore may not be representative of the rest of the country. The data show that the United States is suffering from relatively high regulatory protection of established firms due to exemptions from antitrust laws for publicly controlled firms ( OECD ) In addition the OECD notes that U.S. product market regulation is more restrictive than that of other OECD economies due to the prevalence of State-level ownership of certain enterprises particularly in the energy and transportation sectors. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | low regulatory burden and GDP per capita. They also compared the U.S. score on the regulation index with the average score on the regulation index in five benchmark countries with the lowest regulatory burdens. On the basis of this comparison they estimate that if the burden of regulation in the United States were as low as in the benchmarks U.S. GDP would be $ trillion higher. This estimate forms one component of their estimate of the total regulatory costs in the United States ( Crain and Crain ) The Congressional Research Service notes that there have been a number of criticisms of this top-down estimate of regulatory costs ( Carey ) It would be useful for policymakers to know the impact of different broad regulatory programs on the value of goods and services that the U.S. economy can produce. Comparing GDP per capita achieved by different countries that have taken different regulatory approaches mimics this thought experiment. In principle the top-down approach should capture the cumulative burdens of regulatory actions. However there are fundamental methodological challenges regarding how to measure regulatory burden across countries and on the validity of drawing causal inferences from the estimated statistical associations. Further econometric specification issues include the selection of the dependent and independent variables and the correct functional form of the relationship between the dependent and independent variables. To sum up total regulatory costs in the United States are difficult to estimate with precision. However the cost estimates which range from almost half a trillion to over a trillion dollars are sufficiently large to justify the argument that deregulatory actions should be considered as a priority to help sustain U.S. economic growth. The cross-country comparisons of regulatory burdens also suggest that there is room to reduce the burden in the United States. The Need to Level the Playing Field for Deregulation If regulatory review worked perfectly it might seem that deregulation would never be needed. Each deregulatory action is subjected to the same costbenefit analysis required for new regulatory actions ( OMB 2017a ) Regulatory review thus requires that a deregulatory action s benefits ( the regulatory costs saved ) must justify the action s costs ( the benefits forgone when the original regulatory action is modified or eliminated ) The original regulatory review should have ensured that the benefits of the original regulatory action justified its costs. If the results of the original regulatory review were correct and unchanging a deregulatory action should never be needed and indeed should not pass regulatory review itself. However until the use of regulatory cost caps the regulatory process was likely to have been tilted toward the benefits of expanding the regulatory state. Because regulatory actions address agencies core missions such as protecting workers public health safety and the environment there is a | Chapter natural tendency for the analyses to emphasize benefits over costs. In the past some agencies regulatory analyses came across like advocacy documents to justify a predetermined decision rather than to inform the decision ( Broughel ) ; emphasis in the original ) OMB s OIRA regulatory review process provides a check on this tendency. In the extreme the focus on agency-specific missions leads to tunnel vision causing regulators to go too far in pursuing their agencies missions ( Breyer ) The economic theory of regulation and public choice economics provide additional insights into the functioning of government bureaucracies. Regulatory actions can serve the interests of established firms in the industry for example by creating barriers that prevent the entry of new firms ( Stigler ) Chapter of this Report reviews evidence that State professional licensing requirements serve as barriers to entry rather than promoting the public interest. In addition to altruistic support for an agency s mission Niskanen ( ) argues that self-interested regulators pursue actions that expand the scope and size of their agency. Several examples illustrate the possible tilt in agencies past analyses toward the benefits of regulatory actions over the costs.6 Dudley and Mannix ( ) criticize RIAs of air-quality regulations. More generally Dudley and Mannix ( ) argue that agencies do not appear to search for benefits and costs objectively but instead focus on benefits and quantify or list every conceivable good thing that they can attribute to a decision to issue new regulations. Gayer and Viscusi ( ) provide a detailed discussion of the controversial question of whether Federal agencies should measure the benefits of climate change policies from a domestic or global perspective. The Circular A-4 guidance document ( OMB ) instructs Federal agencies to focus on regulatory benefits and costs to citizens and residents of the United States. When a regulatory action has effects beyond the borders of the United States agencies are told to report those effects separately ( OMB ) However previous analyses have compared the global benefits of major environmental regulatory actions with domestic compliance costs. For example the EPA estimated that the proposed Clean Power Plan would yield global climate benefits in worth $ billion ( in dollars ) ( FR ) Gayer and Viscusi ( ) find that this estimate falls to $ to $ billion ( in dollars ) counting only domestic climate benefits. In contrast Pizer and others ( ) argued that the global perspective is appropriate given the distinctive nature of the climate change problem and the need for global solutions. The tilt toward benefits does not hold across the board. For example Department of Homeland Security s RIAs are often unable to quantify the benefits of safety rules that address highconsequence / low-probability events. However the lack of quantified benefits does not necessarily avoid and might even exacerbate the tilt toward benefits. Under Executive Order when benefits and/or costs are unquantified RIAs discuss whether the benefits of a regulatory action justify the costs. The subjective judgment about whether unquantified benefits justify the costs might allow more room for an intentional or unintentional tilt toward benefits. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | Whether intentionally or not other analyses have downplayed costs. For example a regulatory analysis concluded that a rule that placed limits on consumers options to purchase short-term health insurance would have no effect on the majority of consumers who purchased such coverage but did not provide quantified evidence for this conclusion. In an analysis of a deregulatory reform of the rule discussed the potential for regulatory cost savings and concluded that the deregulatory action was likely to be economically significant and have an annual impact of over $ million. The Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) projected that the deregulatory reform will lead to million additional enrollees in short-term insurance. The deregulatory action did more than just remove the rule s restrictions. There is also uncertainty about the effects of the regulatory action and the deregulatory action. Despite these caveats however it is hard to reconcile the finding that the rule was not economically significant with the CBO s projections and with further analysis which estimated that the deregulatory action of the short-term health insurance market will provide cost savings worth $ billion in ( CEA ) A body of research compares the results of agencies prospective regulatory analyses conducted before the rules were passed with the results of retrospective analyses conducted afterward ( Harrington Morgenstern and Nelson ; OMB ; Morgenstern ) These comparisons of prospective and retrospective analyses have focused on the accuracy of the original estimates. However the prospective/retrospective comparisons do not address the problem that important categories of costs were omitted entirely in the original analysis ( Harrington Morgenstern and Nelson ) Moreover the prospective/retrospective comparisons do not shed light on the magnitude of the omitted costs or how including them might have changed the results of the prospective analyses. Whether intentionally or not omitting important categories of costs will result in systematic underestimation of costs. Regulatory analyses typically focus on compliance costs which are the most obvious source of opportunity costs. For example Belfield Bowden and Rodriguez ( ) reviewed RIAs of education regulatory actions from to They found that the education RIAs only calculated the paperwork costs of documenting compliance with regulatory actions what Belfield Bowden and Rodiguez call the administrative compliance costs. Opportunity costs include but are not limited to administrative and other compliance costs. When a firm hires workers and purchases new capital equipment to comply with a regulatory action for example society gives up the value of the other goods and services that those workers and capital could have produced. Aggregate paperwork costs of regulation are substantial ; if the billion hours devoted to regulatory paperwork in instead were used by employees to create output equal to their average hourly earnings it would total $ billion an amount equal to percent | Chapter of that year s GDP ( CEA ) But other sources of opportunity costs can be more subtle and difficult to see ( see box ) For example when the intended or unintended consequence of a regulatory action is to prevent a purchase the action prevents a mutually beneficial exchange. The buyer s potential gain is measured by the consumer s surplus the difference between the maximum the consumer is willing to pay and the amount actually paid. The seller s potential gain is measured by producer s surplus the difference between the minimum the producer is willing to accept and the amount actually received. The losses of consumer and producer surpluses are part and potentially a large part of the regulatory action s opportunity costs. Federal agencies analyses do not always measure consumer and producer surpluses because to do so would require estimates of the elasticities of demand and supply. OMB ( ) argues that estimating consumer and producer surpluses requires data that [ are ] usually not easily obtained and assumptions that are at best only educated guesses. The difficulty of measuring opportunity costs has often been discussed in subsequent OMB Reports although different Administrations have given it different emphases ( Fraas and Morgenstern ) Even without a preceding tilt toward the benefits of the regulatory state there are several other reasons deregulation will be needed and can lead to regulatory cost savings that more than offset the forgone benefits of the original regulatory action. First in a dynamic economy new products and technological developments will often require new approaches. For example as the drone industry took off the Federal Aviation Administration amended its rules to allow small unmanned aircraft systems in airspace and it changed the certification requirement of drones remote pilots ( FR ) Small unmanned aircraft do not raise the same safety concerns as manned aircraft. The flight training and other requirements for pilots of manned aircraft imposed high regulatory costs and created few benefits when applied to pilots of drones. The development of automated vehicles poses similar challenges for the Department of Transportation ( DOT ) As a first step DOT now interprets the definitions of driver and operator as not referring exclusively to a human but also to an automated system. And DOT ( ) encourages the developers of automated driving systems to adopt voluntary technical standards as an effective nonregulatory approach. Second new information can emerge that requires the reevaluation of regulatory actions. For example after the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) issued a rule to implement the Food Labeling Act companies and trade associations told the FDA about the difficulty of updating labels within the required time frame. The industry s concerns included the need for new software the need to obtain additional nutritional information about its products and the possible need to reformulate its products. In a deregulatory action the FDA extended the compliance date by years ( FR ) The cost savings Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | Box Opportunity Costs Ride Sharing and What Is Not Seen The opportunity cost of a regulatory action is the value of the activities forgone because of the action. In a classic essay the 19th-century French economist Fr d ric Bastiat argued that taking into account not only that which is seen but also that which is not seen is the difference between a good economist and a bad economist. His parable of the broken window is an example of opportunity costs. The bad economist concludes that the broken window is good for the economy ; when the shopkeeper pays the glazier to repair the window it encourages the glazier s trade. But the good economist recognizes that which is not seen ; because the window needs to be repaired the shopkeeper loses the enjoyment from the forgone opportunities to make other purchases. Likewise in addition to the more easily seen compliance costs regulatory actions often involve substantial opportunity costs. Measuring the opportunity costs of regulatory actions can be difficult ; they are not easily seen. The development of ride sharing provides an example where the opportunity costs of regulating the taxi industry can be estimated. Most major U.S. cities restrict entry into the taxi industry. A typical regulatory approach is to require taxi medallions which are transferrable permits required to operate a taxi ( Cetin and Deakin ) The restriction on entry drove up the price of taxi rides and created monopoly profits for the owners of medallions which could be worth hundreds of thousands of dollars. Ridesharing services including Uber and Lyft provide a close substitute for the services provided by taxis. The competition from ride-sharing services eroded medallion holders market power and led to sharp decreases in medallion prices. Cohen and others ( ) analyze data on almost million individuallevel observations of users of the UberX service. The researchers exploit the richness of the data to estimate that in the UberX service generated about $ billion in consumer surplus in the four cities studied. The gain in consumer surplus from UberX sheds light on the opportunity costs of the cities regulation of taxis. The bad economist might conclude that restricting the number of taxis was good for the economy because it increased taxi owners profits. But the good economist recognizes that which was not seen : the value consumers gain when ride-sharing services compete with taxis. Reviews of deregulatory actions should attempt to account for as much of the opportunity costs as possible. Current guidance already stresses the importance of measuring opportunity costs ( OMB ) Economic theory sometimes does not provide a simple formula to extrapolate the unseen opportunity costs from more easily observed regulatory compliance causes. Nevertheless careful analysis and consideration of the likely consequences of regulatory actions will shed light on the opportunity costs savings that are possible from deregulatory actions. Public input into the deregulatory process is likely to be helpful in this exercise. | Chapter from the delay offset the benefits forgone because of the delay. The extension of the compliance dates does not prevent companies from revising their labels sooner and data show that over products have already adopted the new Nutrition Facts label ( FR ) The extension reduces compliance costs while still promoting public health by helping consumers make better decisions about their food choices. Another example of an agency using new information to reduce regulatory costs is the Federal Aviation Administration s ( FAA ) revision of a rule to allow ground tests of helicopters to demonstrate compliance for night operations. The FAA s airworthiness standards for helicopters require that each pilot compartment must be free of glare and reflection when operated at night. In the past this aspect of airworthiness was evaluated by night flight tests which cost on average about $ The FAA determined that ground tests are equally effective to demonstrate compliance and cost only about $ per test. The compliance cost savings for the entire industry were estimated to be about $ million ( in present value ) The Cumulative Economic Impact of Regulation This section discusses the cumulative economic impact of regulation. First we explore how the effects of regulation are transmitted through markets. Then we describe the cumulative regulatory burden both its basic aspects and its costs along the supply chain. The Effects of Regulation Are Transmitted through Markets Even when the costs of regulations of public goods and regulations to enhance productivity might appear to fall primarily on a single industry it is important to interpret productivity broadly for the economy as a whole because the industry s costs affect the movement of capital and labor between the regulated industry and the rest of the economy. Take the occupation of barbers. Their production technology scissors chair sink and a shop has hardly changed in a century even though their inflation-adjusted wages have grown by about a factor of five ( Mulligan 2015b ) The development of safety and disposable razors has helped consumers substitute toward the home production of shaves but not haircuts. Nevertheless barbers wages grew even while their technology was static mainly for two simple reasons : ( ) Productivity grew in farming manufacturing information and many other industries ; and ( ) barbers have a choice of occupation and industry which means that either the wages of barbering keep up with the rest of the economy or barbering disappears as an occupation. Barbering is not special ; every occupation has its wage determined by productivity elsewhere in the economy. Wages in any occupation and industry are determined by the industry s supply of and demand for labor which in turn are determined by productivity elsewhere in the economy. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | For example the labor supply of barbers reflects their productivity in their next best alternative occupation and industry. Given the intimate relation between regulation and productivity regulation will therefore usually have a significant economic impact beyond the regulated industry. A regulated industry with price-elastic customer demand yields the more obvious result that higher costs increase the prices charged to customers reduce production and reduce industry employment and revenue. But the results of regulatory actions are less obvious to the extent that industries like barbering face relatively price-inelastic customer demand. Consider a perfectly competitive market with constant unit costs. When a regulatory action drives up the unit cost of production the change in industry revenues equals the change in consumer expenditures on the product. Given relatively inelastic demand the increase in unit cost results in higher consumer expenditures and higher revenues. The higher revenues cover the costs of production and regulatory compliance. As Becker Murphy and Grossman ( ) pointed out the paradoxical result is that more capital and labor are drawn into the industry even though production and consumption are reduced. In other words the opportunity costs in the price-inelastic case accrue primarily outside the industry because the rest of the economy must produce with less capital and labor. Policymakers sometimes emphasize the potential impact of regulatory actions on jobs ( i.e. the use of labor ) Under Executive Order one of the criteria for when a cost-benefit analysis is required is if the action is likely to have a material effect on jobs. Under Executive Order agencies Regulatory Reform Task Forces are required to prioritize repealing or modifying regulatory actions that eliminate jobs or inhibit job creation. However for the reasons explained above in some industries it can be misleading both for magnitude and direction to assess the benefits of a regulatory action solely on the basis of the jobs created or destroyed in the regulated industry ( a strength of the current practice of regulatory cost-benefit analysis is that agencies do not assess benefits this way ) Our framework also emphasizes that it is important to consider the effects including job effects outside the regulated industry. Regulatory actions that affect the degree of competition in an industry are also cases in which productivity needs to be understood broadly. For example a monopoly withholds production and therefore its use of capital and labor in order to extract higher prices from its customers. Its capital and labor are used elsewhere where they are less productive or are not used at all. Either way the result of a monopoly is all else being the same less total output and the result of competition is more total output. We examine these effects in an economic framework similar to that of Goulder and Williams s ( ) model of excise taxes where the primary difference is that an excise tax delivers its revenue to the public treasury whereas | Chapter regulatory action may use up the revenue in less efficient production.7 The framework has a composite commodity reflecting the value produced by the economy s many industries combined. The industries use capital and labor with efficiency that depends on regulation either because regulation discourages certain types of production or as with the monopoly example because it distorts the interindustry composition of production. In the aggregate therefore both regulations of public goods and regulations to enhance productivity have many of the same consequences as aggregate productivity shocks which have been studied extensively in economics ( Gray ; Crafts ) The Cumulative Burden I : Within Industry According to a former OIRA Administrator Cumulative burdens may have been the most common complaint that I heard during my time in government. Why people asked are agencies unable to coordinate with one another or to simplify their own overlapping requirements or to work together with State and local government so that we do not have to do the same thing two five or ten times ? ( Sunstein ) The NFIB s surveys of the owners of small businesses confirm the OIRA Administrator s experience. The NFIB conducted regulation-specific surveys in and When asked which best describes the source of their regulatory problems the majority of small business owners consistently responded that it was the total volume of regulations coming from many government agencies as opposed to a few specific regulations coming from one or two agencies ( in this question respondents were not asked to identify specific regulations ) In percent of respondents identified the volume of regulations as the problem compared with percent of respondents identifying specific regulations. In the number of respondents citing the problem of the volume of regulations jumped to percent. In this number dropped to percent. This subsection analyzes how businesses experience cumulative burdens and it uses the economics of convex deadweight costs and supply chains to assess these burdens and show how they have sometimes been neglected in cost-benefit analyses. Figure begins to illustrate cumulative burdens by focusing on a specific regulated industry that like any other industry has a downward-sloping factor demand curve that reflects the diminishing marginal value of what that industry produces. Factors refer to the labor capital and materials used in the production process. The industry factor supply curve represents the marginal opportunity costs : holding constant the total factors of production when more factors are used to produce in the regulated industry fewer are available to produce in the other industries. It is also possible that part of the revenue associated with a regulation s distortions goes to some of the market participants. A monopoly is an example where the industry output price is distorted and the revenue from that tax takes the form of a monopoly rent ( Harberger ) Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | Figure Distorted Allocation of Resources Among Industries Marginal value product Marginal opportunity cost E D1 A C1 D2 C2 Second regulation IFD without regulation IFD with one regulation First regulation Factor usage in the regulated industry Note : IFD = Industry factor demand. The value of production combined across all industries is maximized when the regulated industry is producing a quantity exactly at the intersection of the two curves shown in figure where the marginal value product of the factors of production are equalized between industries. For the sake of illustration we consider first one regulatory action and then later add a second regulatory action that has the same size impact on factor usage in the regulated industry. Each action reduces the degree of competition in the regulated industry for example by added legal or technological barriers to entering the industry. As noted above for the case of monopoly a less competitive industry has less factor demand and therefore uses less of the factors of production. The first regulatory action therefore reduces the value of the regulated industry s output by the combination of areas A C1 and C2. As a result of the reduction in the regulated industry s output factors of production shift to other industries. Areas C1 and C2 represent the resulting gain in output value in the other industries. The value of the output loss combined across all industries is triangular area A shown in figure Because it is assumed for the moment that an important effect of regulation is competition as emphasized at the end of this chapter with the joint employer standard the part of the output represented by combined areas E and D1 is retained by the industry s producers as economic profit rather than competitive factor incomes ( i.e. competitive payments to labor and capital ) For other regulatory actions such as the two health insurance regulatory | Chapter actions examined at the end of this chapter areas E and D1 are output losses rather than a transfer of income.8 In this chapter we use the public finance concept of deadweight cost to describe cumulative effects of regulation. If a regulatory action depresses an industry s resource usage by percent the lost transactions are likely those that were creating the least surplus which is why these transactions disappear merely because of just one regulatory action. But when the second regulatory action comes along the transactions of least value are already gone so that the next percent depression of the industry must eliminate relatively higher-value transactions than the first percent did. This is shown in figure ; even though the first and second actions have the same-size impact on factor usage in the regulated industry the second action has a larger cost in terms of aggregate output. That is combined areas D1 and D2 which show the incremental cost of the second regulatory action in terms of aggregate output are greater than area A which is the corresponding cost of the first regulatory action. The field of economics usually refers to such costs as convex given that doubling the regulatory action more than doubles the costs of regulation. The other side of the coin is that assessing the incremental costs of regulation requires an estimate of how much the industry has already been distorted. In addition to showing how regulatory costs accumulate figure also shows why a regulatory action s effect on industry employment is not entirely a cost. Note that the value of the regulated industry s output is the area under the without regulation factor demand curve ( colored red in the figure ) up to the equilibrium factor usage for the industry. The impact of regulatory action on the value of the regulated industry s output is therefore the impact on that area due to the change in the amount of factor usage. Areas C1 and C2 therefore capture the value created by labor and capital that switch to other industries which admittedly is less than the combined values A C1 and C2 that they would have created in the regulated industry. To the extent that the regulatory action causes capital and labor to cease employment entirely we need to look at the aggregate factor markets as we do in the next subsection. The Cumulative Burden II : Costs along the Supply Chain The interindustry cumulative cost shown in figure is commonly considered in traditional cost-benefit analyses but it is incomplete because the typical industry is surrounded by public policy distortions. The labor and capital used Even when the two areas reflect a lack of competition they may ultimately prove to be output losses to the extent that market participants use their capital and labor in order to increase their share of the economic profits at the expense of others ( Tullock ; Dougan and Snyder ) When the two areas reflect an output loss it is possible that the industry factor demand curve is rotated counterclockwise ( Mulligan and Tsui ) rather than shifted down as shown in figure which corresponds to the case in which the final demand for the regulated industry s output is locally price elastic. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | in the regulated industry and elsewhere are taxed. We show the accumulation of taxes and regulatory actions in figure which shows the aggregate economy-wide long-run supply and demand curves for capital. For the same reason that the area under the without regulation industry demand curve in figure is the value of industry output the area under the corresponding demand curve in figure is the value of long-run aggregate output. The aggregate capital demand curve is the sum of the capital demands of the regulated and other industries and therefore the regulatory action shifts it down according to the regulated-industry shift shown in figure Figure shows how the industry-specific regulation has a second effect on output by reducing the aggregate amount of capital in the economy. The amount of output lost due to less capital is equal to combined areas B1 B2 and F. As discussed below output is reduced still further to the extent that the regulatory action shifts down the aggregate labor demand curve and thus reduces the aggregate amount of labor. Output is not necessarily the same as welfare because increasing output with additional labor and capital comes at the cost of supplying the additional inputs for example the cost of delaying consumption in order to build up the capital stock. If the aggregate capital supply curve fully reflected the marginal cost of capital then the only social loss to be found in figures and would be area A representing the net loss of value created in the regulated and other industries. However to the extent that the supply of capital is itself distorted say due to taxes on capital income the marginal cost curve for capital is below the supply curve as drawn in figure by a proportion equal to the tax rate for capital income.10 The overall cost of regulatory action therefore includes not only area A in figure but also the deadweight cost associated with the reduction in capital shown as combined areas B1 and B2 in figure As found by Goulder and Williams ( ) the deadweight cost and loss of output associated with reduced aggregate factor usage often significantly exceeds the loss of output that comes from distorting the composition of The quantitative relationship between combined areas A D1 and E in figure and combined areas B1 and B2 in figure depends on what is also happening in the aggregate labor market which for brevity is not shown in this chapter and the degree to which economic profits are created or destroyed by the regulatory action. A regulation that affected only consumer goods industries and had no effect on economic profits might not shift the demand curve in figure If capital were subsidized then the marginal cost curve would be above the supply curve. In macroeconomics the opportunity cost of capital is often referred to as the rate of time preference or the rate of impatience reflecting the fact that the opportunity cost of capital in the future is less consumption in the present ( Romer ; Fisher ) If the regulation were increasing the value of output rather than decreasing it then area A in figure would be negative ( an increase in productivity ) so that the regulation increases the use of capital and areas B1 and B2 in figure would be an additional benefit. | Chapter Figure How Industry Regulation Affects the Aggregate Factor Market Capital rental rate Supply of capital B1 B2 F ACD without regulation Marginal opportunity cost ACD with regulation Aggregate quantity of capital Note : ACD = Aggregate capital demand. activity among industries.11 A regulatory cost imposed on a specific industry can add substantial excess burdens to the capital and labor markets. The case studies at the end of this chapter are such examples. The aggregate labor market has a diagram analogous to figure with the gap between labor supply and marginal labor cost due to taxes on labor income and other distortions of the labor market. In a small open economy where wages are primarily determined in international markets the picture would be quite similar including a horizontal supply curve and a horizontal opportunity cost curve. Otherwise we would draw the labor supply curve sloping upward and would also shift it due to the income effects of the productivity change ( Ballard and Fullerton ) Either way the labor market has an additional factor cost analogous to figure s areas B1 and B2. Moreover to the extent that labor and capital are complementary production factors and regulatory action reduces their aggregate employment there are further reductions in the aggregate demand for capital and labor and therefore further reductions in aggregate output and aggregate surplus. Although not shown in figure another possible effect of regulating an industry is to shift up the supply curves for capital and labor. For example suppose the regulated industry has its capital taxed at lower rates than other industries. Then the cost-benefit analysis would commonly recognize that Goulder and Williams ( ) examined excise taxes rather than regulations but the aggregate analysis is the same as long as figure s areas D1 and E are a transfer rather than an aggregate output loss. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | additional capital tax revenue is a benefit of a regulation that induces capital to move out of the industry. But we must also count the costs associated with the reduced aggregate supply of capital due to the fact that the regulation raises the average marginal tax rate on capital. Those costs include lower wages ( resulting from less capital investment ) and a loss of capital tax revenue that potentially offsets the revenue gain reflected in the usual analysis.12 The cumulative cost of regulation can nonetheless be estimated in practice primarily with information from the regulated industry. Specifically only information from the regulated industry is required to estimate lost factor incomes A E and D1 which are the result of the regulatory actions holding constant the aggregate amounts of labor and capital. Because areas B1 and B2 ( and their analogues in the labor market ) are the result of the lost factor incomes shown in figure their magnitude can be included by rescaling the industry-specific effects according to the marginal deadweight cost of government revenue as estimated in the field of public economics ( Feldstein ; Saez Slemrod and Giertz ; Weber ) The additional factor costs of regulation have different implications for cost-benefit analyses depending on whether a regulatory action is a regulation of public goods or a regulation to enhance productivity. The additional factor costs are associated only with industries that produce private goods using the factors of production and experience a net cost from the regulatory action. Take for example a regulation of a public good that improves environmental quality at the expense of reduced manufacturing output. Figure s area A measures costs ( associated with a reduced value of production in manufacturing and the other industries ) but not necessarily net costs because it does not include the environmental benefit. Area A generates additional factor costs such as those shown by areas B1 and B2 in figure because capital and labor are used in the production of private goods. There is no additional factor cost ( or benefit ) associated with the environmental benefit because that is a public good. In other words recognizing the additional factor costs can change the sign of the net benefit of regulations of public goods because they are associated with the output losses but not the environmental benefits. Regulations to enhance productivity are different in this regard because their costs and benefits both accrue in industries that are producing private goods with the factors of production. In this case if figure s areas A D1 and E measure net costs then areas B1 and B2 in figure can not change the Another example is the proposal to shift health insurance from employers to the individual market where taxation is greater. The shift has a benefit reflected in the additional tax revenue ( Gruber ) but the shift also reduces the aggregate supply of labor because holding tax policy constant it raises the average marginal tax rate on work. The CEA ( ) followed this practice in its analysis of health insurance deregulatory actions taking the rescaling factor to be : for every $ of deadweight loss in the health insurance industry it added another cents of factor market distortion costs. | Chapter sign of the net cost ; they only increase its magnitude.14 To be more general we note that to the extent a public good contributes to private production some regulatory actions will be combinations of regulations of public goods and regulations to enhance productivity. Our application of Goulder and Williams s ( ) framework has a rather simple supply chain where final goods markets ( the industries ) draw directly from capital and labor markets so that the cumulative cost of regulation is simply the combination of costs in final goods markets ( represented in figure ) and costs in factor markets ( represented in figure ) But in reality multiple industries can be situated in a vertical supply chain in which case there would be more than two sets of costs to consider. The cumulative costs can be especially large when individual industries in the chain pass on their costs more than one for one which is a result known in the industrial organization field as double marginalization ( Tirole ) The specification of the joint employer standard discussed at the end of this chapter is an example of how the Trump Administration s deregulatory actions have improved efficiency along supply chains. Lessons Learned : Strengthening the Economic Analysis of Deregulation This section considers lessons learned vis- -vis strengthening the economic analysis of deregulation. First it looks at how to diagnose market failure. Second it describes the costs of regulatory actions that are correct on average. Third it explores examples of the excess burdens of regulatory actions. Fourth it looks at the burdens of nudge regulatory actions. Fifth it describes how to expand the use of regulatory impact analysis. Diagnosing Market Failure Regulatory review should be careful to not overdiagnose market failure. The first step in a regulatory cost-benefit analysis is to identify the problem the action is intended to address : a market failure or other social purpose such as promoting privacy and personal freedom ( OMB ) In many circumstances competitive markets tend to successfully guide the use of society s resources to their highest value. In economic terminology markets fail when resources are not achieving their most highly valued use. A typical regulatory impact analysis should compare the benefits of correcting a market failure with the opportunity costs of the regulatory action. For example an environmental regulatory action might address the market failure created by the negative For the purposes of the analysis in this chapter the CEA assumes that the various industries affected by regulation are equally substitutable or complementary with the supplies of capital and labor. This assumption could be relaxed by examining the more general framework of Goulder and Williams ( ) Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | externalities when a manufacturing plant pollutes the air. Other market failures include a lack of market competition inadequate consumer information and when consumers and producers have asymmetric information. Because the cumulative regulatory burden is large when diagnosing market failures the burden of proof should be high. The possibility of a market failure does not by itself mean that a Federal regulatory action is appropriate. Regulatory actions are costly and like markets government bureaucracies are imperfect ( Kahn ) Federal regulatory actions are more likely to be appropriate when they correct market failures that result in large misallocations of resources. OMB ( ) guidance for RIAs tells Federal agencies to focus on significant market failures and when feasible to describe the market failure quantitatively. The burden of proof should be high because a claim that there is a market failure must mean that something blocks mutually beneficial exchanges from taking place. In the example given above of a polluting plant the potential exchanges are between the public which values cleaner air and the manufacturer which could take costly steps to reduce air pollution ( and the consumers of the product that is now more expensive ) Minor symptoms in which markets do not work perfectly should not lead to the diagnosis of a significant market failure. In situations where exchanges fail to take place the Nobel laureate Ronald Coase ( ) identified the lack of clearly defined property rights and transaction costs as the root causes of market failure. All markets face transaction costs so the question is not whether there is a market failure but whether the transaction costs are a major barrier that prevents many beneficial exchanges ( Zerbe and McCurdy ) In the polluting plant example it is reasonable to expect that high transaction costs create a significant market failure. However in other cases the potential market failure can be less clear. For example indoor air pollution from secondhand cigarette smoke might seem to fit the definition of a market failure of an externality. But because the ownership of the airspace within their properties was both established and relatively easy to police many hotel chains and some restaurant chains enacted smoking bans long before State or local laws required them to ( Institute of Medicine ) In spite of some transaction costs enforcement of the bans within their airspace these voluntary bans were market successes. Hotel and restaurant owners could increase their profits by guaranteeing more valuable clean air unpolluted by cigar and cigarette smokers to their nonsmoking customers who were willing to pay for access to it. However voluntary bans might not go far enough to meet all social goals. In cases like this a careful empirical analysis is required to determine the quantitative significance of the market failures that may remain.15 As long as all parties ( consumers workers and so on ) can make voluntary transactions it might be profit- and welfare-maximizing to allow smoking in certain establishments. | Chapter The Costs of Regulatory Actions That Are Correct on Average In a market economy that is too complex for any regulator or scholar to fully understand regulators are bound to make mistakes. Decades ago Friedrich Hayek ( ) insisted that centralized economic planning is impossible even when regulators have access to much statistical information about the economy because statistical information by its nature can not take direct account of these circumstances of time and place and that the central planner will have to find some way or other in which the decisions depending on them can be left to the man on the spot. At best central planning is highly imperfect and as we illustrate with some important examples below closely watched attempts to fine-tune industries with regulation have suffered costly failures. Remarking on the deregulation of the airline industry Kahn ( ) observed that the prime obstacle to efficiency has been regulation itself and the most creative thing a regulator can do is remove his ( and her ) body from the market entryway. One reason why Executive Order places great importance on receiving public input on proposed regulatory actions is that the households and businesses that will be burdened with the costs Hayek s man on the spot are in a better position to identify them. The convex deadweight cost approach also complements Hayek s observation that planning is highly imperfect. Once we acknowledge that regulation involves errors of magnitude or even direction the fact that the costs are convex means that optimal regulation is necessarily cautious because the benefit of pushing the market one unit in the direction of efficiency is less than the cost of ( accidentally ) pushing the market one unit in the direction of inefficiency. Regulation that is correct on average can nonetheless have a negative expected net benefit.16 Consider figure again. The regulator identifies say an environmental benefit that justifies imposing a productivity cost equal to area A. This benefit would be obtained by contracting the industry by the increment shown in figure If the regulator were perfect and the industry were contracted by that amount the actual cost A would be equal to the environmental benefit. But if the regulator were imperfect say by having a percent chance of contracting the industry by twice as much and a percent chance of not contracting it at all the expected cost of the regulatory action would be ( A D1 D2 ) /2 which is greater than A because of the convex deadweight costs discussed above. This example shows how regulation would have costs equal to benefits when the regulation is exact but expected costs exceeding benefits when the For a more extensive analysis see Mulligan ( 2015a ) Milton Friedman ( ) makes a related argument for cautious monetary policy. The Friedman model has macroeconomic variance as the cost rather than deadweight costs but delivers a similar conclusion that even monetary policy that leans against the wind on average can nonetheless make the business cycle more volatile because variance is also a convex function. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | regulatory action is correct only on average. When acknowledging that the effects of regulation are uncertain it follows that the best estimate from a decision perspective is one that is pessimistic as to net benefits relative to the statistical expectation ( Hansen and Sargent ) Examples of the Excess Burdens of Regulatory Actions Regulatory reviews of deregulatory actions should routinely account for the excess burdens of regulation. Accounting for excess burdens is consistent with current guidance but it appears to be uncommon. Current guidance for regulatory reviews stresses the need to look beyond the direct costs of a regulatory action and to examine countervailing risks which are defined to include an adverse economic consequence that occurs due to a rule and is not already accounted for in the direct cost of the rule ( OMB ) The excess burdens of regulatory actions in other markets such as the capital market shown in figure fit the definition of an adverse economic consequence. One lesson from research on taxation is that the excess burden depends on the existence and levels of preexisting distortions taxes and subsidy programs in the economy. A standard example from taxation is the excess burden of a new tax on a certain good ( e.g. restaurant food ) when there is a preexisting tax on a good that consumers see as a complement ( e.g. gasoline used to drive to the restaurant ) The new restaurant tax further reduces gasoline sales and magnifies the distortion created by the preexisting gasoline tax. The reduction in gasoline tax revenues measures the excess burden ( Harberger ) The source of the excess burden is the misallocation of resources due to the preexisting gasoline tax ; the new restaurant tax magnifies the resource misallocation in the market for gasoline. In the same way a new regulatory action that increases costs in the restaurant business magnifies the preexisting resource misallocation in the market for gasoline and generates an excess burden that could be measured by the reduction in gasoline tax revenues. To illustrate the potential magnitude of the regulatory excess burden due to a preexisting tax suppose a hypothetical regulatory action increases the cost of producing a restaurant dish by $ As a result of the price increase suppose that the typical consumer reduces his or her purchases from to dishes a month. Because the restaurant dish and the gasoline are complements ( due to the need to drive to the restaurant ) further suppose that the restaurant regulatory action causes him or her to spend $ less on gasoline per month. If the market for restaurant food is competitive with constant unit costs of production the standard measure of the opportunity cost of the regulatory action is $ per month : $ in compliance costs ( $ for each of the dishes still consumed ) plus a consumer surplus loss of $ a month. Assuming that taxes account for percent of the price of gasoline ( which is about true in Pennsylvania where in the State gasoline tax of $ a gallon is added to the Federal tax of $ a gallon ) the reduction in gasoline tax revenues | Chapter from this consumer which measure the regulatory excess burden is $ a month. In this example the total cost of the restaurant regulatory action is correctly measured to be $ Failing to include the excess burden omits $ in costs or almost percent of the total costs.17 The share of the total costs accounted for by the excess burden depends on the strength of the demandcomplementarity and the size of the preexisting tax ( Goulder and Williams ) If the good with a preexisting tax is a substitute for the good produced by the regulated industry the excess burden is negative that is the excess burden of the preexisting tax is reduced. Moving from the hypothetical example to a real-world regulatory action the Affordable Care Act required chain restaurants to post calories of menu items. Major cost elements in the RIA of this requirement included collecting and managing records of nutritional analysis revising or replacing menus and training employees ( FR ) The FDA estimated that the compliance costs are $ million ( in dollars annualized at a percent discount rate ) Based on an analysis that the labels will shift consumers toward healthier foods and reduce obesity the FDA estimated that the annualized benefits are $ million ( in dollars ) A more complete analysis of the calorie-posting rule would not exactly parallel the hypothetical example. Unlike the hypothetical example the calorie-posting rule mainly creates fixed costs of compliance. However if the fixed costs restrict entry and competition the rule would still reduce consumption of restaurant food and of the complementary good gasoline. Although the RIA s estimated compliance costs did not include an estimate of the excess burden imposed in the market for gasoline in this case correcting the omission is unlikely to change the conclusion that the benefits of the regulatory action exceeded the costs. A more complete analysis could also consider other preexisting distortions that affect the chain restaurant industry such as agricultural subsidies and the joint employer standard ( discussed below ) The potential complications illustrate a common challenge in RIAs the need to include the most important distortions without making the analysis overly long and complex. A cost-benefit analysis should account for changes in tax revenues when they measure the excess burdens that regulatory actions impose in the presence of preexisting distortions ( Harberger ) The standard economic analysis of a tax increase measures the tax revenues generated and the excess burden imposed on the economy known as the deadweight cost of taxation ( Auerbach and Hines ) In a cost-benefit analysis of a tax increase the change in revenues from that tax is merely a transfer payment that leaves In practice an RIA of the restaurant regulatory action might fail to account for the reduction from to dishes per month. The approximation that assumes no reduction would lead the RIA to overestimate the compliance costs to be $ The approximation in estimating compliance costs could offset part of the mistake of ignoring the $ excess burden. In general approximations and mistakes need not cancel each other out. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | social benefits unchanged ; the tax revenues represent a monetary payment from one group ( the consumers who pay the tax ) to another group. But the point of the example given above was to evaluate the hypothetical regulatory action that imposed new costs on the restaurant industry and also shifted consumer demand for gasoline when there already was a preexisting gasoline tax. Because of the preexisting tax consumers have already given up the lower-value purchases of gasoline. Consumers marginal willingness to pay for gasoline exceeds by the amount of the tax the marginal opportunity costs of the factors of production used in the gasoline industry. The preexisting gasoline tax results in the misallocation of resources to the market for gasoline. When the regulatory action increases the price of restaurant dishes and shifts the demand for the complementary good gasoline the resource misallocation due to the preexisting distortion is magnified. As a result the regulatory action creates an excess burden which is measured by the change in tax revenues. By the same reasoning a cost-benefit analysis should account for changes in subsidy expenditures when they measure excess burdens created by regulatory actions. Again the common case where subsidy expenditures are treated as transfer payments does not apply. For example chapter discusses the costs and benefits of setting the Affordable Care Act s individual mandate penalty to zero. The CBO ( ) projected that setting the penalty to zero will reduce federal expenditures on ACA subsidies by $ billion over years. The ACA premium subsidy is properly treated as a transfer when the task is evaluating the effects of the subsidy. But the analytical task in chapter is to evaluate removing the mandate penalty not to evaluate changing the ACA subsidy rules. The reduction in subsidy expenditures measures the benefits of setting the penalty to zero. Parallel to the analysis of a preexisting tax the preexisting ACA subsidy results in the misallocation of resources and the mandate penalty magnifies the resource misallocation. A consumer who voluntarily gives up his or her subsidy when the mandate penalty is removed is not by comparison with his or her situation with the penalty in place harmed because the Treasury no longer provides a subsidy. Instead the consumer has received a benefit by no longer being constrained by the tax penalty and at the same time taxpayers benefit by no longer having to finance the ACA subsidy. As in the case for taxation whether the regulatory excess burden is positive or negative depends upon whether the goods are substitutes or complements as well as on whether the regulatory action decreases or increases subsidy expenditures.18 In practice taking into account all the adverse economic consequences of a regulatory action might seem a daunting task. To estimate the costs of the Clean Air Act and the Clean Water Act Hazilla and Kopp ( ) constructed an Self-paid treatment would also be provided in the absence of insurance enrollment and would in the absence of behavioral considerations be reflected in the height of the health insurance demand curve. The shapes of both the demand and supply curves would determine the discrepancy between surplus changes and federal budget effects. | Chapter econometric general equilibrium model that included producing sectors on the supply side and a complete model of consumer behavior on the demand side. If the general equilibrium approach is taken it is important that the models include the preexisting taxes and subsidies that drive the excess burdens of regulation. Murray Keeler and Thurman ( ) evaluated a possible rule of thumb that to capture excess burdens the direct costs of environmental regulatory actions should be adjusted upward by to percent. Their analysis showed that the rule of thumb is not necessarily a good approximation and concluded that whenever possible estimates of regulatory costs should be based on the specific nature of the regulatory actions and likely interactions between the tax and regulatory systems. In many circumstances instead of a rule of thumb an implementable formula provides a good approximation of the excess burden that a tax or regulatory action imposes in the labor market ( Goulder and Williams ) The formula captures general equilibrium interactions that are often left out. The use of this approximation and when needed extending it to include other important sources of excess burdens allows reviews of new regulatory and deregulatory actions to be based on more complete estimates of total regulatory costs. The Burdens of Nudge Regulatory Actions Regulatory reviews should take a cautious approach to so-called nudge regulatory actions. The relatively new field of behavioral welfare economics suggests that policy nudges can help people make better decisions ( Chetty ) The typical definition of a policy nudge is that it changes behavior although it is easy to avoid and has a low cost ( Thaler and Sunstein ) For example employers can nudge their workers to save more for retirement by making enrollment in a ( k ) retirement plan the default option ( Madrian and Shea ) Because it was easy for the workers to opt out of the ( k ) plan changing the default option fit the definition of a nudge. Advocates argue that nudges help consumers make choices in this case saving more for retirement that are in the best interests of the consumers themselves. However behavioral welfare economics poses a number of challenges for regulatory reviews. Behavioral economics arguments might tend to exacerbate the tilt in the regulatory process toward the benefits of expanding the regulatory state. In addition although some nudge regulatory actions may yield important benefits they also may involve easy-to-overlook opportunity costs. The basic challenge is whether individual failures should be added to the standard list of market failures as potential justifications for new regulatory actions. The logic in favor of adding them is the argument that policy nudges help people avoid making predictable mistakes decisions that the individuals themselves would agree are not in their own best interest. The mistakes can be called internalities ; individuals impose costs on themselves that they fail Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | to consider when making decisions. The main guidance document for regulatory review Circular A-4 ( OMB ) does not discuss individual failures or internalities. OMB s ( ) guidance emphasizes that when possible benefits should be estimated based on consumers revealed preferences. In contrast behavioral welfare economics emphasizes that because consumers make systematic mistakes their revealed preferences are not a reliable guide for estimating benefits. For example if consumers mistakenly fail to take into account future savings from more energy-efficient products their revealed preference for inefficient products should not be used to measure the benefits of regulatory actions to promote energy efficiency. OMB s guidance and behavioral economics thus place different emphases on the role of revealed preferences in benefit estimation. However OMB s guidance does not explicitly exclude methods of behavioral economics ; nor does it exclude the argument that individual failures might provide the rationale for new regulatory actions. Executive Order issued September encourages Federal agencies to apply insights from behavioral economics and following Britain s example a nudge unit ( officially the Social and Behavioral Sciences Team ) was established to explore policy options. Increasingly in practice RIAs discuss individual failures as providing a rationale for regulatory action. In the past Federal agencies have claimed that regulatory actions were needed because consumers and businesses failed to take into account the future savings from buying more energy- and fuel-efficient products ( Gayer and Viscusi ) The arguments in the regulatory analyses echo long-standing claims about energy conservation policies ( Allcott and Greenstone ) Much of the evidence for the claims came from engineering estimates of energy conservation cost curves. The engineering studies often concluded that energy can be conserved at a negative net cost that is that investing in energy conservation more than pays for itself. The apparently unexploited gains from investing in conservation might be viewed as evidence that many consumers and businesses make mistakes about energy conservation. However engineering estimates typically omit opportunity costs and may fail to properly account for physical costs and risks. The shortcomings of engineering studies make the estimates difficult to take at face value ( Allcott and Greenstone ) The opportunity costs of investing in energy conservation can take many forms. Allcott and Taubinsky ( ) conducted two randomized experiments to estimate the effect of providing consumers with more information about the energy efficiency of lightbulbs. In both experiments even after efforts to inform consumers and call attention to the energy savings large shares of consumers continued to purchase incandescent lightbulbs rather than compact fluorescents. The experimental results suggest that a regulatory action that bans incandescent lightbulbs creates significant opportunity costs for those consumers who simply prefer the lighting provided by incandescents. In principle the benefits ( or costs ) of a ban on incandescent lightbulbs could be estimated | Chapter in two steps : First complete an engineering estimate of the value of the energy savings ; and second adjust the engineering estimate downward to account for lost consumer surplus. An analogous approach has been used to estimate the value of reducing consumption of a good that harms health ( Ashley Nardinelli and Lavaty ) The practical difficulty of implementing this approach has been called a tall order ( Levy Norton and Smith ) In another important example of regulatory policy to conserve energy the National Highway Traffic and Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) and the EPA set Corporate Average Fuel Economy ( CAFE ) standards for passenger cars and light trucks. The rule which was finalized in increased the stringency of the fuel economy standards which were estimated to then require manufacturers to achieve a fleet-wide standard of miles per gallon for the model year. This rule would have increased to miles per gallon for the model year if the NHTSA had the statutory authority to set standards that far into the future in a single rulemaking. The NHTSA regulatory impact analysis concluded that the benefits of the standards substantially exceeded the regulatory costs. In the analysis future fuel savings for consumers accounted for percent of the estimated benefits ( Gayer and Viscusi ) In fact the analysis estimated that the fuel savings for consumers would exceed the additional costs they would incur in the form of higher-priced vehicles. In contrast holding everything else being constant the regulatory actions can not make a rational consumer better off and might make them worse off.19 Some rational consumers might make the same fuel economy choices that the NHTSA s analysis estimated were right in which case the regulatory action would not change their behavior and thus would not create any benefits for them. Some rational consumers might instead decide that other car features are more desirable than future fuel economy in which case the regulatory action makes them worse off. For example under the standards consumers might not be able to purchase cars they prefer with more powerful but less fuel-efficient engines. If the results of the analysis are accurate one must believe that consumers who make such choices are not acting in their own self-interest. The standards also created environmental benefits which played a largely The regulatory actions reduce choices and in general more choices are better than fewer choices. More technically the fuel economy regulatory actions impose additional constraints on the consumer s optimization problem. The solution to a more constrained optimization problem can not lead to an outcome that is preferred over the solution to a less constrained optimization problem. The regulatory actions might mean that everything else is not constant. For example if there are economies of scale in producing more fuel-efficient cars the CAFE regulatory actions could decrease the average cost. The cost reduction would benefit consumers who prefer more fuel efficiency. However if there are also economies of scale in producing less fuel-efficient cars there would be an offsetting cost increase for consumers who prefer other attributes such as more powerful engines. Of course all consumers can also be made better off by the reduction in externalities. The RIA measured those benefits separately. The question of consumer rationality is whether there are net private benefits for consumers from future fuel savings. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | incidental role in the cost-benefit analysis ( Gayer and Viscusi ) If the analysis were corrected so that consumers behaved self-interestedly the estimated costs of the standards would have been greater than the estimated benefits ( Gayer and Viscusi ; Allcott and Knittel ) Recently a NHTSA and EPA preliminary regulatory impact analysis of the proposed Safer Affordable Fuel Efficient ( SAFE ) Vehicles Rule concluded that a deregulatory action in the form of retaining the standards through model year would reduce regulatory costs by between $ billion ( in dollars ; percent discount rate ) and $ billion ( in dollars ; percent discount rate ) over the lifetime of the vehicles ( NHTSA and EPA ) The regulatory analysis is complex and runs over pages. It considers eight regulatory alternatives and multiple conceptual and empirical modeling issues. Our discussion focuses on its treatment of the question of whether consumers undervalue fuel economy when making car purchases. New empirical evidence suggests that buyers undervalue fuel economy only slightly if at all ( Busse Knittel and Zettelmeyer ; Allcott and Wozny ; Sallee West and Fan ) The studies analyze data on the sales of different models of cars to identify the impact of higher fuel economy on the selling price. In addition the studies use rich data to control for the influence of other attributes for example more engine power that also influence the selling price. Holding these other factors constant the studies find that consumers are willing to pay higher prices for more efficient cars that reduce their future fuel costs. The studies compare the estimated willingness to pay for higher fuel economy with estimates of the expected fuel savings. The estimated fuel savings depend not only on the car s fuel economy but also on future gasoline prices and the extent to which future savings are discounted. Depending on different assumptions about future fuel prices and discount rates the studies estimate that when purchasing cars consumers incorporate from percent to over percent of future fuel costs. Although the precise degree of undervaluation ( if any ) is difficult to know the empirical evidence is inconsistent with the cost-benefit analysis implying that most consumers mistakenly ignore fuel economy. When a regulatory analysis argues from behavioral economics that a regulatory action corrects individual failures the RIA should apply the same evidence standards used when evaluating standard market failures. As mentioned above OMB s ( ) guidance tells Federal agencies to determine that the market failure is significant and that they should describe the failure both qualitatively and when feasible quantitatively. The discussion in the preliminary regulatory impact analysis of whether consumers undervalue fuel economy is a good example of an evidence-based and quantified description ; the analysis suggests that the individual failure of undervaluation is probably not significant. In other cases behavioral economics research on individual failures might sometimes fail to meet the standard of providing strong evidence for quantification. To a large extent empirical evidence on individual | Chapter failures comes from experiments in economic laboratories. Although carefully designed and controlled experiments provide tight tests of specific behavioral hypotheses it is problematic to try to extrapolate experimental results to predict how people make real-world decisions in markets. Even with empirical support that a nudge is needed measuring the costs of a regulatory nudge is difficult. This difficulty arises in part from the issue of how to precisely define what constitutes a nudge. The criteria that a nudge is easy to avoid and has a low cost are not precisely quantified ( Thaler and Sunstein ) Some policies that correct supposed consumer mistakes are not nudges. For example fuel economy standards are not a nudge ; the standards are not easily avoided and impose opportunity costs because they limit the availability of cars with desirable features. In contrast the Motor Vehicle Fuel Economy Label rule is a nudge designed to correct the same consumer mistakes. If this nudge worked fuel economy standards would be unnecessary ( Gayer and Viscusi ) Glaeser ( ) points out that other common nudge policies essentially create a psychic tax even though the nudges do not require explicit payments consumers bear a real cost. Cost-benefit analyses should account for the fact that stigmatizing behavior imposes real costs regardless of whether the behavior is in the consumers own best interest. More research is needed to develop empirical estimates of the costs of stigmatization and the willingness to pay to avoid it. Promising approaches include revealed and stated preference methods that have been developed to estimate the willingness to pay for other commodities that are not directly traded in markets ( OMB ) Expanding Use of Regulatory Impact Analysis Another priority to strengthen the regulatory review process is to expand the number of complete and quantified regulatory cost-benefit analyses. Because the time personnel and resources available for regulatory reviews are limited Federal agencies are only required to conduct cost-benefit analyses of significant regulatory actions. As a result from through about final rules were published in the Federal Register and fewer than of these rules were deemed significant under Executive Order Because the unreviewed rules were anticipated to not have economic effects greater than $ million annually or other significant adverse effects in principle they might account for a small share of total regulatory costs. However given the volume of unreviewed rules the uncounted regulatory costs might add up to a significant share. OMB should continue to carefully review agencies analyses of whether the regulatory action is significant in the first place. For a large fraction of significant rules discussed in OMB s Reports to Congress the agencies were not able to completely quantify the benefits and/ or costs. Furchtgott-Roth ( ) examines a number of important Federal labor market regulations including the joint employer standard case study Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | at the end of this chapter that were not evaluated with cost-benefit analyses when they were issued.20 Unlike Executive Order which explicitly required an analysis of whether the potential benefits exceeded the potential costs the current regulatory review Executive Order which was enacted in requires only that the potential benefits justify the potential costs. Although at other points this Executive Order still refers to maximizing net benefits the wording might leave the door partly open for an unquantified cost-benefit analysis. In many cases regulatory analyses have been incomplete ( Hahn and Tetlock ) Studies of the U.S. regulatory review process have found that over the past years in only about one-third to one-half of the cases was the regulatory analysis able to conclude that the benefits exceeded the costs ( Hahn and Dudley ) In most of these cases the original analysis was simply unable to quantify the benefits and/or the costs. After reviewing OMB s Reports on the Benefits and Costs of Federal Regulations across different administrations Fraas and Morgenstern ( ) concluded that the Obama Administration placed more emphasis on difficult-to-measure benefits such as the value of dignity and equity. Sunstein ( ) argues that as a general principle regulatory cost-benefit analyses should try to measure the willingness to pay to honor moral commitments. Even when it is difficult to place a dollar value on a regulatory action s benefits quantifying its costs makes the tradeoffs involved more transparent. Improving cost-benefit analyses of a set of regulatory actions known as budgetary transfer rules is another priority. Budgetary transfer rules involve changes in receipts or outlays such as Medicare funding. An important principle of cost-benefit analyses is that lump-sum transfers that do not change economic behavior but simply transfer income from group A to group B do not yield net benefits or net costs. The benefits for group B are exactly offset by the costs imposed on group A. However budgetary transfer rules are not lumpsum transfers and thus cause people to change their behavior. For example a regulatory action that changes Medicare payments is not simply a transfer from taxpayers to healthcare providers. Taxpayers and healthcare providers will respond to the changed incentives created by the regulatory action. The transfer rule has a budgetary impact and also has effects on private sector behavior. As discussed above a cost-benefit analysis should measure all the changes in consumer and producer surplus that result when regulatory actions change private sector behavior. In the past most agencies typically reported only the estimated budgetary effects of the transfer rules and sometimes the direct compliance costs. Recognizing that transfer rules may create social benefits or costs OMB encourages agencies to report them and will consider incorporating any such estimates into future Reports ( OMB 2017b ) The framework Some were issued by independent agencies or were issued as informal guidance or were considered economically insignificant. | Chapter we develop above provides guidance for more complete cost-benefit analyses of transfer rules. A complete cost-benefit analysis of transfer rules also requires consideration of preexisting distortions namely subsidies and taxes. By the nature of transfer rules the actions often change behavior that is already affected by government subsidies. For example a Medicare transfer rule might increase or decrease coverage for healthcare services. A transfer rule might also increase or decrease total Federal expenditures that need to be financed through taxes. In many cases one component of the costs of a transfer rule will be the rule s budgetary impact rescaled by an estimate of the marginal deadweight cost of government revenue. Until the OIRA review process generally excluded two important sets of regulatory and deregulatory actions : tax regulatory actions taken by the Department of the Treasury and regulatory actions taken by independent agencies. Just as with the regulatory actions that are currently subject to costbenefit analysis these regulatory actions promoted important goals but at an opportunity cost. A regulatory cost-benefit analysis is thus still needed to help strike the right balance. On April the Department of the Treasury and OMB signed a memorandum of agreement that outlines a new process for OMB to review tax regulatory actions under Executive Order ( White House ) This agreement reflected Treasury s and OMB s shared commitment to reducing regulatory burdens and providing timely guidance to taxpayers particularly guidance necessary to unleash the full benefits of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Under the agreement a tax regulatory action will be subject to OIRA review if it has an annual nonrevenue effect on the economy of $ million or more. Many tax regulatory actions are focused on improving the collection of tax revenues and there is a long-standing process to review the revenue effects of the Department of Treasury s regulatory actions. However similar to other agencies regulatory actions some tax regulatory actions are designed to change incentives so as to promote social goals. For example the Department of the Treasury issued tax regulatory actions that clarify which transactions would quality for beneficial tax treatment for investments in Opportunity Zones such as equity investments made in Qualified Opportunity Funds that invest in the Opportunity Zones. The proposed rule is expected to qualify as a deregulatory action because it will reduce taxpayers planning costs. By reducing taxpayers uncertainty the rule should promote the goal of encouraging investments to flow into Qualified Opportunity Funds. ( The Opportunity Zone initiative is discussed in more detail in chapter ) Regulatory and deregulatory actions continue to be issued by independent agencies are not subject to the OMB regulatory review process. The economic framework we develop above is broad enough to encompass independent agencies actions. The principles of regulatory cost-benefit analysis apply Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | equally well to these actions although of course they will need to be applied to the specific contexts of the independent agencies. Several independent agencies have created groups to conduct economic analyses internally. In the Securities and Exchange Commission created the Division of Economic and Risk Analysis. In recent developments the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau has established its own Office of Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Federal Communications Commission is in the process of establishing an Office of Economics and Analytics. There remains an unmet need for cost-benefit analyses of the regulatory actions taken by the independent agencies. Coglianese ( ) discusses three proposed policy options for improving independent agencies regulatory analyses : through the courts through the OMB process or through a required analysis undertaken outside OMB. Case Studies of Deregulatory Actions and Their Benefits and Costs This section presents three case studies of deregulatory actions and their benefits and costs. The first case study describes association health plans. The second study examines short-term limited-duration insurance plans. And the third study discusses the specification of the joint employer standard. Case Study : Association Health Plans A major theme of this chapter is that the burdens of regulatory actions accumulate which means that the cumulative costs of a set of actions will be larger than the sum of the costs of each regulatory action analyzed one by one. Case studies and illustrate the process in reverse : The cost savings from deregulatory actions also accumulate. The CEA s ( ) analysis used CBO projections and other evidence to conduct prospective cost-benefit analyses of two deregulatory actions taken in that expanded consumer health coverage options : the association health plan ( AHP ) rule ; and the short-term limited-duration insurance ( STLDI ) rule. These deregulatory reforms restore and expand options in health insurance markets within the existing statutory frameworks including the Affordable Care Act. We discuss the benefits and costs of each action separately but the analysis accounts for the cumulative nature of the deregulatory actions. Specifically the CBO ( ) projected the combined impact of the AHP and STLDI rules. The CBO s projections also incorporated the fact that the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of had already set the individual mandate penalty to zero owed by consumers who did not have Federally-approved coverage or an exemption. ( Chapter provides a more detailed analysis of the individual mandate penalty. ) Taking into account the zero-mandate penalty the CBO ( ) projected that by the AHP and STLDI rules will lead to million more AHP enrollees and million more STLDI enrollees. | Chapter Before under Title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act ( known as ERISA ) the Department of Labor had adopted criteria in subregulatory guidance that restricted the establishment and maintenance of AHPs. On June the Department of Labor issued the AHP deregulatory action to establish an alternative pathway to form AHPs that modified some of the criteria. The AHP rule is an example of how deregulation does not always involve the elimination of an existing rule but can instead involve revising subregulatory guidance through notice-and-comment rulemaking. The AHP rule s removal of regulatory burden expands the ability of small businesses and working owners without other employees to join AHPs. AHPs allow small businesses and certain working owners to group together to selfinsure or purchase large group insurance. AHPs allow small businesses to offer their workers more affordable and potentially more attractive health coverage. Summing up over the groups of consumers whose health coverage options are expanded by the AHP rule the CEA ( ) estimated that in after consumers and markets have had time to adjust removing the regulatory burden will yield net social benefits worth $ billion. In addition these savings are estimated to reduce regulatory excess burdens by $ billion. Many uninsured Americans today work for small businesses. The ACA subjected health insurance coverage for small businesses to mandated coverage of essential health benefits and price controls ( in the form of restrictions on how premiums are set ) that are not required for large businesses. Under the ACA AHP coverage provided to employees through an association of small businesses and certain working owners is regulated the same way as coverage sold to larger businesses. Interpreting ERISA the AHP rule provides a new pathway to form AHPs that modified the earlier subregulatory restrictions. New AHPs will be able to form by industry or geographic area ( e.g. for metropolitan areas and States ) Fully insured AHPs could be established beginning on September while self-funded AHPs needed to wait until early Two studies provide estimates of the effects of the AHP rule on insurance coverage and ACA premiums. The CBO ( ) projects that after the rule is fully phased in it will expand AHP enrollments by about million people. Also the CBO projects that consumers who switch to AHP coverage will be healthier than average enrollees in small group or individual plans. Based on the CBO s projections the CEA ( ) estimated that the AHP rule will cause gross ( of subsidy ) premiums in the nongroup market to increase by slightly more than percent. Another study estimated that the proposed rule on AHPs will cause The AHP rule expands organizations ability to offer AHPs on the basis of common geography or industry. For example existing organizations such as local chambers of commerce could offer potentially large AHPs. According to the Association of Chamber of Commerce Executives local chambers of commerce range in size from a few dozen firms to more than firms. Depending upon the number of workers per chamber member the potential group size of chambers of commerce-based AHPs range from the hundreds to the tens of thousands. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | million enrollees to leave the individual and small group markets and enter AHPs by ( Avalere ) The AHP rule will allow small businesses to offer their workers more affordable health coverage by reducing the administrative cost of coverage through greater economies of scale. The share of the premium accounted for by administrative costs falls with insurance group size ; the share is percent for firms with or fewer employees compared with percent for firms with to employees and percent for firms with more than employees ( Karaca-Mandic Abraham and Phelps ) The AHP rule allows the average group size to expand which reduces the average cost of AHP coverage a significant advantage for many small and medium-sized businesses. The AHP rule also gives small businesses more flexibility to offer their workers health coverage that is more tailored to their needs. At this point in time it is speculative whether AHPs will provide relatively comprehensive coverage or more tailored coverage. Providing more choices over tailored coverage options could have substantial value for consumers. An analysis of choices made in the employment-related group market found that offering more preferred plan choices was as valuable for the median consumer as a percent premium reduction ( Dafny Ho and Varela ) The CEA s ( ) analysis did not include a separate estimate of the value of more tailored plan options. In some circumstances there may be a trade-off between AHP group size and the extent of tailoring because the more tailored plan might not be attractive to all potential AHP members. In this context the estimate of the benefits of reduced administrative costs provides a lower bound for benefits ; consumers who do not take advantage of the lower administrative costs of larger AHPs do so because they value tailored coverage more highly than the cost savings. The AHP rule affects four groups of people : consumers who move out of ACA-compliant individual coverage in the nongroup market to ACA-compliant group coverage through an AHP ; consumers who move out of small-group coverage ; consumers who would have AHP coverage with or without the rule ; and consumers who would have been uninsured without the rule. To estimate the effects of the AHP rule the CEA ( ) used data from the CBO s ( ) projections and estimates of administrative costs. The AHP rule s addition of a new pathway to form AHPs which modified the criteria for the creation of AHPs decreased costs and thus increased the consumer surplus for AHP enrollees. The CEA s ( ) estimates include changes in the consumer surplus and the reductions in the excess burden of regulatory costs. As discussed above the consumer surplus and excess regulatory burden are often omitted. The CEA s ( ) analysis of the AHP rule provides a useful case study and guide to estimate these important aspects of regulatory costs. The first step is to estimate the benefits that flow from consumers moving out of ACA-compliant individual coverage in the nongroup market. Based on differences in administrative costs of ACA-compliant coverage in the | Chapter individual market versus AHPs ACA-compliant coverage in the group market the CEA estimated that each enrollee who shifts from ACA-compliant individual coverage to ACA-compliant group AHP coverage saves $ in administrative costs and enjoys $ in net surplus from the cost reduction. In addition the CEA estimated that after accounting for the loss of cross-subsidies and their effects on ACA-compliant premiums and subsidies in the nongroup market each enrollee who shifts from ACA-compliant individual coverage into ACAcompliant AHP group coverage reduces third-party expenditures by $ Aggregated over the million enrollees who shift in these effects of the AHP regulatory reform yield benefits worth $ billion. The second step is to estimate the benefits that flow from the roughly million consumers who respond to the rule by moving out of small-group coverage into AHP coverage. By allowing enrollees to switch to AHPs that are larger than their existing small group plans the CEA estimated that the AHP rule will on average reduce insurance administrative costs by $ so each enrollee enjoys $ of surplus from this cost reduction. The CEA assumed that the reduction in administrative costs also reduces Federal tax expenditures on health insurance by an average $ per enrollee. Aggregated over the million enrollees who make this shift these effects of the AHP rule yield benefits worth $ billion. The third step is to estimate the benefits that the AHP rule generates for the consumers who would have AHP coverage with or without the rule. Due to the increase in average AHP group size the CEA estimated that the rule reduces administrative costs by $ per enrollee. The CEA assumed that the reduction in administrative costs also reduces Federal tax expenditures on health insurance by an average $ per enrollee. The aggregate benefits from this effect of the AHP rule are worth $ billion. The fourth step is to estimate the benefits the AHP rule generates for consumers who would have been uninsured without the rule. The CBO ( ) projected that the AHP regulatory reform will reduce the number of uninsured consumers by Because they are responding to a reduction in administrative costs that averages $ per enrollee ( as above ) each newly insured AHP enrollee enjoys a consumer surplus of $ from their purchase. The CEA ( ) also estimated that third-party costs of uncompensated care fall by $ for each newly insured AHP enrollee. Offsetting these benefits Federal tax expenditures on health insurance increase by an estimated $ per newly insured AHP enrollee. The aggregated net costs of these effects of the AHP rule are $ billion. Summing up over the four groups of consumers whose insurance options are expanded by the AHP rule the CEA ( ) estimated that in the rule yields social benefits worth $ billion. The estimate of social benefits takes into account both the benefits and costs including the possibility that the AHP Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | rule imposes new costs on a subset of enrollees in the nongroup market who pay higher insurance premiums. Case Study : Short-Term Limited-Duration Insurance Plans The second case study considers an August deregulatory action that expanded short-term limited-duration insurance ( STLDI ) plans. The STLDI rule revised a rule issued by the previous Administration in At the time of the enactment of the ACA and until the rule STLDI plans had longer durations than allowed by the rule. The rule expressed a concern that consumers were purchasing STLDI plans as their primary form of coverage to avoid ACA requirements. The rule therefore shortened the total duration of STLDI plans from less than months to less than months ( FR ) The STLDI rule removed the restrictions created by the rule which allows consumers more flexibility to purchase short-term insurance. On August the Department of the Treasury Department of Labor and Department of Health and Human Services published a final rule that extended the length of the initial STLDI contract term to less than months and allowed for the renewal of the initial insurance contract for up to months which is the same as the maximum coverage term required under COBRA continuation coverage ( U.S. Congress ) Because the administrative costs and hassles of purchasing health insurance can now be spread out over a longer period of coverage the STLDI rule also has the effect of lowering the average costs consumers pay for insurance. The CEA ( ) estimated that in the STLDI rule will yield benefits worth $ billion. In addition the savings in costs were estimated to reduce excess burdens by $ billion. Because STLDI plans are not considered to be individual health insurance coverage under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act and the Public Health Service Act STLDI coverage continues to be exempt from all ACA restrictions on insurance plan design and pricing. This allows STLDI plans to offer a form of alternative coverage to those who do not seek permanent individual health insurance coverage. The STLDI rule requires that STLDI policies must provide a notice to consumers that these plans may differ from ACAcompliant plans and among other differences may have limits on preexisting conditions and on health benefits and have annual or lifetime limits.22 Insurers were allowed to begin issuing STLDI plans on October days after publication of the final rule. Four studies provide estimates of the effects of the STLDI rule on insurance coverage and ACA premiums. The CBO projects that the STLDI regulatory reform will result in an additional million consumers in STLDI plans by ( CBO ) Based on CBO projections the CEA ( ) estimated that the STLDI ACA-compliant coverage including coverage offered on the exchange continues to have no limits on preexisting health conditions. | Chapter rule will increase gross premiums by slightly more than percent in the same time frame. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ( CMS ) project that by million consumers will have STLDI policies and that as a result gross premiums for ACA coverage could increase by up to percent ( CMS ) A study published by the Urban Institute in predicts that the rule could increase STLDI enrollment by million but does not provide an estimate of the impact on gross ACA premiums ( Blumberg Buettgens and Wang ) A study published by the Commonwealth Fund estimates that the rule could increase STLDI enrollment by million and could increase gross ACA premiums by percent ( Rao Nowak and Eibner ) Under both the and rules STLDI plans are exempt from ACA requirements including the mandated coverage of the essential health benefits ( CCIIO ) The STLDI rule limited the duration of an STLDI contract to less than months. The rule s restrictions on the duration of an STLDI contract exposed potential STLDI enrollees to the risk of losing their STLDI coverage at the end of three months or if they could obtain a new STLDI policy having their deductibles reset among other things. The CEA ( ) therefore modeled both the renewability restriction and the limited terms as an addition to the load costs and hassle of STLDI plans associated with applying for coverage every months rather than every months which are hereafter referred to as loads. Assuming no tax penalty on the uninsured the CEA compared high-loaded STLDI plans ( rule ) with low-loaded STLDI plans ( new rule ) and took the difference to be the impact of the new rule. Allowing for STLDI plans under the rule makes the CEA s analysis different from some others ( e.g. Blumberg Buettgens and Wang ) that assume that no STLDI plan is available under the rule and fundamentally changes some of the results. According to the CEA s approach even under the rule there would be little reason for consumers paying premiums far in excess of their expected claims to continue with ACA-compliant individual coverage because at least they have the expensive but not impossible option of reapplying for STLDI coverage every three months. The marginal STLDI enrollees must instead be those who receive either an exchange subsidy or a cross-subsidy from other members of the ACA-compliant individual market risk pool.24 The CEA s approach also does not permit adding an additional benefit to STLDI enrollees from relief from the essential health benefits mandate because they already had that relief under the previous rule albeit with higher loads. The CEA notes that under the rule a consumer having difficulty continuing STLDI coverage could turn to ACA-compliant plans which in a sense is a choice with extra loading to the extent that the applicable regulations deviate from the consumer s preferences. It is possible that the ACA-compliant risk pool included a number of consumers with a low ratio of expected claims to net premiums but this Report is looking at plan years through when the individual mandate penalty is zero and market participants have had time to adjust to the reality of high premiums for ACA-compliant plans. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | Lower premiums result from smaller loads because premiums finance both claims and loads. But with the exemption from ACA regulations STLDI plans also have more freedom to control moral hazard and to dispense entirely with loads associated with unwanted services by excluding those services from the plan. These are some of the reasons why premiums for STLDI coverage are often less expensive than premiums for ACA-compliant individual market insurance plans ( CMS ; Pollitz et al. ) Many health insurance simulation models treat consumer choice as a negative- or zero-sum game. A person who reduces his or her net premium spending by $ when he or she forgoes unneeded coverage merely increases by $ the premiums that must be collected from those who retain that coverage. This assumption is unrealistic because of moral hazard administrative costs and the fact that the exchanges cap and means-test premiums. For example this person s gross premium for the forgone coverage may have been $ ( he receives premium subsidies on the exchange ) $ of which goes to administrative costs and another $ goes to the person s own claims that were of little value but are made as long as he or she is forced to have the coverage. This person s enhanced choice saves taxpayers $ and imposes no cost on the risk pool. As demonstrated in the CEA s report a broader and more realistic range of insurance market frictions and thereby more reliable conclusions are possible without unduly complicating the analysis. The STLDI rule affects three groups of consumers : consumers who move out of ACA-compliant individual coverage and into STLDI coverage ; consumers who would have chosen STLDI coverage with or without the rule ; and consumers who would have been uninsured without the rule. To estimate the effects of the STLDI rule the CEA ( ) used data from the CBO s ( ) projections estimates of the elasticity of demand for health insurance and estimates of the administrative and time costs of STLDI coverage. Before the rule the rule s restrictions on STLDI coverage increased costs and thus reduced consumer surplus for STLDI enrollees. The CEA s ( ) estimates include changes in the consumer surplus and reductions in the excess burden of regulatory costs. As discussed above the consumer surplus and excess regulatory burden are often omitted. The CEA s ( ) analysis of the STLDI deregulatory action provides a useful case study and guide to estimate these important aspects of regulatory costs. The first step is to quantify the benefits that the STLDI rule generates for consumers who move out of ACA-compliant coverage into STLDI coverage. The CBO projects that the rule will result in million new enrollees in STLDI plans. The CEA ( ) estimated that over million of these are consumers who shift from ACA-compliant individual coverage to STLDI coverage. The CMS projects that the average STLDI premium in will be $ Assuming that the elasticity of demand for STLDI coverage is the CEA estimated that by removing | Chapter the combined effects of the limits on renewability the limited term and the administrative costs and hassles the STLDI rule reduces the load by $ On average each enrollee who switches from ACA-compliant individual coverage to STLDI coverage thus enjoys a consumer surplus of $ ( The average net surplus equals one-half the total cost savings of $ ) After accounting for the loss of cross-subsidies we estimate that each enrollee who shifts from ACA-compliant individual coverage to STLDI coverage reduces third-party expenditures by $ Aggregated over the million enrollees who shift in these benefits of the STLDI rule are worth $ billion. The effects of the STLDI rule depend upon how many consumers shift from ACA-compliant individual coverage to STLDI coverage and of those how many received ACA premium subsidies. The CEA ( ) used the CBO s ( ) projections that over million consumers will switch from ACA-compliant individual coverage. The economic analysis in the STLDI rule assumes that in enrollees will switch from ACA exchange plans to STLDI coverage and another will switch from off-exchange plans. In terms of how many switchers received ACA premium subsidies we assume that the STLDI switchers will be on average similar to the enrollees projected to respond when the tax penalty is set to zero ( CBO ) This assumption is uncertain. The CMS ( ) projects that mostly unsubsidized enrollees will switch to STLDI coverage. Similarly the economic analysis in the STLDI Final Rule anticipates that most consumers who switch to STLDI coverage will have incomes that make them ineligible for ACA premium subsidies. The CEA ( ) conducted a sensitivity analysis that estimated the benefits from the STLDI rule under different assumptions about the number of consumers who switch from ACA-compliant individual coverage and the number of unsubsidized switchers. The second step is to quantify the benefits that the STLDI rule generates for consumers who would have chosen STLDI coverage with or without the new rule. The CEA ( ) assumed that consumers would have chosen STLDI coverage with or without the new rule. Each of these consumers gains the $ in reduced load costs ( as noted above ) Aggregating over consumers the STLDI rule yields an additional $ billion in benefits. The third step is to quantify the benefits that the STLDI rule generates for the consumers who would have been uninsured without the rule. The CBO ( ) projects that the STLDI deregulatory reform will reduce the number of uninsured consumers by million people each of whom also enjoys a consumer surplus of $ from their purchases ( as noted above ) The CEA ( ) also estimated that third-party costs of uncompensated care will fall by $ for each newly insured STLDI enrollee. Aggregated over million the benefits for previously uninsured consumers who move into STLDI plans add another $ billion. Summing up over the three groups of consumers whose insurance options are expanded by the STLDI rule the CEA ( ) estimated that in Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | the rule yields benefits worth $ billion. The estimate of social benefits takes into account both the benefits and costs including the possibility that the STLDI rule imposes new costs on a subset of enrollees in the nongroup market who pay higher insurance premiums. Case Study : Specifying the Joint Employer Standard During the Obama Administration a new expansive standard for determining joint employers dramatically changed the landscape of labor regulation for the employers of millions of American workers. This new standard especially burdened franchising which is a large and rapidly growing part of retail technology and other sectors. This subsection explains why returning to the previous narrow standard as the Trump Administration is doing enhances productivity competition and employment in labor markets with a net annual benefit likely exceeding $ billion. These results occur in large part because the expansive standard increased entry barriers into local labor markets and discouraged specialization along the supply chain. The working conditions of many of the Nation s employees are affected by two separate companies engaged in business relationship. A joint employer standard specifies when two or more companies are simultaneously the employer for legal purposes and therefore both joint and severally liable for unfair labor practices committed by the other. The definition of a joint employer is pertinent to legal liability in Fair Labor Standards Act litigation enforced by the Department of Labor and to collective bargaining rules overseen by the National Labor Relations Board. The NLRB established a common law standard by deciding various cases over the years although that standard was volatile between and In including a board member appointed by President Trump the NLRB issued its Notice of Proposed Rulemaking proposing to follow the standard before which was that to be deemed a joint employer under the proposed regulation an employer must possess and actually exercise substantial direct and immediate control over the essential terms and conditions of employment of another employer s employees in a manner that is not limited and routine. In August a decision by the NLRB established a more expansive standard that did not require the control to be direct or to be actually exercised. The NLRB s shift to a more expansive standard became apparent to the business community no later than July when the NLRB Office of the General Counsel asserted that McDonald s was a joint employer ( NLRB ; Greenhouse ) The Department of Labor had also in provided The quotations in this section are from FR In addition to issuing the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in the NLRB issued a December decision returning to the earlier ( narrower ) standard although that decision was vacated in for reasons unrelated to the substance of the joint-employer issue ( FR ) | Chapter informal guidance specifying a more expansive standard and then during the Trump Administration withdrew that guidance. Consider a few examples. Company ABC retains a temporary agency TMP for some clerical staffing that needs to be performed at ABC s location. If TMP has no supervisor at ABC s location and ABC is selecting and supervising the temporary employees then by both standards ABC is a joint employer of those employees. The determination would under the narrower standard be the reverse if TMP was doing the supervision without detailed supervisory instructions from ABC. Company FRA is a franchisee for company XYZ which specifies the daily hours that FRA stores are open for business but does not involve itself with individual scheduling assignments. XYZ would not be a joint employer under the narrower standard but probably would be under the expansive standard.27 Under the expansive standard the NLRB charged McDonald s which has the vast majority of its restaurants owned and operated by independent franchisees as a joint employer for its franchisees actions ( Elejalde-Ruiz ) The McDonald s case was settled in with McDonald s no longer designated as a joint employer ( Luna ) although an administrative judge rejected the settlement which may be headed back to the NLRB for approval. From an economic perspective a joint employer determination prohibits the division of management responsibility that normally coincides with the assignment of management tasks along a supply chain. By restricting the allocation of responsibility along the supply chain the chain will be less productive and involve less division of tasks ( Becker and Murphy ) As an important example franchisers may need to abandon their franchise status and either abandon the company assets or deploy them in a less productive corporate ( nonfranchise ) structure where all the workers in the chain are employed by the franchiser. Franchising which is a method of distributing products or services in which a franchiser lends its trademark or trade name and a business system to a franchisee which pays a royalty and often an initial fee for the right to conduct business under the franchiser s name and system is by itself a ubiquitous business practice about half of retail sales in the United States involve franchised operations ( FR ; Norton ) About million workers are employed by franchises ( Elejalde-Ruiz ; Gitis ) Temporary help services is another important business model affected by the joint employer The NLRB s expansive standard is more speculative to apply and derives from a single NLRB decision Browning-Ferris ; two dissenting NLRB members found it to be impermissibly vague. Franchisers can be joint employers under the narrower standard if e.g. they specify that franchisees provide specific fringe benefits to franchisee employees. Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | standard with firms in obtaining about million employees from supplier firms.28 An expansive joint employer standard affects the competitiveness of the markets for labor as well as the productivity of the affected industries. The NLRB s Office of the General Counsel advocating the expansive standard stated that such a standard is needed to give workers additional market power ( Phillips ) To the extent that the expansive standard causes franchises to be absorbed by the franchiser the monopsony market power of employers would be increased.29 Either of these adverse competition effects of the expansive standard are represented by areas D1 and E in figure above with the regulated industry understood to be franchised supply chains or the temporary help industry. In order to quantify the annual amounts contained in these areas we first estimate that employment in these businesses is about percent of total employment. Because their average pay is lower we estimate that total wages for are about $ billion for franchisees and temporary help services.30 The monopsony power created by the expansive standard reduces the wages paid by these businesses. For each percent that wages are reduced the aggregate wedge between wages paid and marginal productivity is about $ billion in and $ billion a year on average for the years Krueger and Ashenfelter ( ) estimate that increasing the market power of employers by fully eliminating competition for labor among those franchisees associated with the same franchiser would create a labor wedge equal to about one-sixth of the inverse of the wage elasticity of industry labor supply. At an industry supply elasticity of ( or ) this means that worker s wages are depressed by ( or ) percent respectively. Assuming that some franchising would have continued even with the expansive standard these are upper bounds but suffice to show that the percent effect hypothesized above is plausible. The $ billion per year is a transfer but it also represents a reduction in the aggregate demand for labor. Given that labor is already significantly taxed The number of firms is from FR ; and the number of employees is from FRED ( ) Temporary help employment has now exceeded million. Consolidation on the worker side of the market ( that is unionization ) may offset the wage effect of consolidation on the employer side. However the two are reinforcing in terms of the amount of labor and therefore inefficiency because each side with market power tends to reduce quantities ( demanded or supplied as applicable ) in order to squeeze the other side of the market ( Williamson ; Farrell and Shapiro ; Whinston ) The Bureau of Labor Statistics finds that the annual mean wage of temporary help service workers was $ in May We proxy franchisee workers wages using the annual mean wage of workers in retail trade i.e. $ We then create an annual mean wage of both groups by taking a weighted average of the two groups wages. This assumes wage elasticities of labor supply and demand that are approximately equal in magnitude so that a percent movement down the labor supply curve is associated with about the same movement up the labor demand curve. To convert a amount to an average for through we assume percent annual growth. | Chapter there is a social cost of reduced labor demand for the reasons discussed in connection with figure Using the same percent deadweight cost factor used for the health insurance case studies that makes an annual net social loss of about $ billion from the anticompetitive aspects of the expansive standard. A similar cost calculation would result if it were assumed instead that the expanded standard creates a similar-sized wedge in the labor market due to additional unionization. Any productivity effects need to be added to the anticompetitive aspects. The CEA has not yet been able to quantify these effects aside from noting above the number of workers employed by franchisees and in the temporary help industry. Nevertheless the productivity effects may be important because franchisers view the franchise system as essential for them to be innovative and adaptive to changing market conditions ( Hendrikse and Jiang ) McDonald s is a major franchiser and its annual reports show how it has increased the number of franchisee stores while decreasing the number of company stores. Its goal is to have percent of its stores be franchise stores. Related subregulatory guidance issued in by the Department of Labor proposed a revised test for independent contractor status. Independent contractors account for about percent of U.S. employment ( BLS 2018a ; Furchtgott-Roth ) and are important in the relatively new sharing economy. The test shares many of the same economic issues with the expansive joint employer standard : specialization competition innovation and so on. But potentially unique to independent contractors is the direction of the tax gap ; the expansive independent contractor standard may increase revenues from employee and business taxation whereas the expansive joint -employer standard may reduce it.32 The additional labor or capital tax revenue resulting from the regulation is reflective of a benefit although there is also a cost in the other direction due to a reduction in the aggregate supplies of labor and capital ( recall figure ) In summary the recent decisions by the NLRB and the Department of Labor to return to the narrow joint employer standard will create an annual net benefit of billions of dollars in the forms of added competition and productivity in low-skill labor markets. A rough estimate suggests that the net annual benefit will probably exceed $ billion. Conclusion Regulation involves trade-offs. Many regulatory actions have helped protect workers public health safety and the environment. However ever-growing One issue not yet resolved by the CEA is whether business income franchisers are taxed at a lower marginal rate than business income of franchisees especially now that the statutory corporate income tax rate has been cut. Regarding the employee / independent contractor tax gap for varying conclusions see Bauer ( ) and Eisenbach ( ) Deregulation : Reducing the Burden of Regulatory Costs | cumulative regulatory costs have burdened the U.S. economy. In and the Trump Administration s regulatory cost caps turned around the growth in regulatory costs. Small business owners consumers and workers gain when less regulation means lower business costs lower consumer prices more consumer choice and higher worker productivity and wages that exceed any reduction in the regulations benefits. Guided by cost-benefit analyses Federal agencies are eliminating and revising regulatory actions when the benefits do not justify the costs and to improve the cost-effectiveness of regulatory actions in accomplishing their important goals. This chapter has used an economic framework to analyze the need for and potential of the Trump Administration s deregulatory agenda. The framework emphasizes what small-business owners have long known that regulatory costs accumulate and multiply. When an industry is regulated the effects are felt across the U.S. economy. Starting in and the economy has started to grow stronger as the cost savings from deregulatory actions have begun to accumulate. Deregulation is improving the country s fundamental productivity and incentives to enable sustained economic growth. | Chapter x Chapter Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American Consistent with the robust pace of economic growth in the United States the labor market is the strongest that it has been in decades with an unemployment rate that remained under percent for much of Although this low unemployment rate is a sign of a strong job market there is a question whether the rapid pace of hiring can continue and whether there are enough remaining potential workers to support continued economic growth. This pessimistic view of the economy s potential overlooks the extent to which the share of primeage adults who are in the labor market remains below its historical norm. It also fails to capture the extent to which these potential workers could be drawn back into the labor market by increasing worker productivity and wages as well as by correcting labor market distortions from past tax and regulatory policies. This chapter explores trends in employment and wages as well as the positive effects of the Trump Administration s policies on increasing the returns to work and encouraging additional adults to engage in the labor market. Fundamentally when people opt to neither work nor look for work it is an indication that the after-tax income they expect to receive in the workforce is below their reservation wage that is the minimum value they give to time spent on activities outside the formal labor market. For some this reflects the low wages that they expect to earn through formal work either because they lack the education and skills desired by employers or because firms lack the physical capital necessary to enhance their productivity. Reskilling programs can prepare these individuals for higher-wage jobs. Similarly the reduction in corporate income tax rates the expensing of businesses investment in equipment and the creation of the Opportunity Zones provided by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act each makes it less costly for firms to invest in the necessary physical capital to increase worker productivity which results in higher wages. Consistent with strong economic growth wages continued to increase through and this wage growth has been particularly strong among the lowestearning workers. This wage growth has the potential to give more people incentives to begin looking for work. For others who remain outside the formal labor market this decision reflects the tax and regulatory distortions that limit the after-tax return that they would receive from formal work. Some regulations such as occupational licensing directly raise the costs of entering the labor market and therefore reduce the number of people seeking work. The high cost of child care in part driven by regulatory and other requirements provides a disincentive to work in the formal labor market and an incentive to take care of one s own children rather than hire others to do so. This Administration s deregulatory policies have reduced these labor market distortions thereby drawing some prime-age workers back into the labor market. This chapter outlines recent labor market trends both for the adult population as a whole and for key population subgroups. It also considers policies that could further remove government distortions and increase the after-tax return to formal work thereby increasing work incentives for potential entrants into the labor market. These policies will encourage additional workforce growth and further expansion of the U.S. economy. F or adults ( age years and over ) who are working or looking for work the current labor market is among the strongest in recent decades. The economy is in the midst of its longest consecutive streak of monthly job creation in at least years. The national unemployment rate sat at percent in December after reaching a near 50-year low in November. Since the national unemployment rate has reached a rate below percent during only months with of these months occurring in Additionally for the first time since the Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) began tracking job | Chapter openings in there are more job openings than unemployed workers suggesting that firms still seek to hire more people. Despite the strong job market and the surplus of open positions millions of adults are neither employed nor seeking work. Because these individuals are not actively looking for work they are considered to be out of the labor market and are not counted as unemployed even though many of them are in their prime working years and could be working. In fact the share of primeage ( years ) adults who are working remains below the share seen at the peaks of the previous two economic expansions. The availability of these prime-age adults who currently remain outside the labor force creates the potential for continued increases in employment despite the historically low unemployment rates. Doing so however necessitates a better understanding of the reasons these adults are currently not working and the development of economic policies and workforce training opportunities to draw them into the labor market. A key component of efforts to draw additional workers into the labor market is increasing the potential wages that they could receive. This is because when jobs are available and plentiful the decision to remain out of the labor force signals a belief among those individuals that the wage they could receive is below the value they place on their time outside the labor market. Among those who are employed there is evidence that wages are rising for the typical worker. Real hourly earnings based on the Personal Consumption Expenditures ( PCE ) Price Index which is a measure of inflation rose by percent for all workers and by percent for nonsupervisory workers. This is the sixth consecutive year of positive real hourly earnings growth for nonsupervisory workers and the longest streak since the eight years of consecutive earnings growth from through Encouragingly wage growth is accelerating as real hourly earnings increases for both all workers and for nonsupervisory workers in exceeded those in either or Wage gains in have also been particularly strong among the lowest-earning workers. These wage gains are an indication that policies designed to increase the productivity of workers such as the corporate tax rate reductions in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act are translating into higher paychecks. But despite these recent improvements there is still room for further wage growth both from new policies designed to enhance productivity and from the effects of recent policies to reaching additional workers. With the dual goals of further growing the workforce and increasing the wages of those who are working in this chapter we consider labor market trends in recent decades both for the population as a whole and for key demographic subsets. While recognizing that most adults engage in productive nonwork activities we also explain how potential distortions caused by taxes and regulations can lead some adults whose most productive use of time is in the formal labor market to instead engage in other activities. Furthermore Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | we consider the reasons that the potential wage rates for some workers on the sidelines are below their reservation wages and what could be done to enhance their productivity and increase their potential after-tax earnings if they entered the labor market. Finally we discuss this Administration s policies to increase economic opportunities for a diverse range of adults to enable them to engage more fully in the growing economy.1 Long-Run Trends in Adult Employment Labor Force Participation and Wage Earnings What do long-run trends in the labor market tell us about the economy ? This section considers these trends focusing on adult employment labor force participation and wage earnings. Employment and Labor Force Participation From through there was a marked increase in adult ( age and older ) labor force participation ( i.e. the share of all adults who are working or unemployed and looking for work ) in the United States ( see figure ) Largely driven by more adult women entering the workforce it rose by over percentage points from percent in March to percent in February Since however the trend in participation rates has reversed and has been in decline. By the end of the percent participation rate was more than percentage points below its peak. Earlier in participation rates had reached their lowest since This decline can only be partially attributed to the Great Recession as participation rates also fell before the recession from through and after the recession from through From through the participation rate stabilized and as of December it remained at percent. The share of all adults who are working the employment-to-population ratio shows a similar long-run pattern but has additional business cycle volatility because unemployment rises during recessions and falls during expansions. In recent years as the labor force participation rate has stabilized and the unemployment rate has fallen the share of all adults who are working has risen. In December percent of adults were working which is more than percentage points above where it stood seven years ago in But it still remains considerably below where it stood at the turn of the 21st century. The CEA previously released research on the topics covered in this chapter. The text that follows builds on these research papers produced by the CEA : Returns on Investments in RecidivismReducing Programs ( CEA 2018e ) ; Addressing America s Reskilling Challenge ( CEA 2018a ) ; Military Spouses in the Labor Market ( CEA 2018d ) ; and How Much Are Workers Getting Paid ? A Primer on Wage Measurement ( CEA 2018c ) These dates reflect the final month before the official start of each recession according to the National Bureau of Economic Research ( NBER ) | Chapter Figure Labor Force Participation Rate and Employment-toPopulation Ratio Percent Dec Labor force participation rate Employment-topopulation ratio Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics. Note : Shading denotes a recession. In part the decline in both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio since was to be expected due to the aging of the population. For over years from the late 1960s through the late 1990s the share of the population over age was nearly unchanged making up between and percent of all adults. But since then as members of the Baby Boom generation have aged this stability has dissipated with those over age growing as a share of all adults. In more than percent of the adult population was over age with percent over age ( see figure ) As those who are of traditional retirement age account for a larger share of the total adult population participation rates will decline if rates for workers at any given age remain unchanged. The effects of the aging population on overall employment and participation rates have been partially offset by rising participation of those at or near traditional retirement age ( see figure ) As discussed in chapter of the Economic Report of the President this increase in participation rates among older adults is partially attributable to improved health statuses relative to earlier cohorts ( CEA 2018b ) The increase is also consistent with policy changes that reduce the incentives to retire early including the delayed full retirement age for Social Security and encouraging the use of defined contribution retirement plans which do not have built-in incentives for early retirement. But even as the most recent cohorts of adults Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Figure Adult Population by Age ( Years ) Share of adult population ( percent ) Age Age Age Age Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations. Figure Labor Force Participation Rate by Age Percent Age Age Age Age Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics. | Chapter reaching older ages are working more than those of similar ages did in the past those over age still work at substantially lower rates than younger age groups. Hence the higher-than-traditional participation rates of these older adults are not sufficient to fully offset the loss in participation associated with the aging population. To separate out the effects of aging economists often focus on prime-age adults who are age years. This group is of particular importance because they generally are neither in school nor retired. Thus they represent those adults who are most expected to be working. Among prime-age adults labor force participation rates fell from a high of percent in to a 30-year low of percent in This decline in prime-age participation accounted for between and percent of the overall decline in participation over this period indicating that the falling overall participation rates among the adult population over the past years can not be attributed to aging alone. However the last three years have been more positive with regard to prime-age participation. In both and the labor force participation rates of prime-age adults rose by percentage point offsetting some of the declines over the previous years. In the growth in participation of prime-age adults continued suggesting that recent progrowth policies are encouraging more businesses to hire and more people to enter the labor force. Although it is common to consider prime-age employment as a whole embedded within both the long-term decline in employment rates and improvements over the past few years are diverse population groups with occasionally differing trends. These trends have been markedly different for males and females as well as for married and single individuals and for those who do and do not have children. Although all races and ethnicities have seen increases in their employment rates in recent years the relative increases among African Americans and Hispanics have been particularly strong and the employment rate among working-age adults with a high school degree or less grew faster in than for those with more education. Although employment in rural areas still lags far behind that in urban areas recent employment growth in manufacturing and other sectors that are disproportionately located in rural communities offers hope for employment recovery in those communities. To the extent that employment trends differ across population groups or geographies there is an opportunity to both explore the source of these divergences and to consider targeted policies to address specific challenges and further increase labor market participation as is done later in this chapter. Wages and Labor Earnings The wages that workers earn in the labor market are of similar importance to employment trends for determining the financial well-being of American Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | households. Economists have long understood that increases in wages as well as increases in the demand for labor are driven by rising worker productivity ( Hellerstein Neumar and Troske ) In a competitive labor market firms pay workers a wage that is equal to the value of their marginal product. As worker productivity increases the value of each hour of labor to firms will rise.3 Consequently wages will subsequently rise as well because firms that do not increase their pay will see their workers go to other higher-paying firms. Hence policies that increase workers skills such as additional education or training increase the amount firms are willing to pay for their now-moreproductive labor. Policies that increase the amount of capital that workers have at their disposal to produce goods and services will also increase their productivity and subsequently increase their wages. For example because high corporate taxes act as a disincentive for firms to invest in the capital that would make workers more productive numerous researchers have found that workers bear much of the burden of corporate taxes. Consequently reductions in the corporate income tax rate lead to increases in the wages paid to workers ( Hassett and Mathur ; Desai Foley and Hines ; Felix ) ( For a more detailed discussion of this relationship with respect to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act see chapter ) Although the BLS and other Federal agencies report several different wage measures each of which has its own advantages we focus here on wage trends from the Census Bureau s Current Population Survey ( CPS ) ( For a comparison of the surveys and programs administered by the BLS with information on pay and benefits see BLS ) The statistics reported by the BLS using CPS data focus on full-time workers and do not capture the value of fringe benefits and bonuses whose growth has contributed to total compensation growth among workers in recent decades.4 They also do not directly capture the changing composition of the workforce including the education and skill levels of those who are working.5 In addition these statistics focus on wages for all working adults ( age and older ) and not just those of prime working-age. However these data are particularly useful for understanding the full distribution of wage trends given that researchers can use them to consider wages at different points in the distribution. Figure shows the trend in nominal wage growth among all adult fulltime workers in the CPS data. In the fourth quarter of median nominal weekly wages grew by percent over the previous year. Under any measure Labor productivity affects wages regardless of whether the labor market is competitive monopsonistic or monopolistic. From through total compensation growth in the BLS Employment Cost Index grew about percent per year faster than wages alone from the same survey. For a broader discussion of these composition effects see CEA ( 2018b ) Some researchers including Daly and Hobijn ( ) and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta ( ) attempt to correct for these composition effects by controlling for worker characteristics or following the same workers over time. | Chapter Figure Nominal Weekly Wage Growth Among All Adult Full-Time Wage and Salary Workers Percent ( year-over-year ) : Q4 10th percentile Median : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations. Note : Data are non seasonally adjusted. of inflation this suggests that real wages are growing. Based on the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers ( CPI-U ) which the BLS traditionally uses to track inflation real median weekly wages of full-time workers grew by percent from the fourth quarter of through the fourth quarter of And on the basis of the Chained Consumer Price Index ( Chained CPI ) which academics consider a more accurate reflection of cost of living adjustments than the CPI-U and is now used for indexing tax brackets real median weekly wages of full-time workers grew by percent during this time. Moreover based on the PCE Price Index which is the inflation measure preferred by the Congressional Budget Office ( ) and the Federal Reserve Board of Governors ( ) real median weekly wages of full time workers grew by percent over this time. In addition recent wage growth has been the fastest for those at the bottom of the wage distribution. Over the past two years ( from the fourth quarter of through the fourth quarter of ) nominal wages for the 10th percentile of the full-time wage distribution have increased by an annual average of percent. Looking just at the past year ( from the fourth quarter of through the fourth quarter of ) wage growth at the 10th percentile was an even stronger percent. This wage growth at the 10th percentile over the past two years outpaces the percent annual growth in median nominal Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | wages among full-time workers and the percent annual growth at the 90th percentile. The trend under this Administration for wage gains of the full-time wage distribution s 10th percentile to exceed the growth rate for the distribution s middle and top stands in sharp contrast to that seen in the business cycle. During that period wage growth for the 10th percentile was frequently the slowest of these three measures. Year-over-year wage growth for the 10th percentile only outpaced wage growth for the 90th percentile in six quarters over the six-year period and even then only did so by more than percentage point once. Although the bottom of the distribution has since experienced rapid wage growth in this growth followed when there were nearly no wage increases at the bottom of the distribution and this growth was not sustained into future years. If the trend under this Administration continues with the most rapid earnings gains occurring among those lower in the wage distribution it would be consistent with that seen in the late 1990s when unemployment was similarly low and the bottom of the distribution also experienced several years of robust wage growth ( Ilg and Haugen ) Although the most recent quarter saw the nominal weekly wages at the 10th percentile and at the median of full-time workers grow at their fastest year-over-year pace since at least some economists question why wage growth has not been faster in recent decades. In addition given the current strong labor market and low unemployment rate one could have expected even larger wage gains in recent years. The primary factor in understanding wage growth relates to the productivity growth of workers given the close link between productivity and wages. During the period from the official end of the Great Recession in June through the end of productivity growth averaged just percent a year.6 This is dramatically slower than the productivity growth during the previous two expansions ( figure ) During both the and business cycle expansions as reported by the National Bureau of Economic Research ( NBER ) productivity growth exceeded percent a year on average. Economists disagree on the long-term potential for high productivity growth. Fernald ( ) notes that a productivity slowdown predated the Great Recession and believes that the period of strong productivity gains in the mid-1990s and early 2000s was the exception. Others including Yellen ( ) are more optimistic about potential productivity improvements. This view is supported by Borio and others ( ) who found that the credit boom and subsequent financial crisis misallocated labor to sectors with low productivity The BLS uses the Implicit Price Deflator when tracking productivity growth. This deflator shows slower productivity growth than the CPI-U Chained CPI and PCE inflation indexes. Consequently research comparing productivity growth with wage growth must have caution in using the same inflation measures. Failing to do so results in an artificial gap between compensation growth and productivity growth ( Brill et al. ) | Chapter Figure Nonfarm Business Sector Real Output per Hour Percent ( year-over-year change ) : Q3 Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics. Note : Shading denotes a recession. growth suggesting that the recent period of low productivity growth is not reflective of the economy s future potential. Between and productivity growth ticked up averaging percent a year through the third quarter of Although this remains below the productivity gains during previous expansions these improvements are consistent with the optimistic perspective that there is still a potential for faster productivity growth. Moreover the changes in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act intending to boost productivity by encouraging capital investment were just recently enacted so their full effect on productivity has likely not yet been realized. These changes include the reduction in corporate tax rates discussed in chapter and the creation of Opportunity Zones discussed later in this chapter. Although productivity growth is the most important driver of wage gains some economists have also debated nonproductivity factors that affect wage growth. Much of this discussion relates to the bargaining power among workers. One reason for this lack of bargaining power is the possibility that the economy remains in a relatively elastic range of the labor supply curve meaning that there are still more potential workers who would be willing to work without a substantial increase in the wage rate. Historically the current low unemployment rate would suggest that firms desiring to hire additional workers would need to increase wages ( Leduc and Wilson ) However Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Figure Share of Adults Starting Work Who Were Not in the Labor Force Rather Than Unemployed Percent : Q4 Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations. Note : Shading denotes a recession. focusing exclusively on the unemployment rate ignores the lower prime-age employment-to-population ratio than in earlier decades as well as the growing share of older workers in good health who could be drawn into the labor market. These potential workers who are not currently in the labor market contribute to the elasticity of the labor supply. For this reason Ozimek ( ) recently suggested that the ratio of employment to population is more relevant than the unemployment rate for understanding wage growth trends. In support of this theory researchers can use CPS data ( which track individuals over several months ) to observe the prior-month labor force status of those who find employment in any given month. These data include both adults who are starting work for the first time and those who are starting a job after a period of not working. In the fourth quarter of percent of all adults who started working had been out of the labor force in the previous month compared with just percent who had been unemployed ( figure ) This is the largest share coming from out of the labor force since tracking of labor flows began in It suggests that firms are finding workers who are not currently in the labor force and that these adults who are currently out of the labor force remain relevant for understanding both wage growth and the potential for further increases in employment. An additional hypothesis that some have recently considered for the slower-than-expected wage growth in recent decades is that firms are exercising | Chapter monopsony power in the labor market. Under this hypothesis if the number of firms competing for workers decreases the remaining firms have increased market power and can depress wages ( Webber ; Muehlemann Ryan and Wolter ; Ashenfelter Farber and Ransom ; Twomey and Monks ) Although it does appear that higher industry concentration can result in lower wages recent research suggests that this has not exacerbated a reduction in wage growth during this period. This is because increases in concentration have not been sufficiently large to play a meaningful role. Bivens Mishel and Schmitt ( ) find that increased concentration may have reduced wage growth by just percent a year between and In addition recent research by Rinz ( ) observes that when looking at industry concentration measured at a local level where firms are competing for workers rather than at the national level industry concentration has actually declined over the past four decades which is counter to the claims of rising concentration slowing wage growth. Prime-Age Employment by Gender Shifting from considering labor market trends for the entire adult population to those for specific demographic groups figure shows the labor force participation rate and the ratio of employment to population among prime-age men and women over the past years. Individuals who are neither working nor looking for work are out of the labor force. The gap between the participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio reflects unemployed workers so as unemployment falls the gap between these two series will decline. From until the early 1970s over percent of males age to were in the labor force every month. In the late 1960s the combination of a strong labor market and a lack of young males looking for work in the civilian labor market due to the Vietnam War led to historically low unemployment rates. Consequently in not only were just over percent of prime-age males in the labor force but nearly percent were working. Fifty years later in December the employment rate for these primeage males was nearly percentage points lower as just over percent of these males were employed. This reflects a long-term secular decline in primeage male employment. Although employment rates rise during economic expansions and fall during recessions when looking at the peak employment rate across business cycles ( based on NBER definitions ) the peak employment rate of prime-age males in each business cycle since has failed to reach the peak achieved in the previous business cycle.7 During the current expansion only in did the employment rate for prime-age males reach the trough of the previous business cycle from Employment in recovered to above the peak in between the double-dip recessions. However it did not reach the peak before this pair of recessions. Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Figure Labor Force Participation Rate and Employment-toPopulation Ratio for Prime-Age Adults by Gender Percent Male participation rate Dec Male employment-to-population ratio Female participation rate Female employment-to-population ratio Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics. Notes : Prime-age adults are those age years. Shading denotes a recession. Although the prime-age male labor force participation rate has also fallen over this period from nearly percent in to percent in December it appears to have leveled off in the past three years and was at percent in December As a result of the rising employment rate and flat participation rate for prime-age males since the gap between these two series ( which reflects the share of prime-age males who are unemployed ) has declined. If the male participation rates had not stabilized since the continued growth in male employment that occurred would not have been possible without reaching an even lower rate of unemployment. Nonetheless this long-term decline in the employment and labor force participation rates of prime-age males represents a substantial decline in the size of America s workforce. The gap of percentage points between the current prime-age male employment-to-population ratio and that from November at the peak of the previous business cycle reflects about primeage men who are not working. And the gap of percentage points between the current employment-to-population ratio and that from February at the peak of the previous business cycle reflects million prime-age males who are not working. Some of these nonworkers are unemployed while others remain out of the labor force. Because the number of prime-age males who are out of the labor force exceeds that seen in earlier business cycles | Chapter this represents an opportunity to further increase employment even while the unemployment rate remains near historical lows. Despite the well-established decline in prime-age male labor force participation rates and employment-to-population ratio over the past years the precise reasons for the decline remain unclear. One explanation for the recent weakness of male participation rates is the rise in opioid-related disorders ( see box ) The longer-term decline is also consistent with patterns finding that employment growth over the past years has been weakest in male-dominated industries including the decline of manufacturing that was occurring until recent years. Since the late 1960s over two-thirds of all manufacturing workers have been males including percent of manufacturing workers in However over the course of the years from to the number of manufacturing jobs declined by over million despite an increase in total employment of million jobs. Consequently the share of males working in manufacturing jobs fell from to percent. Similarly mining and logging as well as construction whose workforces are each nearly percent male both saw slower employment growth than the workforce as a whole. However since the fourth quarter of employment in manufacturing has increased by percent in construction by percent and in mining and logging employment by percent. Each of these exceeds the percent growth in total employment over this period. In considering whether the long-term decline in male employment and labor force participation rates can be reversed it is useful to look back to the 1960s which is the last time when the unemployment rate was below percent for a longer consecutive stretch of months than in The strength of the labor market during that 1960s business cycle resulted in the prime-age male employment rate increasing from peak to peak. No business cycle since then has accomplished this feat. There is some early limited evidence that the current strong labor market may at least be limiting the continued decline of participation among prime-age males and perhaps increasing it slightly. In the average monthly participation rate of prime-age males was up percentage point relative to and up percentage point relative to was also the fourth consecutive year where the average monthly male prime-age participation rate increased the first time that this has happened for four consecutive years since at least the 1950s. This indicates that more prime-age males are entering or staying in the labor force. Standing in sharp contrast to the employment patterns of prime-age males over this period the labor force participation rates and employment rates of prime-age females as shown in figure rose nearly continuously for nearly years from the late 1950s through the late 1990s. In the early 2000s business cycle however the consistent increases abated. The period from through saw the first peak-to-peak decline in either female employment or female participation rates in years. Hence the continued decline in Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Box The Opioid Epidemic and Its Labor Market Effects The opioid epidemic that is affecting communities throughout the United States has resulted in a decline in the health of Americans and the health of the economy. Over the past decade the number of opioid-related deaths in the United States per year has more than doubled from in to in ( NIH ) Life expectancy has fallen for the third year in a row in part due to more frequent opioid and drug overdoses. This opioid crisis has important economic repercussions. Ghertner and Groves ( ) find a correlation between substance use measures and economic measures including unemployment rates and poverty. Although the Federal Reserve Board of Governors ( 2018a ) does not find a similar correlation with objective economic outcomes it does observe a correlation between opioid exposure and subjective perceptions of the local economy. The CEA ( ) found that the total cost of the opioid crisis was $ billion in ; and several researchers including Krueger ( ) have suggested that opioid usage has exacerbated a decline in labor force participation among prime-age males. Krueger ( ) notes that percent of prime-age males who are out of the labor force report using pain medication with almost two-thirds of them using prescription pain medication on a given day. He finds a strong association between county-level opioid prescriptions in and declines in labor force participation between and with opioid prescriptions potentially accounting for a decline of percentage point in prime-age male participation during this period. Other recent research has also documented a strong link between opioid prescriptions and lower participation using more detailed data on prescribing practices or including additional areas or years of data ( Aliprantis and Schweitzer ; Harris et al. ) Although its applicability to the U.S. context is uncertain Laird and Nielsen ( ) find evidence that such a link may be causal at least in Denmark. They observe that when people who move their place of residence wind up with a doctor who tends to prescribe more opioids they are more likely to drop out of the labor force. However Currie Jin and Schnell ( ) do not find evidence that higher rates of prescription opioids reduce participation in the United States. Ultimately more research is needed to determine what impact illicit opioid use may have on labor market activity. Nonetheless the strong link suggests that the fatal costs of the opioid epidemic may not capture its full cost to society. In response President Trump has mobilized the Administration to confront this crisis. In October the President declared a national public health emergency which directed all executive branch agencies to employ every appropriate resource to combat the opioid epidemic ( White House 2018b ) By enlisting the aid of the executive agencies the President has expanded access to services while also seeking to limit the availability of prescription and illicit opioids. | Chapter In March President Trump launched the Initiative to Stop Opioid Abuse and Reduce Drug Supply and Demand which seeks to negate the epidemic through primary prevention evidence-based treatment and recovery support services. This includes implementing the Safer Prescribing Plan which supports State prescription drug monitoring programs and calls for all federally employed healthcare providers and nearly all federally reimbursed opioid prescriptions to follow best practices within five years. It also targets overprescription and illicit drug supplies by enlisting the Department of Justice to crack down on illegal supply chains in U.S. communities. With help from Congress the President has signed into law the SUPPORT for Patients and Communities Act which is a step forward in fighting the opioid epidemic. This legislation improves access to treatment and recovery services improves the inspection capabilities of mail-handling facilities to detect controlled substances entering the United States and authorizes grants to States for their work monitoring substance use. The President and Congress allocated $ billion in new funding in the Budget Resolution for and to further the fight against the opioid epidemic. With more resources executive branch agencies are now be able to scale up their efforts to contain the effects of opioid misuse while providing more resources to Americans seeking help and treatment. By counteracting the damaging health effects of the opioid crisis the labor market will continue to improve as more Americans leave the sidelines and enter the workforce. The Administration s commitment to American workers goes beyond a prosperous and booming economy ; it also includes encouraging healthy and productive lives. prime-age male employment rates along with the plateau of prime-age female employment rates resulted in the overall decline in the share of prime-age adults who were working in the early 2000s. More recently the employment rate of prime-age women which was percent in December finally surpassed the previous business cycle peak of percent. In addition the labor force participation rate of prime-age women increased from percent in December to percent in December As a result of the rapid growth in female employment and slower growth in female participation the gap between these two series ( which reflects the share of prime-age females who are unemployed ) has declined. As was the case for males if the female participation rate had not increased since the continued growth in female employment that occurred would not have been possible without reaching an even lower rate of unemployment. Nevertheless female prime-age employment remains more than percentage points below that for prime-age males. This suggests that policies that remove remaining barriers to working have the potential to further increase employment rates among these prime-age females. These include Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | paid family leave policies discussed in chapter of the Economic Report of the President ( CEA 2018b ) the transfer program policies discussed in chapter of this Report to encourage self-sufficiency among low-income females as well as the policies we discuss below that target middle-income females who bear the primary responsibility for child care. Barriers to Work from Child Care Expenses One potential reason for lower labor force participation rates among primeage females than prime-age males is the division of child care and home production responsibilities across genders especially among families with young children.8 The relationship between child care responsibilities and employment patterns among females can be seen in figure which shows the participation rates among prime-age females based on their marital status and the presence and age of children in the household. As discussed above during the 1980s the employment rates and the labor force participation rates of females rose sharply. From figure we see that the increase participation in the 1980s came primarily among married females. The participation rates of married mothers of young children under age ( the green line ) married mothers of older children ( the light blue line ) and married females without children at home ( the yellow line ) all increased by at least percentage points over the decade between and No similar increases were seen during the 1980s among single females with children ( the gray and red lines ) or without children ( the dark blue line ) Consequently by the early 1990s the participation rates for mothers of young children were similar across marital statuses as were the rates for mothers of older children. However participation rates still differed based on the age of the child because the rates for both married and single females with young children were substantially below those for females with either no children or older children. The similarity in levels of labor force participation rates among married and single mothers of young children in the early 1990s was only temporary however. Starting in the mid-1990s there was a dramatic increase in the participation rates for single mothers with young children which rose by over percentage points between and while their unemployment rate also declined. As discussed in greater detail in chapter this increase has largely been attributed to the success of social assistance programs and welfare reforms that have brought these single mothers with children into the labor An increasing share of fathers also indicate that they are not working because they are taking care of their family. In the March CPS percent of prime-age fathers of young children ( under age ) said they were not working because they were taking care of their family up from percent in This trend could be an exacerbating factor in the broader decline in prime-age male employment over this period. Nevertheless the fewer than percent of prime-age fathers of young children who are not working to take care of their family is far below the percent of primeage mothers of young children who were not working to take care of their family. | Chapter Figure Labor Force Participation Rates Among Prime-Age Females by Marital and Parental Status Single no children Single children age or older Married children under age Single children under age Married no children Married children age or older Labor force participation rate ( percent ) Sources : Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations. Notes : Data represent an annual average across all months. Data for are the average through July. Prime-age females are those age years. market ( Juhn and Potter ; Meyer ) Similar increases did not occur among married mothers of young children whose participation rate reached a plateau in the early 1990s. In contrast to that seen for single mothers the current percent participation rate among married mothers with children under age in is slightly below where it was in The participation rates among married mothers of young children is also well below that for all other prime-age females. Prime-age married females with young children are less likely to be working or looking for paid work than are other married females and they make up a disproportionately large share of all prime-age married females who are out of the labor force. Although married mothers with young children represent percent ( million / million ) of all married prime-age females they make up percent ( million / million ) of all married prime-age females who are out of the labor force ( table ) These married mothers of young children who are out of the labor force are evenly distributed across the educational spectrum although on average they have somewhat less education than married mothers of young children as a whole. About percent of married mothers of young children who are out of the labor force have a high school degree or less whereas percent have at least a bachelor s degree. This Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Table Number of Prime-Age Females by Marital and Parental Status Employed ( thousands ) Unemployed ( thousands ) Single no children Not in labor force ( thousands ) Single children under age Single children age or older Married no children Married children under age Married children age or older Category Total ( thousands ) Sources : Current Population Survey ( CPS ) ; CEA calculations. Note : Average across monthly CPS data through July Prime-age females are those age years. compares with percent of all prime-age married mothers of young children who have a high school degree or less. Supporting this conclusion that child care responsibilities are important for the labor force participation decisions of parents with young children the Federal Reserve s Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking finds that among nondisabled prime-age females age who are not working or working part time and have a child in their home under age over percent say that child care plays a role in this decision ( Federal Reserve Board of Governors 2018b ) Among nondisabled prime-age females whose youngest child is between the ages of and half of those who are not working and one-third of those working part time say that child care contributed to their decision. This suggests that there remain females who are taking care of children rather than engaging in the formal labor market due to child care responsibilities. However the survey does not differentiate between child care costs and other reasons that parents of young children may be less likely to pursue formal employment such as a preference for working at home and investing directly in their children s well-being. In some instances parents opting to engage in child care activities may reflect an efficient allocation of resources if this is a more efficient use of these parents time than working in the formal labor market. However several distortions of the child care market caused by tax and regulatory policies could prevent this from being the case. One such distortion occurs because labor market activities are taxed whereas time spent on home production activities is not. Consequently some females may decide that their after-tax wage is too low to | Chapter justify formal work even though they might have chosen formal work if it had not been for the taxes. However some programs exist to help offset this distortion. For example the child and dependent care tax credit offsets this distortion by providing a tax credit of to percent of the first $ of child care expenses for one child ( and $ for two or more children ) However this tax credit will not fully offset the distortion for those whose required expenses for basic child care exceed these amounts. A second distortion of the child care market occurs because regulation can raise the costs of child care.9 Although some regulation is necessary for the safety and well-being of children other regulations and requirements can raise the costs of this care thereby reducing access to child care and discouraging parents from engaging in formal labor market activities. According to data from ChildCare Aware of America ( ) the average annual cost of child care nationwide for a four-year-old is about $ whereas the average annual cost for an infant is about $ The cost for toddlers typically falls between the higher infant cost and the lower four-yearold cost. For comparison with earnings from employment these costs can be converted to hourly terms by dividing the cost of full-time care for each State by hours ( weeks multiplied by hours per week ) Based on these data the hourly child care costs for a four-year-old and an infant are respectively about $ and $ At the State level these hourly costs range from $ for a four-year-old and $ for an infant in Mississippi to $ for a four-year-old and $ for an infant in the District of Columbia. When considering the net returns to employment and whether to enter the labor market after having a child these costs can offset any wages earned Although this section focuses on the high cost of child care and labor force participation rates it is also the case that these costs can act as a disincentive to have children. Milligan ( ) and LaLumia Sallee and Turner ( ) find small increases in fertility in response to increased child tax benefits although Crump Goda and Mumford ( ) suggest that this response is small and only in the short term and Baughman and Dickert-Conlin ( ) find no relationship between child-based tax credits and fertility rates among the targeted population. To the extent that fertility decreases as the costs of raising a child increases high child care costs may also lead some people to forgo having children or to have fewer children. Though increased fertility rates are beneficial for long-run economic growth exploring the relationship between child care costs and fertility rates is outside the scope of this chapter. ChildCare Aware of America ( ) offers three separate methodologies for calculating the national average that produces a range of average cost for infants between $ and $ These estimates are broadly in line with estimates from other sources. In the National Survey of Early Care and Education found that the price for center-based child care for an infant was $ an hour at the median and $ an hour on average ( HHS ) For hours per week of care year round this reflects $ ( median ) to $ ( mean ) of expenses for the year. A separate survey of parents by Care ( ) found that the average cost of infant care paid by parents was $ per week or $ for a year. Knop and Mohanty ( ) found in the Survey of Income and Program Participation that working mothers who paid for child care and whose youngest child is under age paid an average of $ per week on child care for all their children although their analysis of the CPS found lower estimates. Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | through employment. Figure therefore shows the average hourly cost for center-based child care for four-year-old children and infants in each State as a share of the median before-tax hourly wage in the State. In every State the hourly cost of care for one young child represents at least percent of the median hourly wage in the State. Parents with two or more young children in child care will have a larger financial burden. Similarly lower-income adults may also pay a larger share on child care if they are unable to find lower-cost providers ( see chapter for a discussion of work and child care decisions for lower-income adults who are potentially eligible for welfare programs ) Across all States the hourly cost of child care for a single four-year-old is on average percent of the State median wage while the cost of child care for an infant is percent of the State median wage. Including commuting times when a child is with a paid caretaker but his or her parent is not paid for working the financial burden is even greater.11 Given that a decrease in the cost of child care essentially means an increase in the effective wage rate for those who use child care to go to work one way to determine the potential labor supply response to a reduction in the cost of child care is by considering estimates of the response of labor supply decisions to wages. If work increases when wages go up then work should also increase when child care costs go down. Based on their extensive literature review McClelland and Mok ( ) conclude that for every percent increase in the wage rate there is a percent increase in the number of people who work and a percent increase in hours worked among those who were already working.12 For workers ( or potential workers ) earning $ an hour facing child care costs of $ an hour ( about the national average cost for one child in center-based care ) a percent decrease in child care costs ( from $ to $ ) would increase the effective wage by percent. For workers ( or potential workers ) earning $ an hour with two children in child care the effective wage would rise by percent ( from $ an hour after $ an hour of child care costs to $ an hour after including the now-reduced child care costs ) Applying the labor supply elasticities from McClelland and Mok ( ) a percent increase in the effective wage would increase the number of workers and hours worked among current workers by percent each. A percent increase in the effective wage would lead to an increase of percent each. However such calculations are only illustrative because they do not account for the actual hours of child care purchased relative to hours worked the number of children each family has in child care or the wage distribution of people who might use child care. McClelland and Mok ( ) also conclude from their Based on data from the American Community Survey workers who commute days a week spend an average of about hours a week commuting to and from work. McClelland and Mok ( ) report a range of to for both the elasticity with regard to the decision to work and the decision regarding how many hours to work. Here we use the middle value of | Chapter Figure Child Care Costs as a Percentage of States Median Hourly Wage 4-year-old Additional infant cost Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware District of Columbia Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Percentage of median wage Sources : ChildCare Aware of America ( ) ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations. Notes : Child care costs per hour are obtained by dividing the cost of full-time center-based child care for 4-year-olds by hours. Montana 's child care costs are for Infant care costs are not available for South Dakota so these costs are computed as the toddler care costs scaled up by the national average percent difference between costs for infant and toddler care. Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | literature review that the labor supply elasticity of married females ( about ) is larger than that for unmarried females ( about ) suggesting that married females are more likely to respond to reductions in the cost of child care.13 An alternative way to assess the potential responsiveness of work to reductions in child care costs is to consider studies that explicitly test how previous reductions in child care costs affected work. Fortunately a number of studies have explored this question. Baker Gruber and Milligan ( ) study a policy in Quebec that gradually provided new child care subsidies requiring parents to pay at most $ a day for each child age four and under regardless of family income. They find that child care subsidies increased the use of care by almost percentage points and increased labor force participation among mothers by close to percentage points. Lefebvre and Merrigan ( ) find similar effects of Quebec s child care subsidies ; and Lefebvre Merrigan and Verstraete ( ) find that these effects persist in the medium and long terms. Herbst ( ) uses historical U.S. data to estimate the impact of the Lanham Act of which provided child care funding to U.S. communities in response to the deployment of many males to World War II. He finds substantial effects on the labor supply of women in the and Census years. Outside North America studies looking at Spain and Norway find mixed effects of child care subsidies on maternal employment ( e.g. Havnes and Mogstad ; Nollenberger and Rodr guez-Planas ) In a review of the literature on the effects of child care costs on maternal labor supply Morrissey ( ) concludes that a percent decrease in costs increases employment among mothers by about to percent. Altogether the empirical evidence on the responsiveness of labor supply decisions to wages in general and to child care costs more specifically suggests that a reduction in the cost of care could lead to increases in the number of people who participate in the workforce and also the number of hours worked among current workers. This is consistent with responses from survey data showing that child care costs are an important barrier to work or to additional work.14 Policies to Reduce Barriers to Work Resulting from Child Care Expenses In considering potential policies to reduce the barriers to work from child care expenses among married mothers it is useful to first consider how existing McClelland and Mok ( ) report a labor supply elasticity range of to for married women and to for men and single women. Although we focus in this chapter on the labor supply effects of child care the effect on child outcomes are also an important consideration. Here the effects of child care subsidies are mixed with Herbst and Tekin ( ) finding that children receiving subsidized early child care score lower on cognitive ability tests in kindergarten and Havnes and Mogstad ( ) finding that subsidized care had strong positive effects on children s educational attainment and labor market outcomes. | Chapter policies may result in the divergent employment outcomes for single and married mothers of young children discussed above. Some programs focus on reducing employment disincentives among both single and married parents. These include the child and dependent care tax credit which provides a tax credit for a portion of child care costs when working ; the child care development fund which provides assistance through block grants for people attending job training or educational programs ; and dependent care flexible spending accounts which allow parents to pay for child care expenses using pretax dollars. Nevertheless as discussed in greater detail in chapter many of the public policies targeted at increasing employment in the 1990s were focused on families living in poverty often without a worker in the family. These included the Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) which provides substantial incentives to enter the labor market for single parents and parents without a working spouse. Hence the EITC effectively increases the average hourly compensation of low- and middle-income parents who are entering the workforce as long as there is no other working parent in the family which can offset these child care expenses. However among married women with a working spouse the EITC typically has either no effect or a negative effect on after-tax hourly wages. This is because policymakers structured the EITC to incentivize work among lowincome individuals who would represent the first worker in a family rather than encouraging both parents to work. For example consider the EITC that a married couple with two children with at least one full-time worker receives ( table ) The maximum EITC benefits of $ is reached with just one fulltime year-round worker making the federal minimum wage ( $ per hour ) in the family ; and if this worker makes $ per hour the couple will be in the phase-out region of EITC benefits without any earnings from the second parent. This means that once one family member is working full time adding a second worker to the family can not increase EITC benefits and will frequently result in a reduction of these benefits. Without the offsetting EITC benefits the combination of child care expenses and tax liabilities can offset nearly all the financial benefits from work even for relatively well-paid workers. Consider a married mother with one child whose spouse earns $ per hour and who is considering starting to work full time herself at an hourly wage of $ If her child requires care that costs $ per hour each these expenses would offset percent of her pretax hourly wage. Based on the Urban Institute s ( ) Net Income Change Calculator which incorporates any Federal State local and payroll tax liabilities the combined expenses from child care and taxes could constitute half of her pretax wages. If she had two children that require care the combination of additional taxes and child care expenses could represent about three-fourths of her pretax wages. These substantial child care expenses act as a similar burden for a single Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Table EITC Benefits for a Married Couple with Two Children Based on the Additional Earnings from a Second Full-Time Worker First full-time worker s hourly wage ( dollars ) Second full-time worker s hourly wage ( dollars ) Sources : Internal Revenue Code ; Internal Revenue Service ( ) ; CEA calculations. Note : EITC = Earned Income Tax Credit. Assumes both workers are working full-time year-round ( hours per week and weeks per year ) The maximum possible EITC benefits that a parent of two children can receive is $ female considering work but the additional EITC benefits for which she qualifies through work will partially offset these expenses associated with entering the labor market. One way to reduce the financial burdens of child care for both single and married females considering working is to reduce the direct costs of care. Given the high costs of care relative to wages it is important to consider how government policies may drive up these costs. Regulations that impose minimum standards on providers can decrease the availability and increase the cost of obtaining care thus serving as a disincentive to work. Because staff costs constitute the majority of child care costs regulations that constrain the number characteristics and required activities of staff members can greatly affect costs ( National Center on Early Childhood Quality Assurance ) Although States differ on which facilities are exempt from licensing requirements all States license child care facilities and require a minimum ratio of staff members to children ( for details on licensing regulations and exemptions from these requirements see HHS ) For 11-monthold children minimum staff-to-child ratios ranged from : in Kansas to : in Arkansas Georgia Louisiana Nevada and New Mexico in For 35-month-old children they ranged from : in the District of Columbia to : in Louisiana. For 59-month-old children they ranged from : in New York and North Dakota to : in Florida Georgia North Carolina and Texas. Assuming an average hourly wage of $ for staff members ( inclusive of benefits and payroll taxes paid by the employer ) the minimum cost for staff per child per hour would range from $ in the most lenient State to $ in the most stringent State for 11-month-old children from $ to $ for 35-month old-children and from $ to $ for month-old children. Figure shows the distribution of States over minimum staff-to-child ratios as well as the average | Chapter Figure Number of States and Average Center-Based Child Care Cost by Minimum Staff-to-Child Ratio and Age Group Number of States Average hourly cost ( dollars ) Frequency of ratio for infants ( left axis ) Frequency of ratio for 4-year-olds ( left axis ) Average cost for 4year-olds ( right axis ) Average cost for infants ( right axis ) : : : : : : : : : : : : : Minimum staff-to-child ratio Sources : Childcare Aware of America ; Early Childhood Training and Technical Assistance System. Note : Infants are up to months for maximum staff ratios and months for average annual cost. Maximum ratio data are for Annual cost data are for hourly cost of center-based care in each State. For both infants and 4-year-old children costs tend to fall as fewer staff members are required. Of course minimum ratios are likely correlated with other State-level factors that determine costs including demand from residents for different quality levels of child care. Still these ratios may be binding constraints for many families especially for low- to moderate-income families in States with high minimum ratios. In addition to the number of staff members required the wages they are paid add to the overall cost of child care. Wages are based on the local labor market demand for the employees skills and qualifications as well as the availability of workers in the field. Regulations that require higher-level degrees or other qualifications drive up the wages required to hire and retain staff increasing the cost of child care. Though recognizing that some facilities are exempt from these requirements all States set requirements for minimum ages and qualifications of staff including some that require a bachelor s degree for lead child care teachers. Other staff-related regulations that can drive up costs include required background checks and training requirements. In addition to standards regarding staff many States set minimum requirements for buildings and facilities including regulating the types and frequency of environmental inspections and the availability of indoor and outdoor space. Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Also most States set a maximum number of children who can be included in a given care group which can require additional building space. These regulations are often beneficial for the health and safety of the children ( Hotz and Xiao ) To the extent that these regulations increase safety and reduce injuries in child care settings they have measurable societal benefits. Nevertheless some regulations likely have little effect on children s well-being or the quality of care being provided while acting as a barrier to entry that can limit competition and increase prices ( Gorry and Thomas ) As discussed later in this chapter this concern exists for a range of licensed occupations in addition to child care workers. Consistent with this concern research generally finds that child care regulations increase the cost and reduce the supply of care options. Hotz and Xiao ( ) study how changes in regulations over time affect the number of centerbased care establishments. They estimate that decreasing the maximum number of infants per staff member by one ( thereby increasing the minimum staff-to-child ratio ) decreases the number of center-based care establishments by about percent. Also each additional year of education required of center directors decreases the supply of care centers by about percent. Similarly Currie and Hotz ( ) find that when States adopt more stringent education requirements for child care center directors increase minimum staff-to-child ratios and require more frequent inspections the number of children enrolled in center-based care falls. Other studies focus on variation in regulations at a point in time within States across age groups for example determining whether States with relatively more stringent regulations for four-year-old children than infants have relatively higher costs of care for four-year-old children compared with infant care. With this approach Blau ( ) finds that tighter regulations do not necessarily increase costs while Gorry and Thomas ( ) find some evidence that they do increase costs. Ultimately the regulation of child care is designed to increase the quality of care provided to children. These quality improvements may benefit children who remain in care but they may also increase the costs paid by parents beyond their willingness or ability to pay. Evidence for this can be seen in the shift away from center-based care and toward family care providers ( also known as home-based care ) after regulations on care centers are increased ( Hotz and Xiao ) These family care providers where children are cared for in the provider s home rather than at a center are typically subject to less regulation and offer care at a lower cost than at a center. The National Survey of Early Care and Education found that the median cost of home-based infant care was percent below that for center-based care and percent lower for a four-year-old ( HHS ) For some parents family care centers reflect a more cost-effective way to obtain care and may offer a preferred environment for the children or greater convenience for the parent. However to the extent that regulations are shifting more parents from center-based to home-based | Chapter care this may indicate that regulations are distorting the market and parents are not willing or able to pay for the resulting higher costs. Furthermore regulations designed to increase the average quality of care may not do so if parents forgo the more tightly regulated market as a result. In addition regulations designed to increase the quality of child care centers may not actually do so if centers respond by reducing other inputs such as teacher training that also affect quality ( Blau ) Thus by loosening regulations that do not substantially affect the safety or quality of care States may be able to reduce the cost of formal child care and increase parental work effort. Prime-Age Employment by Race Ethnicity and Education A key concern in evaluating the economy and the labor market is the extent to which certain demographic groups are consistently left behind. In particular black and Hispanic employment rates have consistently fallen short of those of whites. This is apparent in figure which shows the prime-age ratio of employment to population by race. To reduce the noise in the series we use quarterly average employment rates. Since this series began in the white prime-age employment rate has consistently been at least percentage points above that for blacks and at least percentage points above that for Hispanics. Although there is further progress to be made in closing the racial and ethnic employment gaps it is apparent that the economic growth during the current business cycle is having the largest positive effect on the employment of blacks and Hispanics. The average difference of percentage points between the prime-age employment rates of blacks and whites in and of percent between Hispanics and whites are each the smallest annual gaps ever recorded since the BLS began publishing prime-age employment-topopulation ratios by race in Although prime-age employment-to-population ratios are not available by race before prime-age labor force participation rates are available for earlier years ( see figure ) The gaps in participation rates across races and ethnicities have not closed as rapidly as have employment-to-population ratios as figure shows. This is because unemployment rates for prime-age blacks and Hispanics have both declined more rapidly than the unemployment rate declined for whites. Nevertheless the average gap of percentage points in prime-age participation rates between whites and blacks in both and were the smallest since As discussed in box the current disparity in employment and participation rates between white and black prime-age adults is almost completely attributable to a racial employment gap among males rather than females. Similar results are apparent when considering the recent trends in primeage employment-to-population ratios by education level because those with Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Figure Employment-to-Population Ratio for Prime-Age Adults by Race Percent ( non seasonally adjusted ) : Q4 White Hispanic Black Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics. Note : Prime-age adults are those age years. The series for Hispanics starts in : Q4. The BLS does not publish prime-age employment-to-population ratios for any race before Shading denotes a recession. Figure Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Adults by Race Percent ( non seasonally adjusted ) : Q4 White Black Hispanic Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics. Note : Prime-age adults are those age years. The series for Hispanics starts in : Q4. Shading denotes a recession. | Chapter Box Employment Rates among Black Men The ratio of employment to population is an important measure of the share of the civilian noninstitutional population who are employed and allows us to combine information from both the labor force participation and unemployment rates. As figures 3-i and 3-ii show there has historically been a wide gap in employment rates between black and white prime-age adults. However a notable aspect of this disparity in employment rates is that it currently appears to be driven primarily by the employment disparity for males across the two races rather than females. For instance while the employment-to-population ratio for prime-age white males in the fourth quarter of was percent for prime-age black males it was percentage points lower at percent. For females conversely the prime-age employment-to-population ratio had been higher for black females than white females from September until the fourth quarter of In the fourth quarter of the prime-age employment-to-population ratio for black females was within percentage point of that for white females. Numerous researchers have explored the black/white employment disparity trying to better understand the factors driving this gap. This research suggests that the employment gap results from multiple sources ( Bound and Freeman ) with common explanations including differences in education or skills ( Wilson ; Moss and Tilly ; Neal and Johnson ) labor mar-  $ "  $   ( ' * ( ) / / *  * '  / $ * )    / $ *  ! *   $ (  "    '        Percent ( non seasonally adjusted )   # $ /  '   &  *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $   * /   $ (  "  (  '    / # *  age     #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * ) Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Figure 3-ii. Employment-to-Population Ratio for Prime-Age Females by Race Percent ( non seasonally adjusted ) : Q4 White Black Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics. Note : Prime-age females are those age years. Data are non seasonally adjusted. Shading denotes a recession. ket discrimination ( Bertrand and Mullainathan ; Darity and Mason ; Shulman ) and the first fired last hired phenomenon which asserts black workers are hit much harder by recessions and take a longer time to recover from economic downturns as noted by Couch and Frailie ( ) and Weller ( ) ( Couch and Fairlie observe however that the decline in unemployment late in a business cycle comes more from a reduction in the rate of job losses rather than actually being the last hired. ) Especially because the racial disparity is driven by male rather than female employment an additional explanation is the lasting effects of higher incarceration rates among black males ( Western and Pettit ; Holzer Offner and Sorensen ; Pager Western and Sugie ; Neal and Rick ) In close to percent of people incarcerated were racial or ethnic minorities with over one-third being black ( Carson ) Black males are six times more likely to be incarcerated than white males ( figure 3-iii ) According to the Sentencing Project ( ) about in black males in their 30s is in prison or jail every day. Those who are incarcerated are not included in employment statistics ; but if those with a criminal record are less likely to find employment after their release these high incarceration rates could exacerbate the lower employment rates among black males. Previous research has found that this is the case. Bhuller and others ( ) find that spending time in prison has a negative effect on employment outcomes after release. They assert that incarceration may result in depreci- | Chapter ated human capital and limit employment opportunities due to societal stigma. Western and Pettit ( ) observe that individuals with criminal records have significantly fewer employment opportunities and lower earnings. They go on to say that it is impossible to truly understand patterns of employment without also considering incarceration rates. Criminal justice reform has been a leading priority of the Trump Administration. In March the President issued an Executive Order ( White House 2018a ) that would bring numerous Federal agencies together helping to identify ways to improve the reentry of formerly incarcerated individuals into the labor force in addition to reducing recidivism and improving public safety overall. The Administration has also worked with Congress to pass the FIRST STEP Act which the President signed into law on December This legislation will help strengthen reentry programs for federal prison inmates while reducing recidivism. For further discussion on recidivism reducing programs in the United States see the report released by the CEA ( 2018d ) The Trump Administration has also emphasized policies that further the period of economic growth recognizing that the first fired last hired phenomenon suggests that the black workers who are less likely to find work early in economic expansions disproportionately benefit from extended periods of hiring. Consistent with this philosophy the disparity in the black and Figure 3-iii. Rate of Imprisonment by Gender and Race Black males White males Black females White females Rate of imprisonment per Source : Bureau of Justice Statistics. Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | white employment-to-population ratios has been steadily declining. In the average black/white employment gap among prime-age adults reached percentage points a historical low since BLS began publishing prime-age employment-to-population ratios by race in Among individuals of all ages the average gap in was an even lower at percentage points also representing a historical low. less education who traditionally were the least likely to be working have made the greatest gains in employment over the past two years. In the fourth quarter of percent of prime-age adults with at least a bachelor s degree were employed relative to percent of those with a high school degree or less ( figure ) But since the end of gains in prime-age employment have been most prevalent among those with less education. As of the third quarter of the employment rate of those with a bachelor s degree is essentially unchanged falling by percentage point while the employment rate for those with a high school degree or less has risen by percentage points and the employment rate for those with some college but no bachelor s degree has risen by percentage point. The relative rise in employment rates for those with less education and the rise among prime-age black adults mirror the rises from the latter years of the late 1990s business cycle when there were notable increases in employment rates among these groups. This is consistent with research that lower-skilled and marginalized workers are often hit hardest during economic downturns ( Kaye ; Elsby Hobijn Sahin ) and that unemployment gaps between black and white workers narrow late in expansions near business cycle peaks ( Couch and Fairlie ) This historical pattern illustrates the importance of continued progrowth policies that increase the productivity of workers and encourage further hiring of these workers. Despite these recent improvements the substantial gap in employment rates between those with a bachelor s degree and those with a high school degree or less highlights the need to rethink and improve our approaches to training workers so that more adults can gain the skills desired by employers in the current economy. This includes both improving the alignment of workers skills with those sought by employers and evaluating regulations that mandate additional training for workers that employers may not otherwise require. Increasing Workers Skills and Closing Skill Mismatches Even during periods with a strong labor market some low-skill workers will be unable to find work if they lack the skills currently required by hiring firms. Other workers may simply opt against even looking for work if they perceive a skills mismatch between their current skills and those employers seek. | Chapter Figure Employment-to-Population Ratio for Prime-Age Adults by Education Level High school degree or less Some college or an associate degree Bachelor s degree Percent : Q3 Sources : Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations. Note : Prime-age adults are those age years. Data are non seasonally adjusted. Shading denotes a recession. For some workers the skills mismatch occurs purely because they lack skills required across a range of industries. According to an international survey on adult skills conducted by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) a somewhat larger share of adults in the United States have lower mathematics and problem-solving skills than in other OECD member countries while literacy skills in the United States are similar to those in other countries. For others however skill mismatches occur because they were trained in an industry where the growth in employment has failed to keep up with the overall population. Figure shows employment growth by industry since relative to the total adult population change. During this period although several primarily service occupations including education and health services as well as professional and business services have expanded faster than the U.S. population has grown others have exhibited slower growth. For workers trained in these slower-growing industries improvements in their employment prospects necessitate either a revitalization of their current industry or retraining to allow them to transition to industries where employment is growing more rapidly. This is also consistent with the latest data on job openings from the BLS which found that the industries with the highest vacancy rates in Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Figure Employment Growth by Industry Relative to Total Adult Population Growth Female employment Male employment Total population growth Mining and logging Construction Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Transportation and warehousing Utilities Information Financial activities Professional and business services Education and health services Leisure and hospitality Other services Government Average growth per year ( percent ) Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations. were largely the industries that have been exhibiting the fastest employment growth in recent decades ( figure ) In some instances employers may address any skills gaps among their workers by offering training to new employees. This is especially true in a tight labor market when there are relatively few people looking for work with the skills necessary to do the job. However employers may be reluctant to undertake this investment if they are concerned that after training a worker the firm will lose him or her to a rival firm. In considering these concerns about poaching economists often distinguish between general and specific human capital. General human capital includes the set of skills workers obtain that can be applied to multiple firms whereas specific human capital is more narrowly applicable to a single firm or a narrow set of firms. For example learning to operate a proprietary computer system would be specific human capital but capabilities to write in a ubiquitous programming language would constitute general human capital. From an employer s perspective spending on specific human capital is a safer investment because it is less likely to give workers who receive the training increased opportunities for outside jobs. However not all skill gaps can be bridged with specific human capital which suggests that employers individually may not | Chapter Figure Job Opening Rates by Industry : Q4 Mining and logging Total job opening rate Construction Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade Transportation warehousing and utilities Information Financial activities Professional and business services Education and health services Leisure and hospitality Other services Government Percent ( non seasonally adjusted ) Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics. have the financial incentive to bridge the gap between the skills they require to be globally competitive and the skills the U.S. workforce possesses. If employers will not pay to train workers in new skills workers may engage in training themselves. According to the OECD ( ) although the United States does better than most countries in employing low-skill workers the returns to additional skills are particularly strong in the United States. This suggests that it would be advantageous for many workers to increase their own skills even in the absence of employer-provided training. There is evidence that Americans do engage in more adult learning than is seen in many other countries although adult learning rates in the United States are much higher for those who already have at least basic levels of skills than among the lowest-skilled adults. According to the OECD ( ) percent of low-skilled adults participated in adult education in the year before their study compared with percent of higher-skilled adults who did so. Although most of the benefits from reskilling programs accrue to workers and their employers in some instances public participation in the reskilling of workers may be appropriate for several reasons. First although workers who are successfully reemployed will reap the majority of the resulting financial benefits these benefits do not accumulate solely to workers. The public also stands to benefit from successful reemployment both because Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | it increases public tax revenues and because it reduces reliance on social safety net programs.15 Moreover persistent unemployment can subsequently affect local communities including a potential link to opioid use and have intergenerational effects ( e.g. decreased income ) on the children of displaced workers ( Charles Hurst and Schwartz ; Oreopoulos Page and Stevens ; Stevens and Schaller ) Many of these same considerations drive other public workforce investments : ensuring access and funding for students through grade partially financing postsecondary education and providing high-quality metrics to guide students to successful postsecondary programs. Skills training in some ways fits nicely into a portfolio of public investments in education and workforce development already in place. Figure illustrates the spending by the U.S. government on labor market programs compared with other countries. This measure includes other labor market policies ( e.g. public expenditures on retraining as well as on job counseling and job search assistance as defined by the OECD ) and not just skills training. Nonetheless it suggests that the United States spends relatively little on these programs relative to that by most developed countries especially as measured as a share of GDP.16 That adult learning rates are higher in the United States than in many other countries and that public expenditures on adult education are lower suggests that much of the adult learning results from private sector expenses. Figure shows that this is the case. During childhood public education constitutes the majority of education spending. Education spending among adults is lower overall than it is for children. But this is especially true for public education spending given that most of the spending on education for those age and older comes from either private sources or from training paid for by employers. The Trump Administration has emphasized the need to redouble the private sector s involvement in increasing the skill levels of the American workforce. Through the Pledge to America s Workers the President has secured pledges from American businesses to create enhanced career and training opportunities for million workers. Additionally through the National Council for the American Worker the Administration intends to develop a national workforce strategy that increases the efficiency and effectiveness of Federal workforce programs and better cooperates with the private sector to equip workers with the skills desired by employers ( see box ) However we note that workers forgo earnings as they acquire skills which means that for a time the Treasury forgoes tax revenue and might spend more on safety net programs. This also means that minimum ( cash ) wage laws may act as a barrier to skill acquisition ( Hashimoto ; Neumark and Wascher ) Of course funding decisions should be made based on cost-benefit assessments as well as an understanding of the gaps in private labor market expenditures and researchers have found that several European training programs do not pass the cost-benefit test ( Kluve ; Card Kluve and Weber ) | Chapter Figure Public Expenditures on Active Labor Market Programs Percentage of GDP Mexico United States Japan Lithuania Czech Republic Chile Slovak Republic New Zealand Israel Latvia Poland Korea Slovenia Estonia Australia Canada Norway Hungray Switzerland Luxembourg Germany Ireland Portugal Sweden Austria Belgium Netherlands Finland Denmark Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. Figure Expenditures on Education and Skills Training by Age and Source Public education spending Private education spending Employer costs formal training Employer costs informal training Expenditures per capita Age ( years ) Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ; Census Bureau ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Georgetown Center on Education and the Workforce ; CEA calculations. Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Box The President s National Council for the American Worker As technology advances and the economies around the globe become more interconnected the skills demanded by employers change. This may in part explain why there are million more job openings than job seekers in the U.S. economy. As such it is vital for workers to keep pace with change and adapt and/or update their skill sets to meet the needs of the labor market enabling the employment of every American who desires to work. In July the President signed an Executive Order establishing the President s National Council for the American Worker. This council s goal is to develop a national strategy to ensure that American workers have access to innovative education and job training or retraining opportunities that will equip them to succeed in the global economy. The Federal government currently has over grant programs that support workforce development. The new council seeks to make these programs more effective innovative and results-driven. Another crucial aspect of the council is that it helps promote working partnerships between American businesses workers and educational institutions. Information gaps can hinder the economy and limit the opportunities for American workers ; therefore the council intends to link all participants in the economy informing them about what jobs are available where they are located what skills are required to succeed and how best to obtain these skills. The Executive Order also provides for the formation of an advisory board made up of leaders in education philanthropy state government and the private sector. Together with the Administration these leaders are working toward implementing successful job-training programs including both formal and informal educational opportunities. The Administration has also established the Pledge to America s Workers which calls upon businesses to commit to investing in America s workers. Companies have pledged to create enhanced career and training opportunities for more than million Americans through a variety of tried-and-true methods such as apprenticeship programs and on-the-job training. The President s National Council for the American Worker is devoted to helping every American worker obtain the skills necessary to succeed and to ensure that every business s needs are met guaranteeing that every American benefits from the prosperous and booming economy that American ingenuity has built. In considering how to encourage more Americans to seek additional skills training it is important to consider why some individuals may not seek out further training despite the positive financial returns it is likely to provide. In some instances the lack of information about jobs available in the local labor market the skills required for these jobs and training programs that can | Chapter best equip them with these skills may be to blame. The expansion of online job aggregators has greatly eased the search for job openings but it has not necessarily assisted workers in determining the skills required for these jobs and the specific training steps that are needed. Closely related to this problem is the uncertainty about which skills will be necessary to remain competitive in the labor market of the future. Another reason some workers may not engage in skills training is the real or perceived costs of postsecondary education which serves as a barrier to individuals who are not already successful in the labor market. This is a particular concern for those who are budget constrained and unable to fund training efforts while maintaining the financial stability of their households. Yet without making this investment the likelihood that these individuals will find a way into the labor market is reduced. Predictions about the growth in jobs linked to automation which require advanced programming and information technology skills suggest that workers with fewer years of education ( who are likely to have lower incomes ) may have fewer job opportunities in the future ( Manyika et al. ; OECD 2018b ; PwC ) Those who are unemployed may find it even harder to reenter the job market if they do not have technological skills although several State and Federal programs are targeted to assist them to develop the necessary skills. The State of New Jersey for example allows unemployment benefits to be extended to individuals who are working to complete training programs after they would have otherwise expired. Additionally the Reemployment Services and Eligibility Assessment Program at the Department of Labor which was funded through the Bipartisan Budget Act of provides States with funding for programs that provide reemployment services to help unemployed adults develop marketable job skills and reenter the job market more quickly. For individuals who can not engage in skills training programs due to financial constraints some low-cost or no-cost models support training and retraining without imposing additional financial burdens. In particular apprenticeships and other on-the-job learning opportunities provide a financial bridge so workers can earn a wage during their training and do not face the personal expenditure outlays and lost income associated with enrolling in formal education. Apprentices and those participating in other types of earn-and-learn opportunities undertake productive work for an employer earn wages receive training primarily through supervised earn-and-learn training models and engage in related classroom instruction. Moreover apprenticeships reduce the need for individuals to figure out on their own which skills are most desired by employers because employers help design these programs based on indemand knowledge and skills. Additionally apprenticeships have been shown to provide a strong boost to workers future labor market outcomes ( Neumark and Rothstein ; Lerman ) Despite these advantages apprenticeships Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | make up less than percent of the U.S. labor force compared with roughly to percent in Australia Britain Canada and Germany. The President highlighted the benefits of apprenticeships and workbased learning in his June Executive Order to expand apprenticeship including by establishing new Industry-Recognized Apprenticeship Programs ( IRAPs ) developed by third parties. This Executive Order also directed Secretary of Labor Alexander Acosta in partnership with the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Education to establish the Task Force on Apprenticeship Expansion ( ) to identify strategies and proposals to promote apprenticeships especially in sectors where apprenticeship programs are insufficient. The task force met for almost a year and in May published its report which makes a number of recommendations. The Department of Labor is now actively working to implement the task force s recommendations and set up a new IRAP system and other Federal agencies are doing their part to support these recommendations as well. Another approach to increasing access to reskilling programs includes increasing the flexibility of unemployment insurance ( UI ) benefits for those seeking additional skills. Because UI benefits are conditional on a displaced worker not being rehired they may discourage some recipients both from quickly finding new employment opportunities and from enrolling in an apprenticeship program which also must pay wages. Apprenticeship programs include well-planned work-based and classroom learning. For this reason it may be appropriate to allow apprentices to continue receiving a portion of the UI benefits they would otherwise receive to offset lost earnings while they are learning. This would further incentivize individuals to seek and participate in apprenticeships to learn new skills after a layoff. Despite the logic of extending some or all UI benefits during periods of retraining there is scant empirical evidence on the benefits of these programs. The State of Georgia launched a now-defunct program called GeorgiaWorks which allowed workers to receive full UI benefits while participating in unpaid apprenticeship programs. The success of GeorgiaWorks however is unclear because it did not include a well-designed evaluation component. The Trade Adjustment Assistance Program however uses a similar model to allow for the collection of UI benefits while receiving job training and was found to be largely unsuccessful ( Schochet et al. ; Decker and Corson ) This highlights the importance of ensuring that any apprenticeships are structured so workers do not only learn new skills but also that those skills will be valued in the workforce and lead to successful employment opportunities and careers. Reforming Occupational Licensing For a substantial share of positions many low-skill workers must not only demonstrate to an employer that they have the requisite skills for a job but | Chapter also obtain a professional license. In the first half of just under one-fourth of all workers reported that they have an active professional certification or license. These licenses are often a requirement for employment as over percent of those with a license say that this license is required for their job. The share of jobs requiring occupational licensing has risen sharply since the 1950s when only percent of all jobs were covered by licensing laws ( Kleiner and Krueger ) The traditional justification for occupational licensing is to protect consumer health and safety especially in occupations where the quality of a service provider can not be easily evaluated by consumers ( Akerlof ; CEA Department of the Treasury and Department of Labor ; Kleiner ; Shapiro ) Given this it is perhaps unsurprising that healthcare practitioners are the most frequently licensed with about three-fourths of workers reporting that they have a license. Nevertheless a sizable share of workers in a wide-range of non-healthcare occupations report having a professional license including two-thirds working in legal professions ; over percent of financial specialists ; and over percent of installation maintenance and repair workers ( figure ) These licenses are also not limited to highly skilled workers within each occupation. As illustrated in figure in many occupations the share of workers who have a professional license is similar when considering only those workers without a bachelor s degree. If all these licenses were necessary for the health and safety of consumers one would expect some uniformity of occupations requiring licenses across States. However a study showed that the share of low-wage occupations requiring licenses ranged from percent in Wyoming to percent in Louisiana ( Carpenter et al. ) One potential explanation for the difference in licensing requirements is that States are simply weighing the relative risks of unlicensed workers differently. If this were the case then States with greater licensing requirements would license the same occupations as less regulated States while simply adding additional occupations. Instead however there are idiosyncrasies in the occupations that States license. For example despite having the lowest share of low-wage occupations requiring a license Wyoming is just one of States to have licensing requirements for travel guides ( Carpenter et al. ) Although it is possible that state-specific needs lead to these idiosyncratic licensing requirements this suggests that other factors are likely contributing to which occupations States choose to license. These occupational licenses come at a significant cost to the U.S. labor market by acting as a barrier to entry for new workers seeking to join a profession and in turn artificially raising wages in the occupation for incumbent workers. It has also been found that some state licensing boards have engaged in practices that result in unfair competition and antitrust activities. For example in the case of North Carolina State Board of Dental Examiners v. Federal Trade Commission ( ) the lack of oversight by the State of North Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Figure Workers with a Professional License or Certification by Occupation and Education Level All workers Workers without a bachelor s degree Healthcare practitioners Legal Education training and library Healthcare support Protective service Community and social services Financial specialists Personal care and service Life physical and social sciences Architecture and engineering Installation maintenance and repair Management Transportation and material moving Construction trades Extraction Business operations specialists Sales and related Computer and mathematical Arts entertainment sports and media Production Office and administrative support Farming fishing and forestry Cleaning and maintenance Food preparation Percentage with a professional license Sources : Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations. Carolina allowed dentists to successfully lobby to prevent nondentists from participating in tooth-whitening procedures despite the relatively low risk of such procedures for patients. Though there is no clear consensus on the precise effect of licenses on compensation recent estimates suggest a wage premium for licensed workers ranging from about percent ( Gittleman and Kleiner ; Gittleman Klee and Kleiner ) up to percent ( Kleiner Krueger and Mas ) If the wage premium from occupational licensing is entirely due to economic rents Kleiner Krueger and Mas ( ) estimate that with a labor demand elasticity of the percent wage premium would reflect million fewer jobs in these occupations due to licensing. Applying a similar calculation with the lower-end estimate for the wage premium a percent wage premium would reflect about million fewer jobs if the licenses are not reflecting additional human capital and increased productivity among these workers. State occupational licensing also reduces worker mobility because many licenses can not be transferred from one State to another. Recognizing | Chapter that high migration is seen as a strength of the U.S. labor market relative to other countries and reflects a key way that workers can adjust to labor market shocks economists have expressed concerns about declines in geographic mobility in the United States in recent decades ( for an overview of these concerns see Molloy Smith and Wozniak ) These declines are documented by Molloy Smith and Wozniak ( ) and by Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl ( ) who each find that interstate mobility has reached a 30-year low.17 Johnson and Kleiner ( ) suggest that occupational licensing has exacerbated this decline. On the basis of their estimates interstate migration is percent lower for those working in occupations with State-specific licensing relative to other occupations. They also estimate that the rise in licensing from to can explain between and percent of the overall decline in interstate mobility over this time. The effects of licensing on interstate mobility observed by Johnson and Kleiner are consistent with a report by the CEA that observed substantially lower interstate mobility rates for workers in highly licensed occupations relative to those in less licensed ones ( CEA Department of the Treasury and Department of Labor ) Occupational licenses also impose an additional burden on military spouses who move much more frequently than the general population and potentially face relicensing requirements with each interstate move. The American Community Survey indicated that working-age military spouses were seven times as likely to move across State lines in the United States as the civilian noninstitutionalized working-age population in general ( CEA 2018d ) Also though the military spouses represent a relatively small share of the overall working population military spouses are more likely than the general population to work in an occupation requiring a license given that percent of military spouses in the labor force worked in occupations requiring a license or certification ( DOD ; Department of the Treasury and DOD ) Employment Experiences in Rural Areas Beyond differences in employment patterns by demographic characteristic differences in employment patterns appear across geographies including whether the community is in an urban or rural environment. Although there are several ways that communities can be defined as urban or rural for the purposes of this chapter we do so based on whether or not the county is located in a metropolitan statistical area. In general from the early 1980s through the early 2000s the prime-age employment patterns in urban and rural areas largely followed similar trajectories. Between the fourth quarter of and the fourth quarter of rural Using CPS data for example Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl ( ) find that about percent of people moved across State lines in down from closer to percent in and over percent in Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | employment rates for prime-age adults rose by percentage points which is just slightly higher than the rise of percentage points in urban employment rates during this time ( figure ) The similarities in employment patterns across these communities diverged however after the Great Recession. Though both urban and rural employment fell sharply in the Great Recession prime-age urban employment rates experienced a nearly complete recovery and are approaching their prerecession level from the end of This is despite the fact that some urban areas have restrictive zoning which increases the costs of housing and real estate and limits employment growth ( OECD 2018a ) In contrast to the experience in urban areas prime-age rural employment rates have not shown the same level of recovery. In rural areas as of the third quarter of the prime-age employment-to-population ratio has only risen by percentage points since the end of and remains percentage points below where it was at the end of This divergence is actually even greater if one looks at all adults rather than only those of prime working age due to the faster aging of the labor force in rural areas ( USDA 2017c ) There are several reasons why employment patterns in urban and rural area may diverge. One is a purely technical explanation : that every years the Census Bureau reclassifies nonmetropolitan counties that have grown as large as metropolitan ones. Goetz Partridge and Stephens ( ) show that population growth in counties considered rural in is more than double that of counties considered urban in The supposedly slow historical population growth of rural areas results from the reclassification of fast-growing counties as urban so using definitions of urban and rural it appears that rural areas have grown more slowly. They note that one analyst likened this to taking the best team out of a sports league each year and then wondering why the remaining teams are not performing as well as before. Although the reclassifications are based on population growth they could also influence observed economic trends if the rural areas with stronger economic performance are more likely to undergo reclassification. However these reclassifications only result in an implicit trend break once each decade ( when the reclassification occurs ) and thus should not alter trends within decades when the definitions are stable. Hence this can not explain why the employment of prime-age adults has lagged in rural areas since the Great Recession after decades of similar prime-age employment rates in these two types of communities. A second reason relates to the industry compositions across urban and rural areas. Although manufacturing represents only percent of all urban employment it constitutes a much larger share percent of employment in rural areas. In fact after wholesale and retail trade education and health services and public administration manufacturing is the fourth-largest industry for rural employment ( figure ) As such the declines in manufacturing | Chapter Figure Employment-to-Population Ratio for Prime-Age Adults by Geography Percent : Q3 Urban ( in a metro area ) Rural ( not in a metro area ) Sources : Current Population Survey ( CPS ) ; CEA calculations. Note : Prime-age adults are those age years. These data aggregate monthly CPS surveys within a quarter. Metro area definitions are subject to change over time. Data are non seasonally adjusted. Shading denotes a recession. employment in recent decades have had a disproportionate effect on rural communities. A third potential explanation relates to the differences in the characteristics of urban and rural populations. For example education levels in rural areas have historically been lower than in urban areas and this gap has been growing. In percent of adults in nonmetropolitan areas had a bachelor s degree versus percent in urban areas a gap of percentage points ( USDA 2018c ) Earlier in this gap was somewhat smaller at percentage points ; percent of adults in urban areas had bachelor s degrees versus percent in rural areas ( figure ) Recognizing that there are substantial differences in employment rates by education level as discussed earlier in this chapter the growing educational divide between urban and rural adults can further exacerbate their divergent employment trajectories. One potential reason for the growing education divide is the out-migration of young adults. The exit of college-educated young adults is often identified by policymakers as an important concern for rural areas. This indicates One potential reason for the growing education divide is that education seems to earn a higher return in urban areas versus rural ones. A recent analysis by the U.S. Department of Agriculture ( USDA 2017e ) found that adults in urban areas with a bachelor s degree earn $ versus $ in rural areas. Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Figure Industry Employment by Geography Rural Urban Farm forestry fishing and related Mining and logging Construction Manufacturing Wholesale and retail trade Transportation and utilities Information Finance real estate and insurance Professional and business services Education and health services Leisure and hospitality Other services Public administration Percent Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations. Note : Metroplitan area definitions are subject to change over time. that the problem may not be so much the education level of rural youth but their retention once they complete higher education. Reichert Cromartie and Arthun ( ) found that geographically challenged rural areas are particularly dependent on young adults who decide to move back to their rural communities. Fiore and others ( ) found that the cost of living and strength of the local economy were of primary importance in persuading rural youth in Iowa to return. In a survey of young adults from a sampling across the rural United States Reichert Cromartie and Arthun ( ) find that deciding to return to the rural community of their raising is tied closely to place and personal ties maintained with their home community. Returnees sometimes were able to return because they were able to work remotely. They also returned to become part of both farm and nonfarm family businesses. Finally though not directly related to the growing employment gap between urban and rural areas an important component of rural economies that cuts across many sectors is self-employment or entrepreneurship. Numerous analyses have shown the importance of entrepreneurship for the economic health of rural areas. Rupasingha and Goetz ( ) provide strong empirical evidence that higher self-employment rates in rural counties are associated with increases in income and employment and with reductions in poverty rates. Self-employment is also particularly important for rural | Chapter Figure Educational Attainment in Rural versus Urban Areas Percent Bachelor s degree or higher Associate s degree Some college no degree High school diploma or equivalent Rural Urban Source : Department of Agriculture. Note : Metro area definitions are subject to change over time. Data may not sum to due to rounding. For full details see USDA ( 2018c ) communities because the rate of self-employment in rural areas exceeds that in urban environments ( Wilmoth ) Goetz and Rupasingha ( ) found that greater self-employment growth was associated with higher shares of construction and services employment. Also self-employment and entrepreneurship are enhanced when rural areas are close to growing small metropolitan areas ( Tsvetkova Partridge and Betz ) Larger increases in self-employment growth were also associated with more females in the labor force. But more retail employment in a county was associated with smaller increases in self-employment over time. Goetz and Rupasingha ( ) also used the Economic Freedom of North America Index to evaluate the effect of government policies on proprietorships. This index measured the extent of restrictions on economic freedom. Not surprisingly more economic freedom is associated with higher rates of business formation. Self-employment opportunity goes hand in hand with the return of young adults who left to pursue higher education. Reichert Cromartie and Arthun ( ) report that those who return to rural communities contribute to economic growth often through entrepreneurship. Policies that promote small businesses and self-employment could encourage the return of young adults to their home communities. Their return then enhances economic growth and Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | strengthens rural economies which can further encourage the return of more young adults. Farming employs a shrinking share of the labor force in rural areas. In percent of rural employment was directly in the farming sector. Agriculture and related industries made up percent of U.S. employment in but not all in rural areas. With just over million farms many rural residents live on farms ( USDA 2018b ) Small family farms often with a nonfarming occupation make up nearly percent of the million farms but only produce about one-fourth of the output ( Burns and Macdonald ) Though farming reflects a smaller share of the rural labor force than it once did the rural manufacturing advantage in part comes from closer proximity to raw materials including those grown or raised on farms. For example food manufacturing is prevalent in rural areas because of the proximity of raw products to process making up percent of all rural manufacturing employment. Similarly percent of wood products manufacturing is in rural areas which is consistent with the closer proximity to inputs into this manufacturing process. However between and the decline in rural manufacturing employment was widespread across manufacturing sectors. During this period employment in every manufacturing sector except for tobacco and beverage manufacturing declined in rural areas ( USDA 2017d ) This highlights the importance of policies targeted at revitalizing manufacturing generally for the economic health of rural communities. Policies to Enhance Rural Communities Recent policies of the Trump Administration have been particularly beneficial to these rural communities. These policies include efforts to revitalize industries that are disproportionately located in rural communities ; supporting small businesses and entrepreneurship ; and promoting economic development in less developed areas through Opportunity Zones including in many rural communities. One component of revitalizing rural areas involves restoring the manufacturing industries that have been languishing and losing jobs in recent decades. Although manufacturing jobs are important for both urban and rural communities the larger share of rural employment that is in manufacturing industries means that these jobs are particularly important for rural communities ( USDA 2017a ) Reflecting the priority that this Administration has placed on revitalizing manufacturing over the past two years manufacturing has experienced substantial growth. As seen in figure in manufacturing employment grew by just over percent the fastest annual growth since And this acceleration of growth in manufacturing is part of a broader increase in employment in goods-producing industries generally. Goods-producing employment grew by at least percent each year from until but in this growth stalled and the industry only grew by percent. In | Chapter Figure Manufacturing Employment Growth Percent ( annual change ) growth rate Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations. goods-producing employment gains accelerated again and this acceleration continued into ( figure ) In goods-producing employment rose by percent its second-fastest annual growth rate since A second set of policies that benefits many areas but especially rural economies is the existence and facilitation of entrepreneurship through proprietorships and self-employment. One-sixth of all self-employed adults live in rural communities and a larger share of the rural population ( percent in ) is self-employed than is the case in suburbs ( percent ) or center cities ( percent ) ( Wilmoth ) Consequently policies that encourage the growth of small businesses and benefit self-employed entrepreneurs have the potential to disproportionately benefit rural communities. A major objective of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of as discussed in chapter is to facilitate the success of entrepreneurs. Self-employed workers and pass-through entities which make up the majority of small businesses benefit from the act s lower individual tax rates. Most also qualify for the new percent deduction for pass-through entities and will further benefit from the expanded Section deduction for the purchase of business equipment. A survey of small business owners by the National Federation of Independent Businesses ( NFIB 2018b ) indicates that percent of small Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Figure Goods-Producing Employment Growth Annual change ( percent ) growth rate Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations. business owners recognize that the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act will have a positive impact on the economy. Given the finding that less restrictive business environments help entrepreneurs reducing regulatory burdens is similarly important. According to the NFIB s ( 2018a ) survey of small businesses its Small Business Optimism Index has remained at near-record high levels since the Trump Administration came into office. The NFIB includes the unburdening of small businesses from taxes and regulations as factors in this surging optimism. In addition to incentivizing small businesses by removing regulatory barriers and reducing the marginal tax rates of the self-employed and pass-through businesses the Trump Administration is also incentivizing improvements in rural infrastructure. One such investment that can enhance growth in rural areas is increased high-speed high-capacity Internet access ( USDA 2017b ) Kim and Orazem ( ) found that rural firms are to percent more likely to locate in ZIP codes with good broadband access. Their study which focuses on start-up firms in rural areas emphasizes the importance of providing adequate infrastructure to enhance the location and success of entrepreneurs. Although improved Internet access can benefit a range of communities their study suggests that good broadband access benefits most rural areas that are close to urban areas or that have higher populations. Good broadband access enables | Chapter Box Strengthening Local Economies through Opportunity Zones The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of included a provision that offers tax incentives for private investment in distressed areas designated by State governors as Opportunity Zones. Under the law taxpayers who invest their unrealized capital gains in Opportunity Zones via so-called Opportunity Funds can defer taxes on these gains for as long as they remain in Opportunity Funds ( but no later than the end of ) In addition taxpayers can avoid paying a portion of the original capital gains tax depending on how long they keep these gains in an Opportunity Fund. They can avoid all taxes on capital gains accrued based on investment in the Opportunity Fund ( above the original capital gain ) if they keep these funds in the Opportunity Fund for at least years. Governors designated Opportunity Zones in their States in early with their choices finalized by the U.S. Treasury in June Out of about census tracts in the United States ( each designed to contain about to residents ) over half were eligible and over were chosen. Among eligible census tracts governors tended to designate as Opportunity Zones those with higher poverty rates and lower median incomes. The average poverty rate among Opportunity Zones in was percent compared with an average of percent in all eligible census tracts and an average of percent across all census tracts in the country ( Gelfond and Looney ) In addition rural areas make up almost a quarter of tracts designated as Opportunity Zones ( Economic Innovation Group ) exceeding the overall share of the population living in rural communities. Although the scale and flexibility offered by Opportunity Zones are new place-based policies to encourage investment in distressed areas are not. State and Federal Enterprise Zone programs generally offered tax incentives for businesses that located in certain areas or employed people who lived in such areas. Most studies found that Federal Empowerment Zone programs tended to increase employment and wages in designated areas although there were no similar positive effects of State-based programs on employment ( e.g. Neumark and Kolko ; Busso Gregory and Kline ) Another Federal initiative the New Markets Tax Credit is more similar to Opportunity Zones in that it targets census tracts with low incomes and high poverty rates and offers tax incentives for investment made in designated areas. Unlike Opportunity Zones however eligible investments are more restricted and must be preapproved by public authorities. The New Markets Tax Credit led to increased investment in targeted industries with some evidence of positive effects in reducing unemployment and poverty ( Gurley-Calvez et al. ; Harger and Ross ; Freedman ) Bernstein and Hassett ( ) suggest that the effectiveness of previous place-based policies was limited by weak or misaligned incentives for investment overly burdensome bureaucratic requirements and limited scope for the types of investments that could be made. Opportunity Zones Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | offer a means of flexibly investing in distressed areas without encumbrance by bureaucratic requirements. The scope of potential investment is large with trillions of dollars in unrealized capital gains that could be harnessed. In addition State and local governments have signaled their own efforts to complement Federal incentives in Opportunity Zones. At the Federal level President Trump signed Executive Order on December which establishes the White House Opportunity and Revitalization Council and directs Federal agencies to streamline Federal programs and offer greater flexibility to States to target public investment in Opportunity Zones whenever possible under current law. The large potential scale of the Opportunity Zone investment complemented by public efforts could unleash substantial economic growth in communities that have been most left behind throughout the United States. people to work remotely from rural areas who would otherwise need to live closer to urban areas. With the importance of broadband access in mind in January President Trump signed Executive Order which streamlines the process to expand broadband to rural areas ( White House 2018c ) An additional priority of the Administration is encouraging private investment in areas that previously lacked private capital spending so economic growth can be spread more widely. A key component of this approach is through the creation of Opportunity Zones in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act which encourages a wide spectrum of investment in infrastructure in rural areas and other communities where economic growth could be enhanced through this influx of capital ( see box ) Policies beneficial to rural communities are further promoted by the Strengthening Career and Technical Education for the 21st Century Act which the President signed in July and by the Task Force on Agriculture and Rural Prosperity which the President established in April The Strengthening Career and Technical Education for the 21st Century Act specifically benefits rural areas by allowing States to designate up to percent of allocated funds to a reserve for targeted rural education and training needs. The task force similarly promotes rural development by identifying and recommending policy changes that ensure good broadband access improve the quality of rural life support the rural workforce harness technological innovation and enhance economic development ( White House ) Conclusion Given the historically low unemployment rates that were achieved in it is clear that maintaining the recent rapid pace of employment growth necessitates a better understanding of the reasons that some adults and particularly | Chapter those of prime working-age remain outside the formal labor market. Especially because there are already more job openings than unemployed people looking for work continued growth of the workforce requires overcoming the barriers that have kept some adults outside it. Fundamentally if people voluntarily remain outside the labor market when there is a surplus of available jobs it is an indication that they value their time spent on other activities above the amount that employers are willing to pay. As a result central to expanding the number of people engaged in the labor force are policies that increase workers wages decrease the fixed costs of entering the labor force or remove distortions that cause some whose most productive use of time is in the formal labor market to instead engage in other activities. As outlined in this chapter policies of the Trump Administration focus on each of these areas. The corporate tax rate reductions and expensing of business investment in equipment in the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act incentivized additional capital spending by employers which in turn leads to higher productivity and larger wage gains. The individual tax cuts in the act similarly mean that workers keep a larger share of any wage earnings and more potential workers will find it worthwhile to seek employment. Increased investments in human capital along with physical capital also increase the returns to work. There is strong evidence that wages are higher and unemployment is lower among those with higher levels of education. Efforts to increase the education and skill levels of the American workforce including the pledges from businesses secured by the Trump Administration to train or retrain over million workers should raise the potential wages and employment prospects for the recipients of this training. Further removing regulatory distortions can also increase the likelihood that the returns to work are sufficiently high to draw additional adults into the labor market. These deregulatory efforts include reducing occupational licensing which imposes a fixed cost on potential labor market entrants and reducing regulations on paid child care activities which raise the costs of child care and discourage parents from seeking formal employment. Although many policies to remove distortions and enhance workers productivity and wages are nationally focused there has been a clear disparity in the recovery from the Great Recession in urban compared with rural areas. This geographic divide necessitates policies focused on industries that are prevalent in rural communities so there are more employment opportunities for potential workers in rural areas throughout the country. The Administration s focus on industries including manufacturing and mining that are disproportionately located in rural areas as well as place-based policies such as the creation of Opportunity Zones have the potential to broaden the scope of the Nation s economic expansion to areas that did not experience strong employment gains in earlier years. Expanding Labor Force Opportunities for Every American | Although the labor market faces headwinds as members of the Baby Boom generation reach traditional retirement age these demographic trends do not dictate that the United States will face secular stagnation brought on by slow employment growth in the coming years. Through the policies of this Administration as discussed in this chapter there is the potential to increase economic opportunities for all Americans by increasing the wages of those who are working and by drawing more people into the labor market than has been the case in recent years. | Chapter x Chapter Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets America is unique in both the extent to which it employs private markets to deliver and fund healthcare and in the quality of care provided. While there is substantial government involvement in healthcare regulation and funding government payers often utilize private market mechanisms in their programs and most Americans obtain their healthcare through private markets. The delivery of high-quality innovative care in the United States is the result of market forces that enhance patients welfare by allowing parties to act in accord with their own self-determined interests. Nevertheless the ability of markets to provide affordable high-quality care for the entire population and the value of government interventions in healthcare markets have been debated for decades. This chapter discusses the rationales commonly offered for the government s intervention in healthcare and explains why such interventions often unnecessarily restrict choice and competition. The resulting government failures are frequently more costly than the market failures they attempt to correct. Though some features of healthcare such as uncertainty third-party financing through insurance information asymmetry barriers to entry and inelastic demand interfere with efficient market function we argue that these features are neither unique to healthcare markets nor so disruptive that they mandate extensive government interventions. We contend that competitive markets for healthcare services and insurance can and do work to generate affordable care for all. Current proposals to increase government involvement in healthcare like Medicare for All are motivated by the view that competition and free choice can not work in this sector. These proposals though well-intentioned mandate a decrease or elimination of choice and competition. We find that these proposals would be inefficiently costly and would likely reduce as opposed to increase the U.S. population s health. We show that funding them would create large distortions in the economy. Finally we argue that the universal nature of Medicare for All would be a particularly inefficient and untargeted way to serve lower- and middle-income people. We contrast such proposals with the Trump Administration s actions that are increasing choice and competition in healthcare. In the health insurance arena we focus on the elimination of the Affordable Care Act s individual mandate penalty which will enable consumers to decide for themselves what value they attach to purchasing insurance and generate $ billion in value over years. Expanding the availability of two types of health insurance association health plans ; and short-term limited-duration health plans will increase consumers choices and insurance affordability. We find that taken together these three sets of actions will generate a value of $ billion over the next decade. For biopharmaceuticals the Food and Drug Administration has increased price competition by streamlining the process for drug application and review. Record numbers of generic drugs have been approved price growth has fallen and consumers have already saved $ billion during the first year and a half of the Administration. In addition the influx of new brand name drugs resulted in an estimated $ billion in annual benefits for consumers in Data through the end of show that for the first time in years the Consumer Price Index for prescription drugs fell in nominal terms and even more in real terms during a calendar year. T he dominant theory in economics for centuries in the Western world has been the efficiency of the free market system. For a free market to be efficient free choice and competition must exist in the market | Chapter to allow consumer demand to be met by suppliers. In markets prices reveal economically important information about costs and consumers needs and send signals to both sides of the market to facilitate an efficient allocation of resources. Centrally set prices undermine the important allocative role of prices in the economy. Of course many markets deviate in substantial ways from the conditions under which markets are perfectly efficient. Market failures occur to a greater or lesser extent throughout the economy. The important question is what to do about them. Market failures may be less damaging than the distortions and costs introduced by various interventions intended to correct them. Following the research of Kenneth Arrow ( ) many economists and policymakers have argued that unique features of healthcare make it impossible for competition and markets to work. They claim that uncertainty in the incidence of disease and in the effectiveness of treatment information asymmetry between providers and consumers of healthcare barriers to provider entry and the critical importance of and inelastic demand for health services all interfere with market function and justify government intervention in or even its takeover of healthcare markets. Some members of Congress have proposed nationalizing payments for the healthcare sector ( which makes up more than a sixth of the U.S. economy ) through the recent Medicare for All proposal. This policy would distribute healthcare for free ( i.e. without cost sharing ) through a monopoly government health insurer that would centrally set all prices paid to suppliers such as doctors and hospitals. Private insurance would be banned for the services covered by the Medicare for All program. This chapter begins by critically examining the rationales offered for the government s intervention in healthcare. We find that though some characteristics of healthcare may present obstacles to a perfectly functioning market these are not insurmountable problems that mandate the government s intervention in healthcare and can be overcome by market and nonmarket institutions. Moreover these problems also occur in markets for many other goods without calls for government takeovers and the suppression of consumer choice and competition. Government intervention in healthcare is only clearly warranted where the political process has made a determination that some level of healthcare for low-income people is a merit good a beneficial good that would be underconsumed justifying replacing consumer sovereignty with another norm so that government redistribution programs to provide healthcare in kind for low-income people might enhance efficiency. We next critique the Medicare for All proposal. This plan would eliminate choice and competition everyone would be forced to participate in the same insurance with mandatory premiums set through tax policy and without the option of choosing an alternate insurance if they dislike the government s plan. Our analysis shows that the proposal would reduce longevity and health in the U.S. decrease long-run global health by reducing medical innovation Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | and adversely affect the economy through the large tax burden required to fund the program. In contrast to proposals that diminish health and damage the economy by curtailing market forces the next section of this chapter details the Trump Administration s efforts to improve choice and competition in health insurance markets so as to help them better serve low- and middle-income people. The Administration has reduced the penalty associated with the Affordable Care Act s ( ACA s ) individual mandate to zero so consumers can decide for themselves the value of purchasing health insurance. We analyze this deregulatory reform and find that it will generate $ billion in value over years. In addition the administration has increased the choices and affordability of available health insurance plans by expanding association health plans and extending the available terms and renewability of short-term limited-duration insurance plans. As opposed to sabotaging healthcare markets conventional incidence analysis by the CEA implies that these three deregulations of health insurance markets together will benefit Americans by $ billion during the next decade. Finally the last section discusses the Administration s reforms to enhance choice and competition in biopharmaceutical markets by streamlining the drug application and review process in a way that effectively lowers barriers to entry while ensuring a supply of safe and effective drugs. This deregulatory effort is contributing to a record number of generic drug approvals since January resulting in slower price growth and savings of $ billion over the first year and a half of the Administration. In addition the influx of new brand name drugs since January has induced price reductions resulting in an estimated $ billion in annual benefits for consumers in even though the methods currently being used to estimate changes in drug prices do not reflect this. For the first time in years the Consumer Price Index for prescription drugs fell in both nominal and real terms during a calendar year. We conclude that the market for health insurance and healthcare should be supported through increased choice and competition not hampered by increased government intervention. Competitive markets for healthcare services and insurance whether privately or publicly funded can and do work to provide high-quality care for people at all income levels.1 The CEA previously released research on topics covered in this chapter. The text that follows builds on the following research papers produced by the CEA : The Opportunity Costs of Socialism ( CEA 2018c ) The Administration s FDA Reforms and Reduced Biopharmaceutical Drug Prices ( CEA 2018a ) and Deregulating Health Insurance Markets : Value to Market Participants ( CEA ) | Chapter Rationales for the Government s Healthcare Interventions That Restrict Competition and Choice This section reviews the specific rationales for the government s intervention in healthcare markets and argues that they are often exaggerated ; are not unique to healthcare ; and when present in markets for other types of goods and services have not been used to call for government control. In a market economy free choice among competing suppliers generally leads to an efficient allocation of resources and maximizes consumer welfare. In the market system that predominates in the United States people are mostly free to spend their own money and are therefore more careful in deciding how much to spend and on what the money is spent compared with when money is spent by governments on their behalf. Fiscal and regulatory policies that limit choice and competition distort allocations and reduce consumer welfare from what it would be in the absence of these policies. Unfortunately every market has features that deviate from it working perfectly and healthcare is no exception. Some argue that specific features of healthcare make it unsuitable for the market mechanisms that we employ in the rest of the economy. Fifty-six years ago the economist Kenneth Arrow published a seminal article identifying ways in which healthcare deviates from perfectly competitive markets and thus could generate an inefficient allocation of resources ( Arrow ) The primary factors he identified included : Uncertainty in the incidence of disease and in the effectiveness of treatment and hence the likelihood of recovery. Information asymmetry between providers of medical services and patients who lack an understanding of disease processes and treatments. Barriers to entry that limit the supply of providers including the need to attend selective medical schools and state licensing standards that include educational and training requirements. These barriers can be imposed by the government ( licensing ) or by private parties who often have a financial interest in limiting the supply of their service ( limited admission to medical school residency and fellowship training programs and specialty board society certification which is often needed to obtain hospital privileges ) Arrow ( ) pointed out that these features lead to inefficient markets and when the market fails to achieve an optimal state society will to some extent at least recognize the gap and nonmarket social institutions will arise attempting to bridge it. The medical-care industry with its variety of special institutions some ancient some modern exemplifies this tendency. Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | This section discusses the healthcare features that Arrow pointed out the adaptations to them that can create problems of their own and additional factors that some claim justify government intervention either through public financing or public production in healthcare. We find that many of the arguments for the value of intervention have been exaggerated and that the costs of market failures in healthcare are often lower than the costs of government interventions undertaken to remedy them. Uncertainty Third-Party Payments and the Problem of Moral Hazard The primary institution that has arisen in response to the uncertainty inherent in healthcare is private healthcare insurance or third-party payments. Insurance mitigates the financial risk of getting sick and allows risk-averse individuals to pool the risk. This pooling of risk across the population enhances welfare by reducing the financial risk of uncertain illness events for each individual. Nevertheless some have argued that the widespread adoption of third-party insurance in healthcare creates its own problems that warrant government intervention. It has long been recognized that there is a trade-off between risk reduction through insurance and appropriate incentives at the time of care ( Zeckhauser ) Payment after the time of service via third parties such as private or public insurance plans mutes the incentives of patients to shop based on quality and price and therefore negates market mechanisms which leads to the problem of overconsumption relative to production costs or moral hazard. Normally the risk against which insurance is purchased should be out of the individual s control. In healthcare costs largely depend on the choice of a doctor and the willingness of this doctor and the patient to use medical services. Health insurance can increase the risk that is insured against : medical costs. Moreover because medical insurance limits considerations of cost as services are consumed widespread medical insurance increases the demand for medical care ( Arrow ) By inserting third-party control over payments insurance removes the incentive on the part of individuals patients and physicians to shop around for better prices for hospitalization and surgical care ( Arrow ) Healthcare insurance reduces the price that an individual faces to zero or if there is a copay or coinsurance to greater than zero but still less than the cost of the service as reflected by the market price. This is a recipe for wasteful spending and a welfare loss to society. The primary way insurers deal with moral hazard is through cost sharing deductibles copayments and coinsurance to discourage overutilization by moving consumers up the demand curve. The Rand Health Insurance Experiment of the 1970s and early 1980s randomly assigned patients to health plans with different levels of cost sharing. It showed that higher consumer | Chapter cost-sharing leads to lower utilization with little discernible impact on health ( Newhouse ) Cost-sharing provisions have become far more common and burdensome for patients over the past few years. Nevertheless unless cost sharing is quite high it can not eliminate moral hazard. However moral hazard is less of a problem than it at first appears to be and it has important lessons to impart about the proper role of healthcare insurance. Although seeking extra medical care because of insurance is rational economic behavior for an insured individual who gets to spread the cost over all other insured people the presence of moral hazard suggests that some uncertain medical care expenses will not and should not be insured in an optimal situation ( Pauly ) The problem presented by moral hazard only clearly applies to items where we would expect zero ( or very low ) prices to lead to overuse things like routine physician s visits prescriptions dental care and the like but not necessarily to serious illnesses ( Pauly ) In the case of invasive surgeries painful treatments and tests and medications with serious side effects patients would be unlikely to overutilize them regardless of how low the costs were ( Nyman ) No one would have their gallbladder or pancreas removed undergo chemotherapy or endure a bowel preparation for a colonoscopy simply because the services were free they would only utilize these services to treat or diagnose serious illnesses.2 In other words moral hazard is predominantly a problem when insurance covers routine or nonessential discretionary services ( e.g. cosmetic surgery ) that most economists think should not be covered by insurance. It is not a problem for medical expenditures for the serious costly and unpredictable illnesses and treatments that most economists would agree should be covered by health insurance. For serious illnesses insurance may promote additional spending that is likely to enhance welfare because the patient would have purchased it himself or herself if insurance had given them cash instead of directly paying for the service ( Nyman ) The interposition of third-party payment seems less problematic when we consider that insurers must compete to attract enrollees. In the process they will act as agents for those enrollees in selecting and contracting with high-quality providers through networks or other means and negotiating favorable prices with these providers. The rigors of the market perforce help align private third-party payers actions with buyers preferences. But the same can not be said for third-party public payers. Unlike private insurers which must compete on price public payers do not need to compete. This makes private payers more likely than public payers to act as agents for patients. The incidence of disease may respond to costs in the long run ( see the comparisons of short- and long-run factors below ) For example the price of treating a disease may affect people s behaviors or treatment of antecedent conditions so that the incidence of the disease ultimately changes. Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | Asymmetric Information A common argument for the government s intervention in healthcare markets is that there is asymmetric information that is sellers know more than buyers about the nature and quality of the service that is being sold. Although this is true in virtually any market in industries ranging from legal services to automobile repair academics and policymakers often single out healthcare for government intervention. This is despite the fact that market and nonmarket mechanisms have developed to deal with such information issues usually at far lower costs than government alternatives. A nonmarket institution that Arrow ( ) identified as developing to deal with information asymmetry was professional medical ethics and the trust that physicians would be more motivated by fiduciary obligations to their patients than by profits. Trust is particularly important because patients are prone to rely on their physician s advice regarding what care is needed and where to obtain it ( Chernew et al. ) Whether ethical and professional standards always succeed is a matter of debate but it is likely that they in combination with legal obligations to the patient do alleviate the problem of information asymmetry. The advent of the Internet as a readily available information source and the push for healthcare providers to provide medical information to patients through the now-universal legal requirement for informed consent has decreased the asymmetry problem since Arrow ( ) wrote years ago. In addition because percent of healthcare spending is on patients with chronic conditions ( Buttorff Ruder and Bauman ) these patients have the opportunity to gain knowledge from experience and to be highly informed relative to other markets. They learn which treatments work best for them and which have intolerable side effects which providers are most knowledgeable and responsive and where care can be most readily and cheaply obtained. Moreover most people care deeply about healthcare. They are far more likely to seek out and utilize knowledge about healthcare than about for instance buying a vacuum cleaner. The information asymmetry problem has also been mitigated by the fact that third-party payers rather than patients are often the real buyers of healthcare. Employers in their roles as insurers and purchasers of healthcare and third-party insurers pay for most of the care received and they are far more informed than buyers in most markets. Indeed they often know as much as the sellers about the set of products or services they are considering buying. Many payers explicitly quantify the costs and benefits of what they buy before actually paying for it for example through so called cost-effectiveness analysis. These buyers act as agents for patients by excluding providers or products that do not meet quantitative cost-benefit criteria from networks or | Chapter formularies. The utilization of quantitative purchasing metrics creates a more informed demand side in healthcare. Barriers to Market Entry Arrow ( ) posited that though trust and delegation are the social institutions designed to obviate the problems of informational inequality licensing and educational certification standards were developed to reduce consumers uncertainty as to the quality of the product insofar as this is possible. Arrow acknowledged that this adaptation to market imperfection creates its own problems for the efficient function of the healthcare market barriers to entry which among other problems inefficiently limit the supply of healthcare providers. Licensing and educational certification standards are not unique to healthcare ; our society is awash in licensing and education requirements from those for lawyers to those for hairdressers that restrict market entry. What makes healthcare unique is the pervasiveness of these requirements and the fact that they are imposed by both public ( licensing ) and private parties which often have a financial interest in limiting the supply of their service. Medical schools and residency training programs run by physicians and medical institutions select their enrollees ; and graduation is a prerequisite for licensing. Moreover certification by privately run specialty board societies is often needed to obtain hospital privileges. Licensing and minimum-quality standards can control entry can assure quality in markets where there is information asymmetry between providers that know the quality of their service and consumers who do not or can entail some combination of both ( Stigler ; Leland ) Although they undoubtedly interfere with market efficiency licensing and quality standards seem far more reasonable in medicine than they do for hairdressers. The reason is that trial and error works well when you can recover from the errors but not when the provider s errors can result in irrevocable harm. Arrow ( ) suggested that there are three approaches to dealing with uncertainty about a provider s qualifications and licensing : ( ) Allow licensing and exclude nonqualified entrants ; ( ) certify or label entrants as qualified without compulsory exclusion ; and ( ) do nothing and allow consumers to make their own choices. In an often incorrectly cited statement about these alternatives for licensing not as some have mistakenly maintained ( Reinhardt ) a statement about the need for government-provided health insurance Arrow ( ) wrote It is the general social consensus clearly that the laissez-faire solution for medicine is intolerable. Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | The Inelastic Demand for Healthcare Some argue that the importance of medical care and the often-emergent nature of the care make it impossible for healthcare markets to work efficiently. Patients have neither the time nor the inclination to shop on the basis of price and quality. In circumstances like a trip to the emergency room after a car accident or a heart attack choice is often impossible. Patients may also have little choice when after their initial choice of hospital and physician for elective procedures they become captive to a host of other services and providers that they can not effectively choose. Thus the context in which the service is provided rather than the nature of the service itself often determines whether consumers have the opportunity to make choices. For example a computerized axial tomography ( CT ) scan of the head as part of a workup for an ongoing neurological problem allows making a choice between different service providers but a similar CT scan for an acute head trauma does not. Or patients considering surgery for an aortic aneurysm can consider which surgeon and hospital best suits their needs but do not have the luxury of choice when their aneurysm is rupturing. This issue is reflected in the price elasticity of demand for healthcare services how much the quantity demanded changes in response to changes in price. Although the range of estimates for the price elasticity of demand for healthcare is relatively wide it tends to center on meaning that it is relatively price inelastic ( Ringel et al. ) Studies of the price elasticity of demand for medical services however suggest that cheaper more routine purchases for example preventive care and pharmacy benefits have larger price elasticities than expensive emergent care. Similarly the demand for outpatient services is more price sensitive than the demand for hospital stays ( elasticities respectively of and ) ; and unlike the situation for adults price changes have no effect on the quantity of inpatient services demanded for children. It is reasonable to assume that treatment for serious or emergency care for example treatment for a trauma or for newly diagnosed cancer is very inelastic. This is consistent with the basic economic observation that the price elasticity of demand becomes more elastic over time. In the short run ( e.g. in an emergency ) demand may be relatively inelastic because there may be few substitutes and consumers do not have time to look for alternatives. But elasticity increases in the longer term as substitutes become available and consumers have time to shop. A related way to assess the possibility of healthcare choice and competition is to determine whether healthcare services are shoppable that is whether patients can schedule when they will receive care compare and choose between multiple providers based on price and quality and determine where they will receive services. Despite the issues presented by emergency care people can shop for most healthcare services. A study of people under with employer-provided | Chapter insurance found that percent of healthcare services are potentially shoppable by consumers ( Frost and Newman ) But the study failed to include spending on prescription drugs which are generally shoppable as well. When the percent of healthcare spending that goes to prescription drugs is added in a majority of healthcare spending ( = percent ) is shoppable. In a study of claims by auto workers shoppable services were reported as accounting for percent of total healthcare spending with inpatient shoppable services accounting for percent of total spending and outpatient shoppable services accounting for percent of total costs ( White and Eguchi ) Yet this study like the one cited above also counted prescription drugs as part of total spending but did not include them in the shoppable category. When drugs are added in shoppable goods and services accounted for percent of healthcare spending. The study found that shoppable services are common and constitute a high percentage of the inpatient services provided even though inpatient care is considered less shoppable than outpatient care. Of the highest-spending diagnosis-related groups ( i.e. categories of medical problems that determine payment for hospital stays ) for inpatient care percent were shoppable ; of the highest-spending diagnosis-related groups for outpatient care percent were shoppable. The implication is that nonshoppable services though a minority of services provided are much more expensive and therefore represent a larger percentage of spending. The literature is mixed on whether patients consider information on price and quality in making healthcare choices. Many reports find that patients do not utilize current price information tools to shop for healthcare. In a recent study of one shoppable service ( lower-limb magnetic resonance imaging scans MRIs ) few patients consulted a free price transparency guide ( less than percent ) and they did not select their provider based on overall prices or their out-of-pocket costs ( Chernew et al. ) This is consistent with other studies showing that though a majority of plans now provide pricing information to their enrollees only to percent of enrollees look at it ( Frakt ) A study of employee behavior in the year before and after an online price transparency toll was introduced at two large companies operating in multiple market areas found that only a small percentage of employees used the tool and it was not associated with a decrease in healthcare spending ( Desai et al. ) Nevertheless a study of enrollees in Medicare Part D prescription drug plans indicates that they will respond to a choice of low-cost options by switching from expensive to less expensive plans ( Ketchum Lucarelli and Powers ) Experiments with reference pricing a system of payment where an employer or insurer pays with usual coinsurance and copay provisions up to a maximum reference price for a nonemergency health service and patients are responsible for all costs above that price have found that consumers will shift to lower-price providers ( Robinson Brown and Whaley ) Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | Similarly a systematic review of the literature found limited evidence about the effect of quality information on patient choice and concluded that current attempts to provide comparative data have a limited impact ( Faber et al. ) Nevertheless there is evidence based on a study of three conditions ( heart attacks heart failure and pneumonia ) and two common surgical procedures ( hip and knee replacements ) that together account for a fifth of Medicare hospitalizations and hospital spending that higher-quality hospitals ( as measured by rates of risk-adjusted survival readmissions and adherence to practice guidelines ) attract a greater market share at a point in time and also grow more over time ( Chandra et al. 2016a ) This positive correlation between hospital quality and market share was strongest for patients who were not emergency admissions and therefore had more scope for choice. The reported failure of patients to consider available price and quality information may reflect the quality and ease of access of the information tools assessed rather than the willingness of patients to shop based on price and quality. A confounding factor in assessing healthcare shoppability is the way healthcare consumers shop. After selecting their physician they are prone to rely on his or her advice regarding what care is needed and where to obtain it. In the study of lower-limb MRIs described above the referring physician was the primary determinant of where patients received their MRI and most physicians referred to a narrow group of providers each orthopedist sent on average percent of their referrals to a single radiologist ( Chernew et al. ) This referral pattern could be problematic in the current wave of health system consolidation particularly in vertical integration. Referring physicians who work for hospitals within vertically integrated networks were far more likely to refer to providers within that hospital network and the MRIs performed by hospital-based providers are generally more expensive than MRIs performed by out-of-hospital providers. Having a vertically integrated referring physician raised the cost of an MRI by percent and the amount paid by the patient by percent. Concentration in provider markets leads to market power that interferes with patients ability to shop for insurance and medical services. It is standard economic theory that monopolies and oligopolies lead to an inefficient allocation of resources and to waste. But the government has standard approaches for dealing with this problem like antitrust enforcement and regulatory changes that encourage competition and discourage unfair business advantages. These methods are the appropriate solution for the concentration of market power in healthcare markets not government financing or a takeover. The Administration s report Reforming America s Healthcare System Through Choice and Competition ( HHS ) discusses the important role played by the antitrust divisions of the Federal Trade Commission and the Department of Justice. | Chapter Healthcare Is Not Exceptional Healthcare is not unique in having features that lead to the departures from market efficiency that Arrow outlined years ago or that others have since espoused. Most people know far less about the workings of their car than their auto mechanic does. And there is uncertainty about when a person will have an accident or suffer a car breakdown and whether the mechanic s intervention will successfully restore the car s functions. Barriers to market entry in the form of licensing and education requirements cover hundreds of different professions and service providers often with little demonstrable gain. And healthcare is not the only market where there is relatively inelastic demand. The question for healthcare as well as for every sector of the economy is : What is the optimal way to deal with market inefficiencies ? Government intervention is not the only or even an obvious answer and it can be as inefficient and costly as private market failures often even more so. Market failure is ubiquitous in the sense that all the conditions for perfect competition are rarely achieved so failure occurs to a greater or lesser extent throughout the economy. Various types of failures can be thought of as externalities that is as nonmonetary effects not taken into account in the decisionmaking process when parties engage in transactions ( Zerbe and McCurdy ) The question then becomes how to minimize the transaction costs to eliminate or minimize the externalities. The relationship between hospital quality and market share described above suggests that competition and market forces which would normally exert pressure on low-productivity firms to become more efficient shrink or exit the market are playing a role in healthcare services ( Chandra et al. 2016a ) Another study found that despite the conventional wisdom that idiosyncratic features of the healthcare sector like consumer ignorance of quality and the lack of price sensitivity resulting from health insurance would lead to wide variation in healthcare productivity the dispersion of productivity across hospitals treating heart attacks is similar to or smaller than the productivity dispersion across a large number of U.S. manufacturing industries ( Chandra et al. 2016b ) Because productivity dispersion has been shown both theoretically and empirically to decrease with greater competition this suggests that healthcare may not be more insulated from demand-side competitive pressures than other sectors. Taken together these studies suggest that contrary to the long tradition of healthcare exceptionalism in health economics the healthcare sector may have more in common with traditional sectors subject to standard market forces than is often assumed ( Chandra et al. 2016b ) Redistribution and Merit Goods Although less often discussed by economists a legitimate justification for the government s intervention in healthcare is that healthcare is a merit good Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | whose consumption is not only valued by patients who consume it but also by the third parties that finance this consumption. Broadly speaking a merit good is one for which society has made a judgment that the merits ( or demerits ) of a particular good or service require superseding consumer sovereignty with an alternative norm ( Durlauf and Blume ) This occurs when society makes a judgment that the good will be underconsumed in a free market economy because of a divergence between the private benefits individuals take into account and the actual benefits to the public. Such goods should be subsidized so that consumption does not entirely depend on ability and willingness to pay.3 Virtually every high-income country including the United States has made a collective judgment that healthcare and health insurance provide greater utility than some consumers can afford. American society through the political process has therefore been willing to redistribute income to subsidize healthcare for low-income people with the efficient level of distribution determined by the preferences of the population. Under such merit motives providing healthcare in kind through programs like Medicaid rather than through cash transfers to people who make purchases based on their own preferences is optimal and efficiency enhancing. This creates the reverse situation from the moral hazard problem where pricing below cost decreases efficiency by inducing beneficiaries to consume more healthcare than they normally would. Under merit motives such pricing below cost does not create moral hazard and indeed enhances efficiency ( Mulligan and Philipson ) However this sort of paternalistically motivated merit good transfer program may be far less progressive than a conventional analysis of lump sum income transfers would suggest. Despite international agreement that governments have a role in funding to a greater or lesser extent health insurance few countries ( the United Kingdom being the notable exception ) actually pay for and provide healthcare for all. And a survey of countries including both developed and developing ones ( i.e. China and India ) shows that they all allow private funding and provisions of healthcare and private health insurance ( Mossialos et al. ) Budgetary constraints and societal priorities and preferences for how to utilize limited resources impose a practical limit on merit motives. Several States after enacting legislation ( Vermont in ) having failed ballot initiatives Merit goods should not be confused with public goods which must be provided by the government because the private market will not supply them. Public goods differ from private goods ( including merit goods ) because they are nonexcludable i.e. the supplier of the good can not prevent people who do not pay for it from consuming it and they are nonrival i.e. consumption by one person does not make the good unavailable to others ( Durlauf and Blume ) The classic example is national defense. In protecting the Nation from attack for one person we can not easily exclude others from being protected even if they are unwilling to pay. One person s consumption of protection does not lessen the amount of protection others can consume. Healthcare in contrast is both excludable and rival. | Chapter ( Colorado in ) or experiencing stalled legislation ( California in ) have not followed through on single-payer healthcare initiatives because of financing concerns ( Weiner Rosenquist Hartman ) Current Proposals That Decrease Choice and Competition This section discusses current proposals to increase the government s involvement in healthcare that are partly motivated by the view that competition and free choice can not work in healthcare. Here we assess the proposals by many members of Congress for Medicare for All that would nationalize payments for the healthcare sector which makes up more than a sixth of the U.S. economy. Some claim that only the government can take advantage of economies of scale in healthcare and that a government healthcare monopoly will be more productive by avoiding waste on administrative costs advertising costs and profits and by using its bargaining power to obtain ( i.e. dictate ) better deals from healthcare providers. A recent proposal sponsored or cosponsored by members of Congress ( S. ; H.R. ) titled Medicare for All ( M4A ) would distribute healthcare for free ( i.e. without cost sharing ) through a monopoly government health insurer that would centrally set all prices paid to suppliers such as doctors and hospitals. This proposal would make it unlawful for a private business to sell health insurance or for a private employer to offer health insurance to its employees. Although President Obama promised contrary to fact that consumers could keep their health insurance plan under the ACA M4A takes the opposite approach : All private health insurance plans will be prohibited after a four-year transition period. Instead of relying on competition and individual choice to control prices M4A would lower them by fiat. M4A s ban on private competition would be even more restrictive than healthcare plans in other countries and other government programs in the United States. For example the government does not ban private schools even though it collects taxes to run a public school system. Education providers a.k.a. teachers can still work at private schools and parents can forgo free public education and pay private school tuition. Under the M4A bill patients would have no insurance alternatives. Health providers though not government employees would have no choice but to receive their income and instructions from the Federal government or from the relatively few people who could afford to purchase expensive medical services without insurance. A major issue for M4A is the low productivity of government programs in translating tax revenues into outputs valued by participants such as improved health. This problem is common with in-kind programs like government-provided healthcare where beneficiaries often do not value the healthcare that is Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | provided as much as the money that is spent on it. According to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ( CMS ) in about $ was spent per U.S. Medicaid beneficiary. If Medicaid beneficiaries were given this spending to allocate as they see best most would not spend it all on health insurance. In the Oregon Medicaid expansion experiment Finkelstein Hendren and Luttmer ( ) found that Medicaid enrollees only valued each additional $ of government Medicaid spending at $ to $ ( also see Gallen ) Similarly a study of Medicaid-like coverage provided through Massachusetts low-income health insurance exchange found that most enrollees valued their coverage at less than half its cost ( Finkelstein Mahoney and Notowidigdo ) A second issue is inefficient financing. The price paid to this government monopoly in health insurance the analogue to the revenue received by private plans would be determined through tax policy. M4A will be neither more efficient nor cheaper than the current system and it could adversely affect health. As we show below evidence on the productivity and effectiveness of single-payer systems suggests that M4A would reduce longevity and health particularly among the elderly while only minimally increasing the fraction of the population with health insurance. In the near term it would lead to shortages and decreased access to care. And in the long-run M4A could decrease quality by decreasing innovation. A smaller economy would be another likely adverse effect due to M4A s disincentives to work and earn. The CEA has calculated that if M4A were financed solely through higher taxes it would reduce long-run gross domestic product ( GDP ) by percent and household incomes after taxes and health expenditures by percent ( see chapter of this Report for further discussion ) Implications for the Value of the Program and Health Outcomes M4A would replace the existing private and public system for financing healthcare insurance which includes private group insurance for about half the population ; government insurance for lower-income households with essentially zero out-of-pocket expenses in the Medicaid program covering percent of the population ; Medicare for the elderly and nonelderly disabled covering percent of the population including traditional Medicare that has cost sharing in the form of deductibles and coinsurance privately run Medicare Advantage plans that compete against other advantage plans and traditional Medicare for enrollees and insure about a third of Medicare recipients and privately run Medicare Part D plans for prescription drug coverage ; and the individual nongroup market covering percent of the population consisting of the ACA exchanges and nonexchange plans ( Kaiser Family Foundation 2017a 2017b ) The existing system also provides uncompensated emergency care because the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act requires hospitals to treat anyone coming to their emergency departments regardless | Chapter of their insurance status or ability to pay and uncompensated nonemergency care delivered by various providers. Therefore changing the financing of health would leave limited room to improve health among U.S. citizens by expanding insurance coverage. The current system includes some non Medicaid eligible citizens who remain uninsured but by all estimates they are healthy people which is why they choose not to purchase an ACA plan ( CBO ) M4A would determine quality and productivity through centrally planned rules and regulations. As opposed to a market with competition if a patient did not like the tax charged or the quality of the care provided by the government monopoly he or she would have no other insurance options. In addition price competition in healthcare itself as opposed to health insurance would be eliminated because all the prices paid to providers and suppliers of healthcare would be set centrally by the single payer. Despite its name of Medicare for All the proposed plan differs from the currently popular Medicare program by eliminating cost sharing ; by preventing private health plans from competing as in the Medicare Advantage and Part D programs ; by preventing private markets from supplementing the public program ; and according to the bill in the House of Representatives by prohibiting provider institutions from participating in the program unless they are public or not-for-profit entities. Moreover even if M4A made no changes to Medicare operations it still would have the problem of taking a program that functions reasonably well for about a sixth of the population and making it work on a vastly larger scale. Under the existing system the primary financial limits on healthcare utilization are copayments coinsurance and deductibles which keep premiums lower by discouraging overconsumption of free healthcare at the time of service. M4A would eliminate these out-of-pocket expenses for everyone. If the aggregate supply of healthcare were held unchanged M4A would reduce health and longevity by reallocating healthcare from high-value uses to lowervalue ones. In addition M4A would reduce the aggregate supply of healthcare by reducing payments to providers by discouraging innovation and by using a centralized bureaucracy to allocate resources. We expect that healthcare for the elderly people who are currently covered by Medicare would be especially adversely affected by decreased access to care and decreased longevity. Here we illustrate the evidence for the relationship between singlepayer programs healthcare and health outcomes including short-run effects assuming that it has no impact on medical innovation as well as long-run effects that incorporate changes in incentives for innovation and the resulting impact on future health. Economies of Scale and Administrative Costs in Insurance Many M4A advocates argue that the major benefit of adopting single-payer healthcare would be that the costs of producing health insurance by a state Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | monopoly would be lower than under competition. Some evidence on this comes from the literature on the so-called administrative costs of health insurance that do not directly go toward paying for care for beneficiaries. In order to hold regulation constant Sood and others ( ) analyzed administrative costs within a single State California. They considered administrative costs and profit levels as the residual of the premium revenue spent directly on beneficiaries healthcare. They found that in private plans spent about percent on administrative costs and had profit levels that were significantly below the average for all Standard & Poor s companies ( vs. percent ) which given the existence of government plans makes profits of only or percent of overall health spending. The CBO ( ) found that private plans spent percent of their premium revenues on administrative expenses and that percent were profits. In contrast Sood and others ( ) found that Medicare costs were percent plus the administrative costs of intermediaries that collect premiums and process Medicare claims. However the putative efficiency of Medicare administration by the CMS compared with private insurers may simply be a product of inadequate accounting. Medicare patients the elderly the disabled and patients with end-stage renal disease are sicker and costlier than the younger enrollees in private plans. Medicare s administrative costs as a share of medical spending are smaller mainly because medical spending is higher for the Medicare population compared with the population below that is privately insured nearly two and a half times higher per person ( Book ) In addition insurers administrative costs do not rise proportionally with total health claim costs most administrative expenses are fixed per program or are incurred on a perbeneficiary basis and claims processing costs represent a very small share of administrative costs. If we look at administrative costs per enrollee we find that Medicare is more inefficient than private insurers ( Kessler ) Sood and others ( ) found that Medicare spends $ per enrollee on administrative costs close to the $ in for-profit plans and actually above the $ spent across all California health plans. Similarly Book ( ) found that as a proportion of total costs in Medicare s administrative costs were percent compared with percent for private insurance ; but Medicare s administrative costs per person were $ compared with $ for private insurance. An additional reason that administrative spending by private insurers artificially appears higher than that by the CMS for Medicare is that private insurers administrative costs include State premium taxes from which the CMS is exempt and directly provided medical services such as disease management services and nurse consultation telephone lines that are not counted as paid medical claims ( Book ) Philipson ( ) found that the focus on administrative costs omits other important costs and forgone opportunities of the state monopoly approach. Under a government monopoly health insurer the plan is financed with taxes | Chapter rather than voluntarily paid premiums. As is discussed below the economic cost of taxes is not merely the revenue that arrives in the Treasury but also the distortions of household and business decisions induced by taxes. This applies to administrative costs as well so that $ in administrative costs in the private sector is equivalent to about $ in administrative costs in the public sector. In addition claims of Medicare superiority ignore the vital role that private administrative expenses such as marketing profits and utilization controls play in driving competition and innovation in the marketplace. Administrative costs also help prevent fraud and improper payments which are estimated to be about and percent of Medicare and Medicaid spending respectively ( HHS ) Furthermore private plans reduce overall costs by aggressively reviewing healthcare utilization. As a result of competition among plans lower overall expenses are passed on to consumers as lower premiums even though a greater percentage of those expenses may be administrative. In contrast a public program does not engage in premium competition. Beneficiaries workers and shareholders of private plans would not tolerate the higher premiums or lower wages or dividends that would be the result of lax utilization controls or high levels of fraud. Healthcare providers as distinct from health plans also spend significant time and resources on administrative costs ( Woolhandler Campbell and Himmelstein ; Himmelstein ) Some of these costs serve the economic functions noted above such as controlling fraud and overutilization ; but others are specifically related to billing. It has been asserted ( Weisbart ) that a single-payer system would eliminate many billing-related expenses but these savings may not materialize because providers would likely need to struggle with voluminous new Federal regulations issued to deal with the myriad different circumstances that could arise among the million people who would be on the single government plan. It is unlikely that a government-run monopoly s efforts to lower healthcare costs by eliminating profits and marketing would be any more effective than government monopoly efforts in other sectors of the economy. In many other industries economists have generally found that production costs under a monopoly are higher than with competition. Monopolies that are owned in whole or in part by the government incur higher costs than private corporations that operate competitively. The seminal research by Boardman and Vining ( ) found robust evidence that government-owned and mixed enterprises are less efficient than private corporations. More recent work has examined the inefficiencies and higher costs incurred by public monopolies in the education Overpayments were about $ billion in Medicare Fee-for-Service and $ billion in Medicaid. Underpayments only accounted for percent and percent respectively of the programs. The Medicaid Fraud Control Unit reports ( Murrin ) that over the last five years fraud has accounted for nearly percent of all its convictions. Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | and corrections sectors ( Hoxby ; Gaes ) Once these factors are taken into account Medicare s efficiency advantage becomes illusory even if abnormal profits and marketing were eliminated from the private sector. Cross-Country Evidence on the Effects of Universal Healthcare on Health Outcomes and the Elderly Proponents of M4A often refer to European-style programs of socialized medicine as their role model but the European programs appear to deliver less healthcare to the elderly and result in worse health outcomes for them.5 Many of these programs ration older patients access to expensive procedures directly or through waiting times ( Cullis Jones and Propper ) Such age discrimination in coverage occurs because there is no competition between plans under a monopoly. If there were presumably private plans which would be outlawed under M4A would emerge to offer the care not adequately covered by the government monopoly. Current Medicare beneficiaries would likely be hurt by M4A s expansion of the size of the eligible program population. The evidence for a trade-off between universal and senior healthcare is supported by both the European single-payer experience that limits care for the elderly compared with the U.S. along with the recent domestic U.S. reforms under the ACA that reduced projected Medicare spending by $ billion to help fund expansions for younger age groups ( CBO ) The United States all-cause mortality rates relative to those of other developed countries improve dramatically after the age of years. In before Medicare the U.S. ranked below most EU countries for longevity among those age yet above them among for those age and higher. This pattern persists today. Ho and Preston ( ) argue that a higher deployment of life-saving technologies for older patients in the U.S. compared with other developed countries leads to better diagnosis and treatment of diseases of older people and greater longevity. The availability and utilization of healthcare are particularly important for cancer longevity. Cancer is the leading cause of death in many developed countries especially among older individuals and it constitutes an important component of overall U.S. healthcare spending. Philipson and others ( ) found that U.S. cancer patients live longer than cancer patients in EU countries after the same diagnosis due to the additional spending on higherquality cancer care in the U.S. Figure shows the results for life expectancy after diagnosis.6 Ho and Preston ( ) point out that in Europe where the proportion of surgically treated patients declines with age five-year survival Note that a number of European countries including Belgium Germany and Switzerland have universal healthcare without having a single-payer system. Between the two continents difference not attributable to a different propensity to screen for cancer in the U.S. | Chapter Figure Average Survival from a Cancer Diagnosis United States Life expectancy postdiagnosis ( years ) European Union Source : Philipson et al. ( ) Note : The results are standardized by age gender and cancer site. EU countries for which survival data were consistently available over the analysis period are included : Finland France Germany Iceland Norway Slovakia Slovenia Scotland Sweden and Wales. rates for colorectal cancer are lower for elderly patients than younger patients. But in the United States where utilization of surgery does not decline with age colorectal cancer survival rates do not decline for elderly patients. This effect is not confined to cancer treatment. For ischemic heart disease the world s leading cause of death the use of cardiac catheterization percutaneous coronary angioplasty and coronary artery bypass grafting declines with patients age but declines more steeply in other developed countries than in the United States. Compared with these developed countries the U.S. has a lower case fatality rate for acute myocardial infarction ( the acute manifestation of ischemic disease ) for older persons but not for younger persons age to ( Ho and Preston ) This disease-specific evidence is more informative about the benefits of healthcare than often-discussed cross-country comparisons of nationally aggregated outcomes such as overall population longevity and aggregate healthcare spending. There are many determinants of overall population health other than healthcare such as diet exercise genes and violence that differ across countries ( CEA 2018b ) These factors may lead to lower U.S. longevity even while U.S. healthcare is of higher quality. The fact that many wealthy foreigners who could afford to obtain care anywhere in the world come to the U.S. for specialized care is perhaps the strongest indication of its superior quality. The general pattern of medical tourism is that the United States exports highquality care while importing low-cost care ( Woodman ) Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | The Lower Quality of Universal Coverage in Terms of Reduced Availability Another major quality attribute of healthcare is how long one must wait to receive it. The highest-quality care may be ineffective if there are delays in diagnosis or treatment. For example delays in diagnosing or treating cancer will cause decreased survival and increased suffering regardless of how good the care is. This major dimension of the quality of care may fall with government expansions of care as they generate excess demand and thereby may induce queues with waiting times to access care. Because it is free at the time of service the single-payer universalcoverage system gives consumers more reason to consume healthcare ( Arrow ; Pauly ) The Rand Health Insurance Experiment documented that as the amount of coinsurance decreased utilization of medical care rose ( Newhouse ; Brook et. al. ) M4A cuts the out-of-pocket expenses that people in private insurance and the current Medicare system pay ( about percent of the insured population ) to zero ( Kaiser Family Foundation 2017a ) In addition when it cuts provider reimbursement rates a single-payer system gives the healthcare industry less reason to supply it.7 Something must determine who gets the scarce provider resources and quality degradation is the typical way that markets make this determination when prices are unable to do so ( Mulligan and Tsui ) The quality degradation may take the form of shorter appointment times longer patient travel times or longer waiting times to receive care. Waiting times for nonemergency or elective surgery were shorter for adults ( and older ) in the U.S. than in other developed countries especially those with a single-payer system. Table shows that percent of Americans waited less than month after being advised that they needed surgery. The comparable figures for Canada and the United Kingdom two countries frequently cited as models by M4A advocates were percent and percent respectively. Similarly table shows that only two countries ( Germany at percent ; and Switzerland at percent ) had a slightly higher percentage of patients able to see a specialist within weeks of referral than the U.S. ( percent ) and neither of these countries has a single-payer system ( Mossialos et al. ) The figure for Canada was percent and that for the U.K. was percent. In a recent report the CEA ( 2018c ) pointed out that waiting times for seniors to see a specialist in the U.S. were shorter than in single-payer countries ( figure ) Some argue that this shows that Medicare and thus its distant cousin Medicare for All works and should be extended to everyone. This is a misinterpretation. M4A reduces payments to providers ( subtitle B of Title VI of the Senate Medicare for All Act of ) | Chapter Table Adult Waiting Times for Nonemergency or Elective Surgery Four or more months ( percent ) Do not know or decline to answer ( percent ) Total ( count ) Netherlands New Zealand Norway Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Country Less than one month ( percent ) Between one and four months ( percent ) Australia Canada France Germany Source : Commonwealth Fund Survey. Note : Respondents answered the survey question After you were advised that you needed surgery how many weeks did you have to wait for the non-emergency or elective surgery ? Table Adult Waiting Times for Specialist Appointments Less than four At least four weeks weeks ( percent ) ( percent ) Country Australia Do not know or decline to answer ( percent ) Total ( count ) Canada France Germany Netherlands New Zealand Norway Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Source : Commonwealth Fund Survey. Note : Respondents answered the survey question After you were advised to see or decided to see a doctor in specialist health care/specialist ( or consultant ) how many weeks did you have to wait for an appointment ? Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | Figure Seniors Who Waited at Least Four Weeks to See a Specialist during the Past Two Years Single payer Non single payer Canada Australia Norway United Kingdom New Zealand Sweden France CMWF average Germany Netherlands Switzerland United States Percent Sources : Canadian Institute for Health Information ; Ghanta ( ) ; Commonwealth Fund survey. Note : Single-payer systems were compiled by Ghanta ( ) from World Health Organization sources. CMWF average refers to the average of the countries in the Commonwealth Fund survey. Results exclude respondents who never attempted to get an appointment. All that figure shows is that the current Medicare system which mixes public and private elements including competition between hundreds of Medicare Advantage plans and between hundreds of Medicare Part D drug plans and public and private financing is superior to foreign single-payer systems ( see chapter for more discussion ) It does not indicate that Medicare is superior to the insurance currently available for the non-Medicare U.S. population. And it has little bearing on what to expect from M4A. M4A is not simply an expansion of Medicare. It is a completely different program that bans private insurance and competition and that anticipates a system-wide lowering of reimbursement levels below private insurance rates. According to the CMS Actuary lowering private provider rates to current Medicare rates would lead to a drop of about percent for hospitals reimbursements and percent for physicians reimbursements by decreases that are scheduled to grow even greater over time due to statutory Medicare payment restraints enacted as part of the ACA and the Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of ( CMS ; Blahous 2018b ) These lower reimbursement rates will undoubtedly prolong waiting times and worsen access to care because providers respond to reimbursement levels. In a study of Medicaid fees every $ change up or down led to a percent change in the same direction in the proportion of patients who could secure an appointment with a new doctor ( Candon et al. ) Even more worrisome Medicare s hospital payment rates are on average so far below hospitals reported costs of providing services | Chapter that the CMS Actuary projects that by over percent of hospitals will lose money treating Medicare patients. If this projection is correct M4A would force percent of hospitals to lose money when treating all their patients ( Blahous 2018b ) One does not need to go abroad to see the problems with single-payer medicine. The Veterans Health Administration ( VHA ) is a publicly funded single-payer system to provide care to military veterans. Its governmentemployed providers particularly medical specialists are underpaid compared with the private market and lack the motivation to provide the care that market competition to produce profits generates. In it was widely reported that the Phoenix VHA facility along with several other facilities had kept large numbers of veterans waiting inordinate amounts of time to receive treatment and that some had died while waiting ( Farmer Hosek and Adamson ) Many of the facilities had falsified records in order to meet the VHA s target of providing appointments within days. Using the VHA s own data outside researchers found tremendous variation in waiting times across VHA facilities. Although most veterans get care within weeks of their preferred appointment dates a significant number wait more than days and only half reported getting care as soon as needed ( Farmer Hosek and Adamson ) The Veterans Access Choice and Accountability Act of created a temporary plan the Choice Program to give veterans the option of receiving care from a private community-based provider when timely care is unavailable from a VHA facility. Unfortunately the program had limited success veterans were still experiencing lengthy actual waiting times for appointments in ( GAO ) In June President Trump signed the VA MISSION Act of to extend funding for the Choice Program and to improve it by consolidating it over the next year with six other programs offering community-based care into the single Veterans Community Care program. This statute aims to minimize the inconsistent experience that veterans receive by requiring the VHA to standardize access to care assess the system s capacity to provide the care required establish a high-performing national network of providers to offset capability gaps and transition the VHA to an integrated healthcare system. A U.S. Single-Payer System Would Have Adverse Long-Run Effects on Global Health through Reduced Innovation There has been much theoretical and empirical economic analysis concluding that lowering prices for innovative industries often has short-run benefits that are dominated by long-run costs. Lowering prices by having a single payer for innovative healthcare technologies is analogous to reducing patent terms for both reduce the return to medical research-and-development ( R&D ) investments. Both have short-term benefits lowering prices for existing technologies but at the cost of reducing the flow of new technologies that ultimately lower the real price of healthcare. Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | The value of healthcare generated by innovation over time exceeds its additional costs ( Cutler ) The lower premiums of the 1970s bought lowerquality care than is available today no one today would settle for a 1970s level of care. Forty years of innovations have raised prices but they have raised the value of healthcare even more. Some innovations are very expensive for example today s specialty drugs and others are relative bargains such as antibiotics new treatments for heart attacks that cost $ in real terms but add a year of life expectancy ( Cutler and McClellan ) and new cancer treatments in the 1980s and 1990s that cost an average of only $ per year of life gained ( Philipson et al. ) Other innovations add little value. Though it is often impossible to know in advance which innovation will be a good value it is imperative to preserve the incentive to innovate so there will continue to be new high-value innovations. Because worldwide innovation relies so heavily on the U.S. market to support it adopting an M4A program would likely adversely affect innovation because the global market for new innovations would shrink. A large body of literature looks at the effects of market size on innovation. For example using the passage of the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and Modernization Act of as a source of variation Blume-Kohout and Sood ( ) find an elasticity with respect to market size of between to for Phase clinical trials. These estimates are well within the range of the work of Acemoglu and Linn ( ) who find an elasticity of for approved new molecular entities. Moreover these results are consistent with evidence on the impact of public policy on market size.8 Although these long-run effects on a reduced pace of innovation are more difficult to quantify they may well be more important than the short-run effects of spending less on elder care. U.S. patients and taxpayers alike have financed the returns on R&D investments to innovators. Unlike other developed countries with single-payer systems which nearly all impose some sort of price controls the U.S. market has less public sector financing and is therefore more open to market forces. In a free market prices of products reflect their value as opposed to prices in government-controlled markets which reflect political trade-offs. Among the nations that belong to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development more than percent of patented pharmaceutical profits come from sales to U.S. patients even though the United States only represents percent of the organization s GDP at purchasing power parity ( CEA 2018a ) Empirical research on pharmaceutical innovation and other industries has shown that R&D investments are positively related to market size. For For example Finkelstein ( ) finds a 2.5-fold increase in the number of new vaccine clinical trials for affected diseases following the adoption of three public health policies aimed at raising vaccination rates and Yin ( ) finds that the introduction of the Orphan Drug Act raised the flow of new clinical trials for rare diseases by percent in the three years following the passage of the policy. | Chapter Figure Effect of U.S. Drug Price Controls on Global Longevity Among Those Age U.S. population EU population Change in life expectancy ( years ) Source : Lakdawalla et al. ( ) Note : Data were estimated by the author based on the Global Pharmaceutical Policy Model. the case of medical innovation evidence suggests that a percent reduction in market size reduces innovation defined as the number of new drugs launched by as much as percent ( Acemoglu and Linn ) Given that future profitability drives investment in this way Lakdawalla and others ( ) examined the impact on medical innovation of the U.S. adopting European-style price controls. The study examined patients over the age of and considered the reduction in R&D and new drugs approved that these price controls would cause. The paper found resulting increases in mortality due to heart disease hypertension diabetes cancer lung disease stroke and mental illness. Given that innovations are financed by world returns that are mostly earned in the U.S. the mortality effects on health were substantial both in the U.S. and in Europe ( figure ) If M4A would lead to the same below-market pharmaceutical prices that other countries have imposed through government price controls it would reduce the world market size and thereby medical innovation and ultimately mean that future patients would forgo the health gains that would have come from these forgone innovations. Financing Medicare for All Apart from M4A s effects on the amount and quality of healthcare provided there is the issue of how it would be financed and what impact this decision would have on the overall economy. The CMS which administers most Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | government-financed healthcare projects that in the private sector will spend $ trillion on private health insurance and $ trillion in outof-pocket health expenses in an economy with a total GDP of $ trillion ( National Health Expenditure Accounts projections ; CEA 2018c ) Because healthcare is free at the time of service to users under M4A and otherwise would not be free for those not enrolled in government programs M4A would increase healthcare utilization at the Federal government s expense. Blahous ( 2018a ) predicts that there would be extra utilization of $ trillion in Adding this figure to the private health insurance and out-ofpocket expenses it would replace would lead to a total addition to Federal spending of $ trillion in Without M4A $ trillion would be percent of GDP or percent of consumption or an average about $ per household ( CEA 2018c ) An even larger amount of Federal health spending would occur if the most comprehensive list of covered services were adopted in reconciling the Senate and House M4A bills. The CEA ( 2018c ) found that paying for M4A solely with uniform spending cuts across all existing Federal programs would require percent across-theboard cuts in Without additional taxes all other Federal programs would need to be cut by more than half. This would imply cuts to Social Security of about $ trillion to ( the existing part of ) Medicare of about $ trillion and to the Defense Department s budget of about $ trillion. If Medicare were exempted percent of Social Security ( about $ trillion per year ) would need to be cut and annual Defense cuts would need to be about $ trillion. Alternatively M4A could be financed solely with taxes. Some argue that the population would be no worse off because these new taxes would simply replace the cost of premiums paid to private sector insurers. This argument ignores the fact that taxation distorts economic activity so that the cost of tax revenues is larger than the revenues. The excess burden or deadweight loss reflects the decreased economic efficiency and product output that exceeds the tax revenue collected. To illustrate if the government imposed a per-passenger tax of $ on air travel it would collect virtually no revenue because almost no one would fly but it would impose a large burden on the population in excess of the revenue collected by replacing air travel with less efficient cars and other types of ground transportation. The existing empirical literature finds that this burden is about cents on the dollar so that the cost of collecting the taxes to fund M4A in a year would be about times the additional revenue needed to fund the larger program ( Feldstein ; Saez Slemrod and Giertz ; Weber ) Between the two extreme funding scenarios funding M4A entirely by cuts in spending or entirely by tax increases lies a middle ground of using The excess burden rate is larger and potentially infinite when considered particularly large increases in revenue as with M4A. Also see chapter of this Report for additional perspective on the excess burden of M4A. | Chapter a combination of both spending cuts and tax increases. This approach was followed in the recent Federal healthcare expansion under the ACA whereby funding was split between tax increases and spending cuts to Federal healthcare programs ( CBO ) It is unclear whether sufficient tax revenue could be collected for the much larger proposed M4A program given the existence of tax avoidance behavior particularly by the higher-income populations that provide the largest share of total Federal tax revenues. If the amount of maximum revenue collected the height of the so-called Laffer curve were below what would be required in new funding then spending cuts would be required regardless of whether lawmakers would prefer to finance the entire program with taxes. The Administration s Actions to Increase Choice and Competition in Health Insurance In contrast to policies curtailing market forces advocated in Medicare for All proposals this section details the Trump Administration s efforts so far to improve choice and competition in health insurance markets in order to help them better serve lower- and middle-income people. As part of its broader policy agenda to deregulate markets the Trump Administration has completed three deregulatory reforms that expand consumers health insurance options : ( ) reducing through the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of the ACA s individual mandate penalty to zero ; ( ) a June rule expanding the ability of small businesses to form association health plans ( AHPs ) to provide low-cost group health insurance to their employees ; and ( ) an August rule expanding the term renewability and usefulness of shortterm limited duration insurance ( STLDI ) plans. As discussed above several market failures are relevant to health insurance. Taking the relevant market failures into account we use the standard methods of welfare economics to assess the potential efficiency gains to affected consumers and taxpayers. We find that these deregulatory actions will generate benefits to Americans worth about $ billion over the next years ( CEA ) The reforms will benefit lower- and middle income consumers and all taxpayers but leave small premium increases on some middle- and higher-income consumers. The benefits of giving a large group of consumers more insurance options far outweighs the projected costs imposed on the smaller group that will pay higher premiums. These reforms do not sabotage the ACA ; they provide a more efficient focus of tax-funded care to those in need. In this section we examine in depth the most productive of the reforms elimination of the individual mandate penalty which will benefit Americans by $ billion including the deadweight cost of taxation in ( when the markets will have largely adjusted to the reform ) and $ billion between Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | and Though we will briefly mention the other two reforms AHPs and STLDIs they are discussed at length in chapter The Stability of the Nongroup Health Insurance Market The ACA s proponents argued that three key components of the statute were essential and had to work together for the act to be economically viable the so-called three-legged stool ( see Gruber ) The first leg of the stool is guaranteed issue and community rating whereby consumers must be offered coverage without the premium varying because of preexisting condition or health status.10 The second leg of the stool is the individual mandate penalty on the remaining uninsured population so that healthy consumers do not wait until they are ill to sign up. The third leg of the stool is a system of subsidies so that lower- and middle-income consumers can afford coverage. Under this view deregulatory reforms that expand health insurance options beyond the ACA s insurance markets risk destabilizing the ACA insurance markets. The relatively healthy consumers who might best respond to expanded options are seen as critical sources of ACA insurance-market revenue because their premiums are expected to exceed their healthcare claims.11 However several features of the insurance market undermine this argument. Most important the claim that the individual mandate is indispensable is flawed due to the large ACA premium subsidies that most ACA exchange enrollees receive. The view that deregulation sabotages the ACA is based on the assumption that the premiums paid by unsubsidized healthy consumers are a critical source of exchange revenue.12 Federal subsidies are far more important. Figure displays the annual premiums on the exchanges as a function of family income and composition. Only consumers who are ineligible for premium subsidies those with incomes above percent of the Federal poverty line on the exchanges and everyone with ACA-compliant coverage off the exchanges actually pay the entire premium. There were million people in the nongroup market in the first quarter of million on the exchanges and only off the exchanges in both ACA-compliant and noncompliant plans ( Kaiser Family Foundation ) In only percent of consumers ( million ) who purchased insurance on the ACA exchanges Premiums are allowed to vary within a narrow range based upon age ( : adjustment ) and smoking status. When it adopted the ACA Congress itself evidently believed that the individual mandate was necessary to a regulatory system that included guaranteed issue and community rating. Congress expressly found that the individual mandate was essential to creating effective health insurance markets in which improved health insurance products that are guaranteed issue and do not exclude coverage of preexisting conditions can be sold and that the absence of the [ individual mandate ] would undercut Federal regulation of the health insurance market ( U.S.C. ) This is closely related to adverse selection : The departure of a healthy person from a risk pool is purported to be adverse in terms of reducing plan premium revenue more than it reduces claims. Due to the ACA subsidies adverse selection will operate differently in that subsidized healthy persons will have less incentive to leave the ACA exchanges. | Chapter did not receive subsidies and therefore paid the full premium.13 The other percent of exchange consumers ( million ) received subsidies through the ACA s premium tax credits and so paid just a fraction of the full premium. Many of these subsidized people also received cost-sharing reduction subsidies to reduce their out-of-pocket costs if their income was between and percent of the Federal poverty line and they purchased a Silver exchange plan. ACA-compliant coverage is sold both on and off the ACA s exchanges but subsidies are only available for coverage purchased on the exchanges. Including the two types of ACA-compliant individual market coverage ( on and off exchanges ) that share a common risk pool and have the same premiums about percent of consumers who purchased ACA-compliant individual insurance paid the full premium in The percentage of unsubsidized consumers in the individual market has fallen every year from to the present as premiums have risen. The regulatory reforms expand insurance options. To the extent that the consumers who leave the ACA exchanges for these options are healthier than average their departure will somewhat raise gross premiums for those who remain on the exchanges. But for subsidized consumers who remain on the exchanges the premium increases will be mainly paid by taxpayers not the consumers themselves. Although the CBO projects that setting the individual mandate tax penalty to zero will encourage healthier-than-average enrollees to leave the ACA exchanges the CBO also projects that their departure will reduce Federal expenditures on ACA premium subsidies from through by $ billion ( CBO ; Gruber ) Of course the CBO s projections of Federal expenditures are uncertain. But figure shows the origin of these projections : For consumers with family incomes less than percent of the Federal poverty line the individual mandate penalty taxes them for turning down large amounts of government assistance. The role of the ACA premium subsidies in stabilizing the exchanges has been acknowledged by others including the previous Administration ( CEA ; Sacks ; Collins and Gunja ) The premium subsidies stabilizing role is consistent with the experience of the past few years in which rising premiums did not curtail demand. ACA exchange premiums have almost doubled in just a few years ( figure ) though there has been hardly any change in Grandfathered plans that were in effect when the ACA was passed are exempt from some of the ACA s provisions. The fraction of workers with employer-sponsored insurance enrolled in grandfathered plans decreased from percent in to percent in ( Kaiser Family Foundation ) During the transitional period another set of grandmothered plans have also been exempt from certain ACA provisions. Taking into account all the effects of setting the individual mandate penalty to zero the CBO projects a $ billion reduction in Federal expenditures from through $ billion of which will be a reduction in Federal expenditures on Medicaid ( CBO ) Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | Figure Premium Costs as a Function of Household Income Premium ( dollars ) Unsubsidized premium Subsidized premium Income ( dollars ) Source : Kaiser Family Foundation Subsidy Calculator. Note : Data represent the national average premium for a family of four with two 50-yearold adults and two teenagers with no tobacco use. exchange enrollment.15 Figure demonstrates that the U.S. Treasury ( i.e. taxpayers ) shouldered almost the entire premium increase for ACA plans. Even though gross premiums almost doubled between and lower- and some middle-income consumers were insulated from the effects of these increases by the subsidies. Although there may also have been other factors at work these trends are consistent with the CBO s ( ) projections that further increases in the full exchange premiums ( usually referred to as gross premiums ) will not destabilize the ACA exchange markets. Between and benchmark ACA premiums dropped by percent. The individual mandate penalty adds an unnecessary leg to the ACA stool resulting in economic inefficiencies. Comprehensive insurance particularly with extremely low cost sharing could cause patients to overconsume healthcare that provides little benefit relative to the cost the moral hazard problem discussed above.16 The significant decline in premium subsidies as income rises also distorts labor markets by taxing income and some types of Figure does not include cost-sharing reduction payments or reinsurance payments. Fiedler ( ) calculates that cost-sharing reduction payments were equivalent to about percent of average exchange premiums in Part of the premium increase between and was attributable to the nonpayment of cost-sharing reduction payments in The Economic Report of the President ( CEA 2018b ) discusses the large body of evidence that health insurance coverage and presumably the additional healthcare consumed by consumers as a result of it provides little health benefit. | Chapter Figure Nominal Gross Premiums per Member per Year for Subsidized Enrollees Dollars Premium tax credit Out-of-pocket premium cost Plan Year Source : Kaiser Family Foundation Subsidy Calculator. Note : Data represent the average national premium for a single nonsmoking 50-year-old at percent of the Federal poverty line with no children. full-time employment and introduces another marriage penalty in the tax code ( Mulligan ) Consumers have heterogeneous preferences for risk smooth cash flow and range of coverage. As such it is wasteful to use a tax penalty to coerce people to purchase insurance that does not meet their needs ( Mulligan and Philipson ) Many health insurance simulation models ignore moral hazard and any effect of health insurance policy on labor market equilibrium. Those simulations therefore rule out by assumption many of the benefits of allowing consumers to voluntarily leave ACA-compliant plans ( Gallen and Mulligan ) In sum the three-legged-stool justification for the individual mandate tax penalty is not consistent with the basic facts of how the ACA works in practice. The penalty and other restrictions on consumer choice are not needed to support the guaranteed issue of community-rated health insurance to all consumers including those with preexisting conditions. The ACA premium subsidies stabilize the exchanges. Setting the Individual Tax Mandate Penalty to Zero The ACA s individual mandate imposed a monetary penalty on nonexempt consumers who did not have ACA-compliant coverage. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of involved a tax cut on the uninsured as well as on people purchasing noncompliant ACA coverage by setting the individual mandate penalty to zero Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | Table IRS Reporting of Individual Mandate Payments Tax year Returns paying IM penalty ( millions ) IM revenue ( billions of dollars ) Mean penalty paid ( dollars ) Minimum penalty ( dollars ) Exemptions ( millions ) Sources : Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) ; Busch and Houchens ( ) ; CEA calculations. Note : IM = individual mandate. The minimum penalty is the minimum statutory penalty per personyear. The uninsured per penalty paid is the uninsured person-years per return paying penalty. effective in the tax year ( Stat. ) Part of our analysis is the amount of penalty revenue that would have been collected over the next years if the act had not set the penalty to zero. We took the revenue projections from the CBO and noted their consistency with the actual collections for tax year which was the first year when the ACA put the full penalty in place. In that year about million Federal tax returns included individual mandate payments down from million for tax year ( table ) The average penalty paid per household return was $ The mandate tax penalty is a regressive tax that falls more heavily on relatively low-income people the majority of those who paid the tax penalty in were lower- and middle-income consumers with incomes less than percent of the Federal poverty line. Analyses of removing the individual mandate penalty provided a range of estimates of the impact on the number of insured consumers and on gross ACA premiums. The estimates refer to increases in the full ACA premiums ( gross of subsidies ) not the out-of-pocket ( net ) premiums enrollees pay after taking into account the premium subsidies they receive. The CBO ( ) has projected that setting the mandate tax penalty to zero will result in million fewer consumers with ACA-compliant nongroup insurance coverage in million fewer in and million fewer each year from through Because the enrollees who leave ACA-compliant individual coverage are projected to be healthier than those remaining the CBO has also projected that gross premiums would rise by an average of percent. Nevertheless the CBO ( ) projects that the budgetary impact of setting the mandate penalty to zero will be to reduce the Federal deficit by $ billion which includes a $ billion reduction in Federal expenditures on ACA premium subsidies. A Commonwealth Fund study analyzed the impact of setting the individual mandate penalty to zero under scenarios ( Eibner and Nowak ) Each scenario reflected different assumptions about how people respond to financial and nonfinancial factors. In this study s baseline scenario The CBO also projects voluntary reductions in Medicaid enrollment and enrollment in employment-based coverage. The CEA is still studying these effects which were not included in the analysis. | Chapter setting the mandate penalty to zero was estimated to reduce enrollment in the nongroup market by million in and increase the gross premium for bronze plans on the ACA exchanges by percent. We use the CBO s estimates which involve a larger change in enrollment ( million fewer enrollees ) and a larger increase in premiums ( percent ) than the baseline scenario that the Commonwealth Fund estimates. A Cost-Benefit Analysis of Setting the Individual Mandate Tax Penalty to Zero Setting the ACA s individual mandate penalty to zero benefits society by allowing people to choose not to have ACA-compliant health coverage without facing a tax penalty and by saving taxpayers money if fewer consumers purchase subsidized ACA coverage. We estimate that in when the CBO ( ) projects that markets will have largely adjusted to the changes setting the mandate penalty to zero will yield net benefits worth $ billion including the excess burdens of taxation. The total net benefit of the reform over the period through comes to $ billion. The benefits grow over time so the benefits in are estimated to be lower than average annual benefits over the 10-year horizon. Without the tax penalty consumers will likely reduce their ACA-compliant coverage which refers in this section to coverage purchased on the ACA exchanges and coverage obtained outside the exchanges as long as it complies with the provisions of the ACA. Our analysis recognized that consumers place some value on the ACA-compliant coverage they give up.18 To the extent that these consumers are healthier than average including them in the insurance pool also benefits others in the pool by reducing the premium needed to cover the pool s average healthcare expenditures. At the same time society incurs costs to provide health insurance coverage. Providing insurance to those who value it most highly nets large social benefits. Insuring more and more of the population nets progressively smaller social benefits because it covers enrollees who do not value the coverage as highly. When insuring even more of the population requires providing insurance to enrollees who value the insurance at less than what it costs society on net the social benefits become negative. This is captured in figure by the downward-sloping net marginal social benefits ( MSB ) schedule which shows that as enrollment increases net social benefits decline and eventually become negative. The MSB schedule is the In keeping with much of the cost-benefit literature the CEA used the Kaldor-Hicks criterion which means that all citizens benefits and costs are measured in dollars with all citizens totals getting the same weight. In accord with this focus on Kaldor-Hicks economic efficiency our analysis estimated the value of health insurance coverage to the consumers themselves. Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | Figure Benefits of Setting the Individual Mandate Penalty to Zero Net social benefit ( dollars ) million A Marginal social benefit Enrollees whose coverage is compliant with the Affordable Care Act cumulative distribution of net social benefits ; for illustrative purposes only the MSB schedule in figure is linear.19 Our cost-benefit analysis summarized by the MSB schedule portrayed in figure uses the standard methods of welfare economics. Consumers decisions about whether to have ACA-compliant coverage reveal the value consumers place on this coverage. The value consumers place on insurance reflects their expected healthcare expenditures and the value they place on reducing their financial risk. Some consumers who choose not to have ACA-compliant coverage might have higher healthcare expenditures than they expected and lack coverage. This would not necessarily mean that these consumers were unwise in their choice of insurance ; they were unfortunate. Although the MSB schedule shown in figure reflects the value that consumers place on their own health insurance our analysis took into account all the benefits and costs including the costs imposed on third parties. First some consumers who lack insurance coverage and then fall ill or have an accident receive uncompensated care from providers. The providers might bear some or all of the costs of uncompensated care ; or they might pass some costs along to third parties such as privately insured patients through higher prices. Garthwaite Gross and Notowidigdo ( ) analyzed confidential hospital As noted below our triangle analysis assumes that the MSB schedule is approximately linear in the portion of the distribution that responds to the removal of the tax penalty. We also assume zero economic profits for insurers in that premium revenues are exhausted by claims and loads. Loads in turn reflect competitive payments to labor and capital employed in the insurance industry. | Chapter financial data and concluded that on average each additional uninsured person costs hospitals about $ each year. We use this result to estimate the third-party effects of uncompensated care provided to consumers who do not have ACA-compliant coverage. Second to the extent that the enrollees who leave the market are healthier than average their health insurance decisions will increase insurance premiums charged to those who remain in ACAcompliant coverage. The CBO ( ) projects the zero tax penalty will increase premiums in the nongroup market by about percent. This percent forecast is likely to be too high because the CBO did not expect the decline in benchmark premiums that occurred from to Nevertheless our analysis used the percent estimate and accounts for the third-party effects on Federal expenditures for premium subsidies and on premiums paid by nonsubsidized enrollees. Most of the enrollees who remain in ACA-compliant coverage receive premium subsidies which means that the increased premiums will be largely financed by increased Federal subsidy expenditures. A subset of enrollees who do not receive subsidies will pay higher premiums. Our empirical implementation of the MSB schedule incorporates the third-party effects on uncompensated care on Federal expenditures for premium subsidies and on premiums paid by nonsubsidized enrollees. We concluded that setting the individual mandate penalty to zero benefits society by reducing inefficient coverage in the market for ACA-compliant health insurance. The ACA premium subsidies are the first source of inefficiency. The premium subsidies make health coverage more affordable to lower- and middle-income consumers ; but on net the subsidies reduce the social benefits from health insurance because they result in many enrollees who value the insurance at less than its cost. Pauly Leive and Harrington ( ) also estimated that many uninsured consumers experience financial losses due to ACA coverage.20 The tax penalties that enforced the individual mandate are the second source of inefficiency and exacerbate the inefficiency due to the premium subsidies. Setting the individual mandate penalty to zero may reduce some ACA premium subsidy payments and if it does will generate a social gain. In costbenefit analyses a reduction in subsidy payments is often merely a transfer that leaves social benefits unchanged the benefits to taxpayers are exactly offset by the costs to the recipients who lose the subsidy. When comparing the ACA with premium subsidies to a hypothetical ACA without subsidies the ACA premium subsidy is properly treated as a transfer. But the purpose of this analysis is to evaluate the effect of relaxing restrictions on consumer choice 20Some might question the judgment of consumers for whom a large subsidy is not enough by itself to induce them to purchase ACA-compliant insurance. Features of the ACA exchanges administrative loading fees price controls moral hazard premium subsidies that distort labor markets and heterogeneous preferences make it reasonable and consistent with economic efficiency for a risk-averse person to remain uninsured when his or her risk is low enough. Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | not changing the ACA premium subsidy rules. The subset of individuals who may only have subsidized ACA coverage due to the mandate penalty is shown in figure To illustrate : If ( as we calculate below ) the average net subsidy in would be about $ and the average penalty about $ an individual who voluntarily gives up his or her $ subsidy when the $ penalty is removed is not harmed by losing the Treasury subsidy. Instead the individual has received a benefit by no longer being constrained by a penalty at the same time that taxpayers benefit by no longer having to finance the subsidy. The CEA s application of standard welfare economics to this situation is proper but unfamiliar because of the complicated design of the ACA and its related regulations.21 The CBO ( ) projected that setting the tax penalty to zero would decrease enrollment in ACA-compliant coverage in by million enrollees. We estimated that after accounting for the average premium assistance received and the other third-party effects each of these million enrollees reduces third-party expenditures by $ ( CEA ) If it had not been set to zero the average tax penalty would have been $ in As a result of these two market frictions we estimated that each of these enrollees valued their coverage by $ less than what it cost society a figure arrived at by adding the deadweight loss per person induced to take coverage by the penalty to the subsidy amount ( CEA ) In figure the social benefits of repealing the mandate are given by the base of area A ( million ) multiplied by its average height which measures the value gap ( $ ) Aggregated over the million enrollees setting the individual mandate tax penalty to zero will yield social benefits of about $ billion in plus reducing the excess burden of taxation by another $ billion.24 ( See box for overviews of two important additional deregulatory healthcare reforms. ) Following Goulder and Williams ( ) our analysis accounts for important general equilibrium interactions between the deregulatory reforms and preexisting distortions created by the premium subsidies and labor market taxation. The reduction in the subsidy payments are part of the social benefits created by the tax penalty repeal. From table the average tax penalty paid in was $ We assume that the tax penalty would have grown at an annual rate of percent. The tax penalty averages $ per enrollee so the triangular area of deadweight loss per person induced to take compliant coverage equals half of $ which is $ This is added to the $ net subsidy to arrive at an average gap of $ One aspect of the projected benefits of the Administration s deregulatory reforms is that they reduce Federal expenditures on ACA premium subsidies and reduce the deficit. Generally eliminating taxes and subsidies has larger welfare effects beyond government revenues due to the excess burden of such measures. | Chapter Box Additional Regulatory Reforms The Trump administration published new rules establishing two important deregulatory healthcare reforms that will generate tens of billions in benefits to Americans over the next years. The deregulatory reforms expand options in health insurance markets within the existing statutory frameworks including the ACA. These are more fully discussed in chapter of this Report and are briefly described here. Association health plans. Most uninsured Americans today are nonelderly employed adults ( U.S. Census Bureau ) Many work for small businesses or are self-employed in unincorporated businesses where the uninsured rate has historically been and remains high double the uninsured rate of the general population ( Chase and Arensmeyer ) The ACA subjected health coverage by small businesses to mandated coverage of essential health benefits and price controls that are not required for large businesses. The June association health plan rule expands small businesses ability to group together to form AHPs to offer their employees more affordable health insurance. AHPs can self-insure or purchase large group insurance free of the ACA benefit and pricing mandates thereby lowering premiums and decreasing administrative costs through economies of scale. The AHP rule also broadens plan participation eligibility to sole proprietors without other employees. New AHPs can form by industry or geographic area ( e.g. metropolitan area state ) This rule is still too new to be sure about its impact. The CBO ( ) has projected that after the rule is fully phased in there will be million additional enrollees in AHPs including people who were previously uninsured. Based on the CBO s projections we estimate that the AHP rule will cause premiums in the ACA-compliant individual market to increase by slightly more than percent ( see chapter ) We estimate that taking into account both the benefits and costs the AHP rule will yield $ billion in net benefits in plus an additional reduction in excess burden worth $ billion. Short-term limited-duration insurance. In late shortly before leaving office the Obama Administration issued a rule shortened the allowed total duration of short-term limited-duration insurance contracts from to months thereby limiting the appeal and utility of these STLDI plans. The rule was not required by the ACA or other laws. The Trump Administration s August STLDI rule extends the allowed term length of initial STLDI contracts from to months and allows for the renewal of the initial insurance contract for up to months which is the same as the maximum coverage term required under COBRA continuation coverage ( U.S. Congress ) ( The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act COBRA provides for the continuation of employer health coverage that would be otherwise canceled due to job separation or other qualifying events. ) Because STLDI plans are not considered to be individual health insurance coverage under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | Act and the Public Health Service Act STLDI coverage is exempt from all ACA restrictions on insurance plan design and pricing. This allows STLDI plans to offer a form of alternative coverage for those who do not choose ACAcompliant individual coverage. The STLDI rule requires that STLDI policies must provide a notice to consumers that these plans may differ from ACAcompliant plans in the individual market and among other differences may have limits on preexisting conditions and health benefits and have annual or lifetime limits. The STLDI rule is also too new to be sure of its impact. The CBO ( ) has projected that the STLDI regulatory reform will result in an additional million consumers in STLDI plans by Based on CBO projections we estimate that the STLDI rule will increase gross premiums in the ACA-compliant individual market by slightly more than percent in the same time frame ( see chapter ) Taking into account both benefits and costs we estimate that the rule will yield benefits worth $ billion in plus an additional reduction in excess burden worth $ billion. Improving Competition to Lower Prescription Drug Prices High pharmaceutical drug prices are a major concern of many Americans and the Trump Administration. Part of the problem results from the U.S. system of patent law in which in exchange for innovation inventors are granted exclusive rights to market and distribute their inventions in this case drugs for a period of time during which they can collect monopoly profits. But high prices also stem from Federal statutes and the regulations of the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) which are intended to guarantee safety and efficacy but which create barriers to market entry and hinder price competition. Under the current regulatory regime researching developing and gaining the FDA approval needed to bring a new drug to market can take about a decade and cost an estimated $ billion ( DiMasi Grabowski and Hansen ) The evidence suggests that patients improved health and savings resulting from faster FDA regulatory processes and earlier access to drugs exceed potential associated safety risks ( Philipson and Sun ; Philipson et al. ) The approval and entry of new generic drugs into the market to compete with brand name drugs lowers drug prices. Similarly the approval and entry of new branded drugs creates competition with other drugs in the same therapeutic class and enhances patients and their physicians choices of treatment options. Under the Trump Administration the FDA has launched a series of reforms to facilitate new pharmaceutical drug entry while ensuring the efficacy and safety of the drug supply. These reforms are already helping consumers | Chapter by speeding up generic drug approvals resulting in savings from new generic entrants totaling $ billion over the first year and a half of the Administration Price inflation for prescription drugs has slowed. Figure shows that the price of drugs relative to other goods decreased during the Trump Administration compared with the trend of the previous Administration ( dotted line ) After months of zero or slightly negative relative inflation as of August the relative price of prescription drugs was lower than it was in December In addition due to the way price inflation for drugs is measured the actual reduction in inflation after January may be larger.25 As of August the slower price inflation for prescription drugs under President Trump implies annual savings of $ billion.26 Even if the relative price inflation of prescription drugs were to return to the higher trend that prevailed before this Administration the level effect would yield savings of $ to $ billion over years.27 Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics through the end of show that for the first time in years the Consumer Price Index for prescription drugs fell in nominal terms and even more in real terms during a calendar year.28 This section first discusses how the approval and market entry of new drugs leads to price competition and lower prices. Then it outlines the Administration s FDA reforms to safely speed drug approvals. It subsequently outlines our estimates of the value generated by faster generic drug market entry. Finally it discusses the value of the increased entry of new innovative drugs. Lowering Prices through Competition Brand name drugs can command high prices because the drugmaker s exclusive sales right confers market power over prices. Once the brand name drug s patent expires however generic versions of the drug can enter the market and the resulting competition drives down market prices and leads to substantial savings for patients and the healthcare system. Roughly out of every prescriptions in the United States are for generic drugs ; but because they are so much cheaper than their brand name counterparts they constitute only about Two factors contribute to this. First the Bureau of Labor Statistics has a six-month lag for incorporating generics so any generic entry since March is not included. Second in the bureau changed its index from geometric to Laspeyres and the latter has higher inflation. This was calculated by multiplying actual nominal personal consumption expenditures on prescription drugs ( at a seasonally adjusted annual rate ) in August by the percentage difference between the actual three-month centered moving average relative price ratio in August and that projected by the linear trend estimated over January through December This is dependent on a real discount rate between and percent. The lower bound is implied by the rate on 20-year Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities and the upper bound by Shiller s cyclically adjusted earnings-to-price ratio for the Standard & Poor s respectively. The Consumer Price Index for prescription drugs is the primary series used by the Bureau of Economic Analysis to construct the Personal Consumption Expenditures price index for prescription drugs that appears in figure Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | Figure Price of Prescription Drugs Relative to PCE Ratio Aug-18 Trend Jan. Jan. Jan. Jan. Jan. Jan. Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis CEA calculations. Note : PCE = Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index. The relative price ratio of prescription drugs is computed as the index for prescription drug prices relative to the index of overall consumption prices as measured in the National Income and Product Accounts for the PCE. Data represent a centered 3-month centered moving average. The trend is calculated from to percent of prescription drug spending ( AAM ) reflecting the enormous savings made available to consumers. Generic drugs. Substantial evidence shows that pharmaceutical drug prices fall dramatically when a generic drug enters the market offering great savings to consumers ( Aitken et al. ; Berndt McGuire and Newhouse ; Caves et al. ) Prices continue to decline substantially as the number of generic competitors increases. One analysis of the effect of generic entry on drug prices in the 1980s found that generic drug prices were percent of brand name drug prices after the first generic entrant percent of the brand name price when four generic drugs were on the market and percent of the brand name price with generic drugs ( Frank and Salkever ) A more recent analysis using data from to found price reductions following a similar pattern ( Berndt and Aitken ) Other analyses have confirmed this general finding. The estimates shown in figure illustrate prices declining substantially as the number of generic market competitors increases. ( For further discussion see HHS ) The brand name drug market share in addition to prices falls dramatically with generic competition. Brand name drugs. Market entry of new branded drugs can also reduce the prices of other branded drugs through increased price competition. In many cases a particular condition is treatable with several different brand | Chapter Figure Generic Drug Price Relative to Brand Name Price Average relative price per dose ( percent ) Number of generic manufacturers Sources : Food and Drug Administration ; IMS Health. name drugs which are partial but not perfect substitutes for one another and are known as a therapeutic class or category ( FDA 2018c ) Some of these drugs will have similar pharmacologic modes of actions. Others will have different mechanisms of action but will also be effective for the same condition. When the market evolves from a monopoly with one unique brand name product to a new stage of therapeutic competition or oligopoly market pricing will improve with one or more brand name competitors. Though these brand name products are not perfect substitutes for one another the way generics are the evidence suggests that therapeutic competition between brand name drugs affects innovative drugmakers returns at least as much as competition from generic entry ( Lichtenberg and Philipson ) New drugs often enter the market at lower prices than the dominant existing drug in a particular therapeutic class putting pressure on the dominant drug to lower prices to maintain market share ( DeMasi ; Lee ) Although the literature is limited on the systematic effect that therapeutic competition has on prices there are numerous therapeutic classes in which new brand name drugs have led to vigorous price competition. A recent notable example was the introduction of new highly effective treatments for the liver infection hepatitis C. A major breakthrough brand name drug was approved for sale in the United States in Unlike previously available therapies it essentially offered a cure for many hepatitis C patients albeit at an $ price for a course of treatment. Within a few years competing drugs from Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | multiple companies came to market and drove down prices ( Toich ) The most recently approved drug covers all six genotypes of the hepatitis C virus which not all previous drugs did ; has a shorter course of treatment ; and had a list price of $ for a course of treatment ( Andrews ) less than the discounted prices of the earlier drugs. It quickly outpaced other hepatitis C drugs and has captured a percent market share ( Pagliarulo ) Another example of price competition within a therapeutic class is the case of the cholesterol-lowering drugs known as statins. The first statin was introduced in Since then multiple new statins with higher potency and fewer side effects have come to market. Each new introduction has led to price competition with new drugs which are often priced at a discount relative to the old ones ( Alpert ) Prices have tumbled as these drugs have gone off patent and cheaper generic competition has entered the market ( Aitken Berndt and Cutler ) The Administration s Efforts to Enhance Generic and Innovator Competition The Administration s deregulatory agenda includes streamlining the FDA s review process to facilitate price competition by reducing market entry barriers while securing a supply of safe and effective drugs. This includes prioritizing the approval of more generic drugs ( FDA 2018b ) In August the President signed into law the Food and Drug Administration Reauthorization Act a five-year reauthorization of the Generic Drug User Fee Amendments which empower the FDA to collect user fees for generic drug applications and to process applications in a timely manner. Last year the FDA announced the Drug Competition Action Plan to expand access to safe and effective generic drugs. This plan s efforts focus on three key priorities to encourage generic drug competition : ( ) preventing branded companies from keeping generics out of the market ( ) mitigating scientific and regulatory obstacles to approval and ( ) streamlining the generic review process. The FDA has already released guidance for companies and FDA staff members that outlines specific steps to reduce the number of review cycles and shorten the approval process. These reforms have successfully increased the number of generics approved and have slowed drug price growth. In fiscal year ( FY ) the FDA approved a record generic drug approvals and tentative approvals exceeding the in FY and the in FY ( FDA 2018a ) The FDA approves generics based on a determination that they are bioequivalent to an approved innovator drug for which exclusive sales rights have expired. Generic drug entry is quicker to respond to regulatory changes than brand name drug entry which involves a longer process for review and development. Figure shows the 12-month moving average number of generic drug final and tentative approvals starting in January The dotted blue For a brief discussion of recent price competition in this market see Walker ( ) | Chapter Figure New Generic Drug Applications Approved Number of approvals Aug-18 Trend Jan. Jan. Jan. Jan. Jan. Jan. Sources : Food and Drug Administration ; CEA calculations. Note : The data include final generic drug approvals and represent a 12-month moving average. Data preceding October are a truncated moving average with data beginning in October The trend is calculated from to line represents an estimated time trend from January through December projected through August the most recent observation available. Since December the number of generic drug approvals has outpaced the trend. We found that percent more generic drugs have been approved each month ( a monthly average of ) during the first months of the Trump Administration than were approved during the previous 20-month period ( a monthly average of ) This increase in approvals occurred despite the fact that the number of brand name drug patent expirations necessary precursors for generic entry declined during this period. The FDA s Strategic Policy Roadmap addresses the entire spectrum of FDA-regulated pharmaceutical products from small molecules to complex products and biologics given each of their critical roles in advancing the health of patients ( FDA 2018b ) The roadmap includes the launch of the Medical Innovation Access Plan Drug Competition Action Plan Biosimilars Action Plan and Advanced Manufacturing Strategy Roadmap. These plans are designed to : Modernize the FDA s programs and increase administrative efficiencies for reviewing applications for brand name and generic products. Provide product- and technology-specific guidance to increase regulatory and scientific clarity for sponsors to ensure efficient product development programs. Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | Reduce anticompetitive behavior by firms attempting to game FDA regulations or statutory authorities to delay competition from generic or biosimilar products. The increase in new drug approvals has been as impressive as the improvement in generics. In the first months of the Trump Administration there were drug approvals per month on average compared with drug approvals per month during the preceding month period. A new brand name drug can be marketed only after its New Drug Application ( NDA ) has been approved ; for biologic drug products the corresponding approval is for a Biologic License Application ( BLA ) Figure shows the number of approved NDAs and BLAs since January reported as a 12-month moving average to smooth intermonth volatility. Notably the 12-month average line shows a substantial and sustained rise in approvals starting in about January These new approvals reflect the emergence of many valuable new drug therapies that will add to competitive market pressures on prices for existing drugs and bring new benefits to patients. During the sample period from January through December we estimated a linear time trend for the 12-month moving-average sum of NDAs and BLAs approved. We then projected this trend through December the most recent observation available. As reported in figure after falling below the trend in in actual applications approved climbed above the trend and by the end of were percent above the trend projection.30 It is noteworthy that the approval rate began to rise rapidly a few months into the Trump Administration. Although the FDA approves a wide array of biological products and new drugs only some are novel innovative products that are being introduced into clinical practice for the first time. Novel drugs can be classified as new molecular entities ( NMEs ) as an active molecule with no prior FDA approval or as novel biologics. These new entities are the most meaningful NDAs and BLAs approved because they provide previously unavailable options to patients seeking therapies. Approvals of new molecular entities and novel biologics meanwhile more than doubled in the years relative to In and NMEs and novel biologics approvals averaged just per month. From January through October approvals averaged per month with approved in August alone. Given the lengthy clinical development process for new drugs these trends do not solely reflect the actions of the Administration but they are nevertheless influenced by this Administration s emphasis on accelerating the NDA and BLA processes. To test whether this outperformance of the trend was statistically significant we regressed NDAs and BLAs approved on a linear time trend fully interacted with a post December binary variable. The estimated coefficient on the interaction term was positive and significant at the level meaning that we can reject the null hypothesis of no trend break with percent confidence. | Chapter Figure New Drug Applications and Biologics License Applications Approved Number of approvals Dec-17 Trend Jan. Jan. Jan. Jan. Jan. Sources : Food and Drug Administration CEA calculations. Note : The data represent a 12-month moving average and data preceding July are a truncated moving average with data beginning in July The trend is calculated from to Estimated Reductions in Pharmaceutical Drug Costs from Generic Drug Entry The effects of increased competition through patent expirations and generic drug entry reflect not just a fall in market prices but also a drop in overall quantity consumed because brand name drug manufacturers often stop advertising their product which reduces overall demand for the chemical entity ( Lakdawalla and Philipson ) Therefore the change in consumer welfare resulting from a patent expiration does not just involve a movement downward along a demand curve but also an inward shift in the demand curve. The analysis that follows represents a lower bound on the value of generic entry focusing on savings alone. We estimated the savings made available to consumers from generic drugs entering the market from January through June ( CEA 2018a ) The analysis represents an update of a similar analysis published by the FDA ( Conrad et al. ) We found that generic drug approvals generated savings of about $ billion through July The data on generic drug approvals represent the period from January through June ; these are the most recent approvals data available. Estimates of savings from this set of generic entrants represent sales through July based on the most recent available sales data. Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | Figure Price Decline Due to Generic Drug Entry Price P * PBefore PAfter Demand QBefore QAfter Quantity The baseline price before an entry ( PBefore ) used in this analysis is determined for each compound by aggregating sales across all drug products with the same active ingredient and dosage form for up to six months before the approval of abbreviated new drug applications and dividing by the quantity of all drug products with the same active ingredient and dosage form that were sold ( QBefore ) In some cases a generic entrant is the first to compete with its brand name counterpart ; in others a generic entrant follows one or more other generic entrants. Determination of baseline prices addresses this as follows : When a brand name drug is facing its first generic entrant the baseline price is determined using solely the brand name drug s sales ; when a brand name drug already faces one or more generic competitors the baseline price reflects both brand name and generic sales weighted accordingly. The market price following entry of the generic drug ( PAfter ) is estimated by dividing the aggregate sales volume in the market by the aggregate quantity sold per month. Monthly savings from generic entry are then estimated for the period as Monthly Savings = ( PBefore PAfter ) * QBefore Total savings are the sum of all monthly savings estimates. Figure shows the consumer benefit from the lower prices enabled by generic entry. Note that the savings estimate does not reflect the full trapezoid shown in figure This is because the onset of generic competition as mentioned above is often accompanied by a cessation of marketing by | Chapter the innovator drugmaker which causes the demand curve to shift inward. We therefore limit the savings estimated to the preentry quantities observed. We estimate that the total savings from the generic drugs that entered the market from January through June was $ billion in January dollars. We expect consumers to benefit further from lower drug prices in the years to come as more generic drugs are approved for sale and price competition becomes even more robust. Estimates of the Value of Price Reductions from New Drugs For new innovator pharmaceutical drugs high initial market prices give a misleading picture that overstates price growth. This is because before a new drug enters the market it is unavailable at any price making such a drug equivalent to one with a price so high that there is no demand for it. Economists generally interpret innovations as price reductions from the price at which the product would not sell at all due to its observed price when marketed. For instance before the development of drugs to treat HIV in the mid-1990s the price of a longer life for an HIV-positive individual was inaccessibly high it could not be bought at any price anywhere in the world. But once new HIV drugs were approved the price of a longer and healthier life for HIV-positive individuals decreased dramatically falling from prohibitively expensive to the finite market price of the new brand name patented drugs. Prices fell further when these brand name drugs faced therapeutic competitors and further still when the brand name drugs lost their sales exclusivity and faced generic competition. Using the appropriate empirical methodology to measure such price declines for new drugs marketed since January we find that they have generated annualized gains to consumers of $ billion in though lower-bound estimates of the price elasticity of demand for brand name drugs suggest that the gains could be much larger. This way of conceptualizing the initial price change of a newly approved innovation is illustrated in figure The price P * is the prohibitively high price at which there is zero demand for the drug because it is too expensive. However if no one is buying the drug this is equivalent to its not yet having been discovered ; in both cases no one uses it. An innovation can be interpreted as simply reducing the price from this high level to the price at which it is marketed PBrand in the figure resulting in quantity QBrand of drugs being bought. Therefore the value of the new innovation to patients is simply the consumer surplus generated when the price is lowered from P * to PBrand indicated by the shaded area in figure We used two methods to calculate this consumer surplus. The first applied empirical estimates of the producer surplus ( profits ) as a share of the social surplus arising from new NDA and BLA drugs approved since January Grabowski and others ( ) Goldman and others ( ) Jena and Philipson ( ) and Philipson and Jena ( ) estimated that the producer Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | Figure Price Reductions from Brand Name Entry Price P * PBrand Demand QBrand Quantity surplus is generally between and percent of the social surplus with Jena and Philipson ( ) observing a median level of percent which implies that the consumer surplus is about times the producer surplus. We applied these estimates to revenue data for the new NDAs and BLAs that were approved by netting out the variable costs of production from sales. These costs were assumed to be percent of sales for brand name drugs based on estimated differences in drug prices before and after patent expiration ( Caves et al. ; Grabowski and Vernon ; Berndt and Aitken ; CEA 2018a ) The second approach used price and quantity data along with empirical estimates of the price elasticity of demand for pharmaceutical drug products to generate a demand schedule and to calculate the consumer surplus that arises from lowering the price from P * to PBrand as shown in figure in other words calculating the shaded area of the figure as the integral of the demand curve above PBrand from Q = to Q = QBrand. Across common drugs Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ( ) estimated an average elasticity of demand of ; and across common therapeutic classes they estimated an average elasticity of Goldman and others ( ) meanwhile estimated elasticities of between and For price and quantity in both methods we used IQVIA National Sales Perspectives data on pharmacy and hospital acquisition costs based on invoice prices for new molecule entities and novel biologics approved from January through July We then averaged the estimated consumer surplus gain calculated first assuming the median estimate of the producer | Chapter appropriation from Jena and Philipson ( ) ; and second assuming the mean elasticity of demand for common therapeutic classes of from Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ( ) Averaging the results of the two approaches indicates that the price reductions induced by the new drugs approved after January increased the total consumer surplus in by $ billion. Conclusion The U.S. economy generally relies on free markets to maximize benefits for U.S. citizens. The hallmarks of any free market are consumer choice and competition. Although some have claimed that healthcare is an exceptional case that can not be produced and allocated through the market we argue that these claims are exaggerated and that the costs of market failure are often lower than the costs of government failure. Deviations from perfect market conditions are present in healthcare and many other markets but promoting choice and competition is the appropriate way to maximize efficiency and consumer welfare. The recent push in Congress to enact a highly restrictive Medicare for All proposal would have the opposite effect it would decrease competition and choice. The CEA s analysis finds that if enacted this legislation would reduce longevity and health in the United States decrease long-run global health by reducing medical innovation and adversely affect the U.S. economy through the tax burden involved. The Trump Administration has instead concentrated on deregulatory reforms that will increase choice and competition in the health insurance markets and pharmaceutical drug markets. Bringing the ACA s individual mandate penalty down to zero will allow consumers to choose how much health insurance they desire. Expanding the availability of association health plans and the duration and renewability of short-term limited-duration health plans will increase consumers options and spur competition. Finally the FDA s initiatives to speed drug approvals have already had tangible benefits in record numbers of drug approvals and increased pharmaceutical competition. All these reforms are expected to bring down prices encourage continuing innovation and maximize consumer welfare. Because the Goldman et al. ( ) upper-bound estimated elasticity of generates implausibly large consumer surplus gains when applied to all newly approved drugs for the second method we assume an upper bound of Enabling Choice and Competition in Healthcare Markets | x Chapter Unleashing the Power of American Energy Taking advantage of America s abundant energy resources is a key tenet of the Trump Administration s plan to increase long-term economic growth and national security. This is best achieved by recognizing how prices and technological change underpin growth in the production of renewable and nonrenewable energy sources. By promoting domestic energy production and expanding U.S. energy exports the Administration seeks to improve the relationship the U.S. economy has historically had with global energy markets. Since the President took office the U.S. fossil fuels sector has set production records led by all-time highs in both oil and natural gas. The energy content of fossil fuel production is at this apex thanks to petroleum s high energy content. The surge in petroleum production is a surprise and is attributable to a confluence of technological improvements and relatively high prices. Natural gas production has also continued to increase following a long-running trend. Coal production stabilized in and after a period of contraction in and Increased production allows the United States to alter historic trade patterns by decreasing its net imports. The U.S. is now a net exporter of natural gas for the first time in years and petroleum exports are increasing at a pace such that the United States is projected to be a net exporter of energy by Reducing its net import position for energy products helps the United States by making its economy less sensitive to the price swings that have disrupted it in the past. Greater economic resilience at home is coupled with greater diplomatic influence and flexibility abroad as U.S. prominence in global energy markets grows. Technological and regulatory changes are forcing the U.S. energy system to further adapt. This is especially true for the electricity sector which is adapting to the changing slate of generation assets and to economic pressures from restructured wholesale markets. Recognizing and embracing the innovations that have helped spur these changes in the U.S. energy system and ensuring that distorting policies do not interfere can help all Americans and people around the world which is why the Administration is focusing on policies supporting these priorities. L everaging American energy abundance is a central tenet of the President s economic vision. This is best achieved by recognizing how prices and technological change underpin growth in the production of renewable and nonrenewable energy sources. In this sector of the economy yielded historic results. U.S. fossil fuels production is booming led by all-time highs in oil and natural gas. This increase in production has helped support economic growth and allowed the United States to change historic trade patterns. Yet technological and regulatory changes are forcing the energy system to further adapt. Recognizing and embracing the innovations that have helped spur these changes in the U.S. energy system and ensuring that distorting policies do not interfere can help all Americans and people around the world. The Administration focuses on policies supporting these priorities. Although proposals for a policy of energy independence have a history in the United States dating back to at least the Trump Administration s energy policy goes further by emphasizing two elements. The first is to maximize the value of U.S. production at market-determined prices. Fossil fuels which provide percent of the Nation s energy needs loom large in this regard. Energy is useful insofar as it can ultimately provide the power light and work that are important economic inputs for the production of goods and services that benefit Americans. These inputs can be generated in a number of ways. For example electricity can provide light and electricity can be generated from a variety of sources by burning fossil fuels like coal and natural gas or by using renewable methods like wind and solar generation or other means like nuclear generation. The United States also has extensive energy resources fossil fuel reserves ; renewable resources like hydroelectric solar and wind ; and perhaps most valuable of all world-class engineering and research complexes that constantly innovate and improve the efficiency of both the U.S. and global energy systems. The Administration s policy of fostering maximum production | Chapter embraces all these sources with their diverse characteristics and economic applications. The various sectors of the U.S. economy rely on different forms and sources of energy ; for example in the U.S. economy relied on petroleum for percent of its transportation needs using percent of all petroleum consumed domestically. Other countries around the world satisfy their energy needs with different mixes than the United States. Because countries have different endowments of energy resources and different energy policies the varying demands and supplies of energy provide the opportunity for trade in power and fuels. The importance of energy trade is underscored by the prominence of a single commodity crude oil which in recent years has accounted for an average of over percent of global trade value ( United Nations ) The United States can use its increased energy production to take a greater role in global energy markets particularly those for fossil fuels. Reducing its net import position for energy products helps the United States by making its economy less sensitive to the price swings that have disrupted it in the past. Greater economic resilience at home is coupled with greater diplomatic influence and flexibility abroad as the United States prominence in global energy markets grows. Finally more global competition in energy supply may moderate global prices and price volatility. This chapter outlines the key economic contours of the Trump Administration s energy agenda. The first section documents and contextualizes recent developments in U.S. fossil fuels production. The second section considers the United States ability to engage with global energy markets through increased trade. And the third section examines specific policy issues that remain and pose challenges for the future. U.S. Fuel Production Reached Record Levels in The United States is fortunate to have many useful energy resources oil natural gas coal solar wind geothermal and more. American success in promoting fuels production is broad-based as overall fossil fuel production has increased. In U.S. fossil fuel production set an all-time record for total energy content as shown in figure This record continues the recent trend which was only interrupted by a dip in when lower prices failed to support oil and natural gas production enough to offset falling coal production. Since then the growth in petroleum production has more than made up for lower coal production relying on the greater energy density of crude oil to make up the difference. Unleashing the Power of American Energy | U.S. Oil Production Is At an All-Time High Reports of the demise of U.S. oil production ( Bentley ; Hirsch Bezdek and Wendling ; EIA ) appear to have been premature. Thanks to a confluence of technological proficiency in available geology and world price patterns in U.S. oil production reached an all-time high. In November U.S. oil production surpassed a monthly production record set in with oil production reaching a monthly average of million barrels per day ( MMbpd ) This trend continued into as the monthly average production for the year s first three quarters was MMbpd. Resurgent U.S. production relies on unconventional resources once deemed too diffuse and costly to exploit. However advanced seismography hydraulic fracturing directional drilling and related technologies have changed this situation by effectively lowering the cost of accessing oil and gas trapped underground. The technical innovations pioneered and perfected in the United States ( Zuckerman ; Gold ) are now paying dividends in the form of increasing production. The dividends have been paid quickly with U.S. production increasing by MMbpd in eight years the largest increase of any country in history. Technology that was pioneered in parts of Texas and in the western States is now applied across the country boosting production everywhere from the historically productive Permian Basin in Texas and New Mexico to new provinces like the Eagle Ford Shale in Texas and the Bakken Shale in | Chapter North Dakota and Montana. Production in Texas increased by percent from December levels through the first half of while the monthly average production through October was percent higher than annual production in the state years ago ( figure ) This increase more than offsets declining production in other important regions including Alaska and the shallow-water areas of the Gulf of Mexico. Crude oil prices in exhibit three general characteristics. First from the perspective of U.S. producers price levels remained higher than the previous three years on average. Second price volatility was modest compared with the period Together these high and stable prices provided a strong incentive for producers. And third the price discount for the main landlocked U.S. benchmark West Texas Intermediate ( WTI ) crude oil relative to the nearest waterborne benchmark Brent crude oil has increased to the highest level since Although both grades are priced higher due to attractive refining properties the differential between these two close substitutes indicates that the U.S. market is separated from the global market. Many market observers take this as evidence of the existence of infrastructure constraints that require U.S. production to incur somewhat higher transportation costs that erode its value at inland pricing points. McRae ( ) documents how price basis differentials stemming from pipeline bottlenecks represent a transfer from producers to refiners and shippers but are not transmitted to consumer prices. This is consistent with earlier work by Borenstein and Kellogg ( ) who found that the marginal barrel of gasoline is priced to Brent leaving the consumer unaffected by a Brent WTI basis differential. In addition to setting a domestic production record in the United States became the world s leading producer of crude oil after years of leading the world in combined oil and natural gas production.2 Figure shows the recent increase that has returned the United States to global leadership after years. The production comes from a different resource base than conventional deposits in Russia and Saudi Arabia because U.S. production and especially production growth rely on unconventional resources that were once considered subeconomic. However a combination of technological innovation market incentives and millions of private mineral owners willing to take risks with new techniques have helped the U.S. oil and gas sector launch a new era of production. U.S. production now largely comes from geological formations like low-permeability sandstones and shales that are not developed in most other countries. An added benefit is that much of the production is Although less volatile than the preceding years this period s volatility remains higher than that of many historical periods and may be an important concern for producers ( McNally ) Oil and gas producers bring a cocktail of hydrocarbons to the surface including crude oil lease condensate natural gas and natural gas liquids. The exact proportions vary across different geologies. After they are brought to the surface together the products are separated and sold through different channels for different uses. Unleashing the Power of American Energy | | Chapter lighter and lower-sulfur grades of crude oil that command a price premium and give refiners considerable flexibility in processing because they are less costly to refine than heavier grades. The economic implications of the technological innovations that have facilitated these changes have been a long time coming ( CEA 2016a ) So why was the year to break production records ? In the not-too-distant past it seemed that increased U.S. production required high prices further reducing U.S. influence in the global marketplace. Technological innovations have increased both economically feasible and technically recoverable reserves. Innovations in directional drilling and hydraulic fracturing helped lower the breakeven costs of shale oil while improved deepwater extraction efficiency has increased interest in offshore drilling as well. The assumption was that all these methods required fairly high breakeven prices. The threat posed by unconventional U.S. production to other global producers compelled the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) to allow prices to fall in late in an effort to protect global market share and long-run revenues. This strategy of defending market share against new entrants is historically well-known to OPEC members and it may or may not deliver higher revenues ( Adelman ) Although the subsequent price drop was traumatic for U.S. producers the ultimate result was that the marginal cost of unconventional production fell making U.S. oil more competitive in the global marketplace ( Kleinberg et al. ) The combination of relatively high and stable prices accumulated cost-reducing technological improvements and the massive endowment of unconventional resources has allowed production to expand rapidly. Some observers have taken America s world-leading production and decreased net imports as evidence that the United States has greater influence in the global oil market but the empirical evidence suggests more work is needed to achieve this goal.3 The responsiveness of onshore oil production to price shocks remains limited inside the continental United States. Estimates by Newell and Prest ( ) indicate that although the response of U.S. supply to price changes is larger than before the dawn of shale oil the U.S. remains slower to react than a traditional swing producer ( i.e. a producer that can bring additional capacity online quickly in response to demand ) such as Saudi Arabia. Newell and Prest ( ) also find that the U.S. response takes several months to come online which is substantially less timely than the to days associated with typical swing production. So while the United States now enjoys more production and more responsive production than it has historically done it has not yet reached a point that would provide it with the market power associated with being a global swing producer. The United States During the week ending November the United States had negative net imports of petroleum for the first time since at least ( data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration ) Unleashing the Power of American Energy | lack of spare capacity implies that other countries notably the members of OPEC hold the key to modulating prices by being able and willing to adjust production. As OPEC settled into a regime of production cuts that helped support prices in and geopolitical uncertainty in key oil-producing countries also boosted prices and helped bolster U.S. production ( see box ) Compared with the production levels of OPEC members in supply reductions in Venezuela and other countries subtracted barrels per day on average from OPEC s production during the period between January and August Cuts by Venezuela accounted for percent of gross output reductions by OPEC s producers between January and August The unexpected resurgence of U.S. production over the past decade provides evidence that is hard to square with central predictions of popular models of resource scarcity. A prominent example is the peak oil literature which recognizes the physical limit on the endowment of oil to predict a date of maximum extraction rate after which production monotonically declines.4 Growing reliance on petroleum as a fuel has been matched by episodic concerns about its continued availability. A monotonic production decline is viewed as problematic for an economy that previously had consumed increasing amounts of oil. The paper by Hubbert ( ) was the original technical contribution to the peak oil literature which later blossomed into a broader following ( Deffeyes ) Hubbert s central insight was that there is a finite amount of oil to be found and the pace of discoveries could not accelerate indefinitely as it had for the preceding decades. Hubbert established an initial estimate for total U.S. oil reserves of billion to billion barrels. Conditional on U.S. oil reserves of billion barrels and the historical trajectory of discoveries and extraction Hubbert predicted peak production in with a subsequent decline. This forecast was remarkably accurate for the lower States through about ; production peaked in and appeared to enter a steady decline in the following years ( figure ) Even when considering the massive discovery in Alaska and the effect that Alaskan oil had on aggregate U.S. production Hubbert s simple model predicted a peak that was only off by a couple of years and seemed to encapsulate the inherent limit to oil production. However Hubbert s model ignored the role of prices in promoting exploration and production and of technological innovation in expanding proven reserves. Higher prices and technological improvements allowed access to offshore and unconventional reserves leading to an unpredicted peak increase Highlighting the economic significance of physical limits follows a long tradition dating back to at least when Thomas Malthus published An Essay on the Principle of Population which expressed the fear that growth in population would outpace growth in food production. As the Industrial Revolution made coal an essential economic input William Jevons ( ) translated this same argument to a nonrenewable resource which was the first peak fossil fuel argument. | Chapter Box OPEC s Oil Production Cuts OPEC has member states located in the Middle East Africa and South America. As of October OPEC producers enjoyed a percent share of the global petroleum market down from a post-2000 peak of percent in September ( OPEC 2018b ; EIA 2018i ) However they collectively control percent of world oil reserves and most of the lowest extraction cost reserves ( EIA 2018b ) Since its formation in OPEC has alternated between strategies of maximizing market share and maintaining high prices. The oil price collapse in is attributed to OPEC protecting its market share at the expense of prices. Since then OPEC has changed strategies and cut production to enjoy the resulting higher prices. ( In OPEC had oil-producing members along with the Republic of Congo. The Qatari state petroleum company announced on December that it was leaving OPEC effective January Qatar is a substantial natural gas producer but it only accounted for percent of OPEC s oil production less than percent of global production. ) Through late and much of OPEC members discussed a targeted cut to help support prices. These discussions also expanded to include key non-OPEC producers including Russia. The OPEC meeting on November announced a target reduction of MMbpd for the cooperating members of OPEC Libya and Nigeria are exempt effective January Figure 5-i. OPEC Crude Oil Production versus Production Targets Barrels per day ( millions ) Total OPEC-14 production OPEC-12 production OPEC-12 target Oct-18 Cooperating countries production Russia and other cooperating countries target Jan. Jul. Jan. Jul. Jan. Jul. Sources : Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) ; U.S. Energy Information Administration ; CEA calculations. Note : The OPEC-12 are the OPEC member states except for Libya and Nigeria which are exempt from production cuts. The other cooperating countries are Russia Mexico and Kazakhstan which along with several other smaller producers collaborate with OPEC s production schedule. Unleashing the Power of American Energy | bringing its allocated production to MMbpd and its ceiling for the OPEC14 to MMbpd. Subsequent OPEC meetings in May and November extended these cuts in allocations through the whole of in addition to allowing for the accession of Equatorial Guinea into OPEC with an allocation of barrels per day ( OPEC 2018a ) Cooperation by several other countries notably Russia Mexico and Kazakhstan has helped leverage the cuts by including more production share in the group agreeing to cuts. Adding the production of these cooperating countries to the OPEC-12 the global market share of the countries cooperating with OPEC s cuts increased to percent of crude production in Compared with average production in the OPEC-12 and its collaborators have cut production by MMbpd or about percent of global production. According to data from the U.S. Energy Information Administration ( EIA ) on secondary reporting of OPEC s oil production the target of MMbpd for the OPEC-12 was met for only of months in with the largest monthly overage being MMbpd ( percent over target production ) During the first six months of the OPEC-12 came in below the target by an average of percent each month or barrels per day ( EIA 2018i ) See figure 5-i. in domestic production. This experience contrasts sharply with forecasts influenced by peak oil theory especially those that were ascendant years ago most of which expected peak oil extraction by ( Laherr re ; Campbell ; Skrebowski ; Bakhtiari ) The prediction of decreasing U.S. oil production has been proved wrong by increased domestic production in of the past years ( BP ) shattering Hubbert s ( ) original prediction shown in figure Though there is a finite quantity of oil resources that can be discovered and extracted ignoring the incentive for exploration and innovation created by high prices and the impact that successful innovations have had on expanding the economic reserve base and reducing production costs the physical limits do not circumscribe economic potential as some analysts have hypothesized. Although the physical endowment of oil is smaller than it once was some context is useful. In as Hubbert was making his original forecast U.S. proven reserves of crude oil were billion barrels. At the end of proven reserves were billion barrels. From to total U.S. crude oil production was billion barrels. In addition to the billion barrels extracted before Hubbert s estimate of the size of reserves was not unreasonable. However what it did not anticipate was that today different kinds of resources would be considered reserves ( known resources that can be profitably extracted with current technology at current prices ) This | Chapter Figure U.S. Lower-48 Production versus Hubbert 's Peak Oil Prediction Barrels per day ( millions ) Jun-18 U.S. field production of crude oil Hubbert high-peak oil estimate Sources : Energy Information Administration ; Hubbert ( ) ; CEA calculations. Note : Data represent a 3-month moving average. The Hubbert ( ) estimate was constructed using a stepwise logit function. observation is not new to the economics literature ( Boyce ) but the recent empirical record suggests that peak oil models will need to consider prices and technology to be reliable in the future. Geologists like Hubbert woke up every morning and looked for oil ; but they expected the pace of discoveries to eventually slow down and then production would have to decline.5 The policy environment had no bearing ; nor did prices or technology. The point of Hubbert s paper was to emphasize the need for future energy transitions ; he expected nuclear power to be more widely used. Nuclear power has its own inherent trade-offs some of which are discussed below. Recent experience in the United States underscores the imprudence of relying upon geological forecasts alone. The incentives of prices and the role of technological innovation which is funded by the price incentive in a market economy like the United States are critical for understanding the production of even a nonrenewable natural resource like petroleum. The Natural Gas Revolution Rolls On Before technology helped U.S. oil production reach record highs natural gas was the focus and the natural gas revolution changed the national energy landscape ( Deutch ) Hydraulic fracturing receives much of the credit. This Hubbert s earliest paper describing single-peaked growth with a decline to zero came in a publication for the Technocracy a social and political movement of the 1930s that advocated replacing the price system with management by technocrats ( Inman ) Unleashing the Power of American Energy | technique was originally developed in to improve flow from oil wells and it evolved in the 1990s toward greater volumes of water and sand injected to fracture rocks saturated with natural gas. This breakthrough depended on a fundamentally sound understanding of the relevant geophysics the basis of which was pioneered in by none other than the same Hubbert of peak oil fame. Production of natural gas in the United States has continued to grow to record levels reducing reliance on imports and expanding exports globally. For the 9th time in the past years in the United States withdrew a record amount of natural gas. Gross natural gas withdrawals in the United States have increased by more than percent over the past years rising to billion cubic feet ( Bcf ) in October This growth has relied on technological advances including hydraulic fracturing and directional drilling that have made the development of shale gas resources economic. The Appalachian Permian and Haynesville basins have led U.S. production growth. The growth of U.S. natural gas production led by shale and other unconventional resources has been driven by the rise in nonassociated gas production. Nonassociated gas is produced from reservoirs where the gas is not found with substantial amounts of crude oil whereas associated gas is jointly produced with crude oil. Nonassociated gas production in the United States grew by percent between and The rise in nonassociated gas production has been centered in the Appalachian Basin which stretches across New York Pennsylvania Ohio and West Virginia to include the Marcellus and Utica shale plays where total gas production grew from Bcf per day ( Bcfd ) in January of to Bcfd in January of ( EIA 2018f ) Unlike the other states New York has effectively banned development of its shale resources ( see box ) Associated gas production is rising again with shale oil production. This has created an infrastructure challenge given that two types of infrastructure are needed for oil and for natural gas. Oil has more transportation substitutes than natural gas which depends on specific investments in pipeline capacity to move efficiently. In comparison oil can move by rail or even truck where necessary until pipeline capacity catches up with production ( Covert and Kellogg ) As a result the flaring of associated natural gas has increased. Firms that are unwilling to wait to extract oil have a choice between completing natural gas pipeline projects and seeking accommodation from regulators to allow more flaring. In the short run the latter might be less expensive. Total natural gas proven reserves ( wet after lease separation ) increased by over percent between and In total proven natural gas ( wet after lease separation ) reserves stood at Bcf which corresponds to over times the total U.S. consumption in the same year. The reserves are there ; the technology is there. Two factors limit production. The first is finding uses for more gas at current prices ; the second is building out infrastructure to move gas from where it is produced to where it is consumed. Continued | Chapter Box The Important Economic Effects of State Regulation on Energy Production Differences in States regulation of hydraulic fracturing ( fracking ) have important economic effects. Nowhere is the contrast as stark as between Pennsylvania and New York State which have taken divergent regulatory tacks Pennsylvania has been accommodating and thus has seen widespread development of its underlying shale gas resources but more restrictive New York has elected to effectively prevent development. Pennsylvania s natural gas production expanded over times between and and went from making up under percent to constituting percent of U.S. dry gas production. In contrast New York placed a de facto moratorium on hydraulic fracturing in that ossified into an outright ban in In light of this regulatory ban New York received far less investment and its natural gas production fell by percent from to Counties along the New York Pennsylvania border that are otherwise similar provide an ideal laboratory for understanding some effects of regulation. Boslett Guilfoos and Lang ( ) examined the effects of the New York moratorium and found that among those counties most likely to experience shale gas development residential property values declined by percent due to the shale gas moratorium. This result is also true for rural land values ; Weber and Hitaj ( ) found a percent greater appreciation in Pennsylvania s border counties relative to New York s border counties. Cosgrove and others ( ) used a differences-in-differences approach to examine the effects of increased shale gas production between and finding that after Pennsylvania counties experienced significant increases in both industry employment and wages compared with New York counties. Komarek ( ) used New York s border counties to compare with counties in the Marcellus region that were developed and found that developed counties had a percent increase in employment a percent increase in earnings and a percent increase in earnings per worker. export growth is one method by which to capitalize on vast proven natural gas reserves ; but as figure shows current exports are quite small relative to annual production. Infrastructure investments require an expectation of production and sales over a sufficiently long time horizon to amortize the fixed costs. U.S. consumption of natural gas by consumers has increased alongside production thanks to low and stable prices. For of the last years the United States has recorded record natural gas consumption. This increase is led by electricity generation on pace for a percent increase over the previous peak in Although natural gas consumption has increased substantially for electric power consumers and natural gas vehicles the main Unleashing the Power of American Energy | Figure U.S. Natural Gas Trade and Withdrawals Cubic feet per year ( trillions ) U.S. gross natural gas withdrawals U.S. exports U.S. imports Source : Energy Information Administration. Note : Trade data preceding are derived from EIA s tracking of international deliveries and receipts. Annual data for were reported as monthly data through October at a seasonally adjusted annual rate. sources of natural gas demand are electric power generation industrial uses and residential uses. The shift toward using natural gas for electricity generation is a global trend and were the first two years on record in which natural gas fired electricity generation made up a greater share than coal-fired generation in countries belonging to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) ( BP ) Electricity generation is an important component of creating enough demand to capitalize on American abundance and supporting production.6 The dramatic rise in unconventional natural gas production since has enabled the United States to become a net exporter starting in for the first time since In total U.S. exports of natural gas increased by percent between January and October ( figure ) As a net exporter of natural gas the United States occupies a strategic position to provide this resource both to its Western Hemisphere neighbors and to its allies and trading partners around the world. Natural gas exports by pipeline to its neighbors make up the largest share of U.S. exports with pipeline exports to Canada and Mexico accounting for and percent respectively of total U.S. natural An alternative interpretation is that the lower energy density of natural gas frees up other higher-density fuels for export. Substituting an inferior product for local consumption to capture a premium in export markets is recognized in economics as the shipping the good apples out principle ( Alchian and Allen ; Hummels and Skiba ) | Chapter Figure U.S. Monthly Trade in Natural Gas LNG imports U.S. pipeline exports to Canada LNG exports Cubic feet per month ( billions ) U.S. pipeline imports U.S. pipeline exports to Mexico Oct-18 Sources : Energy Information Administration ; CEA calculations. Note : LNG = liquefied natural gas. gas exports in October Total U.S. natural gas imports have fallen by percent since January ; Canadian pipeline imports make up percent of total imports. Coal Production Is Recovering after the Slump U.S. coal production has recovered after facing difficult market conditions between and After averaging roughly billion short tons of production annually from to coal production and related employment began to slip in mid-2011. By production had dropped to million short tons percent of the average level between and ( EIA 2018c ) However production rebounded in rising percent from the preceding year to million short tons. This trend continued through the first half of as production remained percent higher than its secular low in the first half of Increased production required a small boost in coal mining employment which has grown by since the President s election in This increase has been helped by the production increase in relatively labor-intensive eastern regions. Different grades and characteristics of coal make these mines competitive despite requiring much more labor per unit of output. Higher exports are a welcome fillip to an industry that has been battered by declining demand for domestic steam coal used to fire electric generation Unleashing the Power of American Energy | that stems from low natural gas prices ( figure ) The portfolio of electric generation technologies has expanded with greater penetration of renewables like solar and wind and inexpensive natural gas has expanded its market share at the expense of coal. Coal producers have also been affected by increased costs from new regulatory requirements ; for example coal plant retirements in and were affected by the Mercury and Air Toxics Standards ( known as MATS ) which made a shutdown an attractive alternative to compliance for many plants even those receiving a one-year waiver. Although the past two years show that these trends have slowed and coal production has stabilized at a new lower level a reversal of the trends that return coal to the dominant position it enjoyed for decades appears improbable. The private market is showing signs of trouble as insurers and underwriters are shying away from coal projects. The U.S. coal industry has evolved over the decades toward western and surface production. Underground and surface operations west of the Mississippi River have shifted from under percent of total production years ago to well over half of all production in ( EIA 2018c ) Western coal production has focused on steam coal. Part of the change was influenced by Federal environmental policy which led companies to switch inputs to low-sulfur western coal rather than reducing output or changing technology ( Carlson et al. ) This substitution was costly however and railroads | Chapter  $ "    #  ) "  $ )        /0-  '      *   ./   1er.us    "     *  '    "    "    *  '        "    *  '  *    ) "  ) ! * (  / $ * )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )        '  '  / $ * )  * /   # $ ! /.  ! '  /   $ ! ! )   $ )  ! *   ./.  ! * (    )    $  * !  / #   ) )  '   ) "   0/ ' * * &      managed to capture some of the surplus ( Busse and Keohane ; Gerking and Hamilton ) Productivity gains help account for the relatively modest employment gains ; high levels of productivity in the West North Central Region spanning Kansas Missouri and North Dakota have led to moderate gains in employment over time while the Mountain Region s nationwide eminence in productivity has allowed it to sustain employment levels roughly equal to those during the early 2000s ( EIA 2018c ; MSHA ) The contrast between the outlook for natural gas and coal is captured in figure The EIA s ( 2018b ) Annual Energy Outlook shows a substantial revision between the and forecasts for natural gas consistent with an anticipated shift of the supply curve out and down implying more and cheaper natural gas. This is shown in the left panel of figure with a shift in the supply curve from red to blue. Over time the demand for natural gas shifts out to accommodate growth in energy demand. Hausman and Kellogg ( ) derived the welfare implications of contemporaneous supply and demand shocks. In contrast a sector without technological change like coal does not get a supply shift and even faces the prospect of declining demand because cheaper natural gas is an attractive substitute. U.S. Fuels in the Global Marketplace Trade is crucial for energy markets. Fuel commodities constituted more than a percent share of global trade in on a value basis ( United Nations ) The supply shift that the United States oil and natural gas producers have experienced thanks to technology along with its world-leading coal reserves put it in an excellent position to trade energy products. The gains from trade are especially large in primary commodities like fossil fuels ( Fally and Sayre ) for which the United States has a comparative advantage ( CEA ) Unleashing the Power of American Energy | U.S. Oil Exports Are At an Unprecedented High The unexpected increase in domestic oil and natural gas production has bought the United States a new degree of leeway in energy markets especially for transportation fuels that are particularly reliant on petroleum. Domestic production offsets the demand for imported petroleum which has contributed to rebalancing in the global market. U.S. net imports of crude oil and petroleum products averaged MMbpd in down from the average of MMbpd in World production of crude oil and other petroleum liquids continued to grow through and is expected to average over MMbpd ( EIA 2018i ) The change in the U.S. net import position for crude oil in year was about MMbpd equal to about half of OPEC s estimated spare production capacity in ( EIA 2018i ; BP ) This shift also significantly affects the U.S. international position in the market for crude oil and petroleum products. The U.S. petroleum trade balance was $ billion after seasonal adjustment in which is less than half of the $ billion ( inflated to $ ) years earlier and is down over $ billion from the all-time low in ( U.S. Census Bureau ) Although the overall trade balance deteriorated over the concurrent period increased production has undoubtedly served as a boon to the American position internationally as well as a buffer for American consumers sensitivity to oil prices. Petroleum exports. The United States has witnessed a renaissance in exports of crude oil since December thanks to the lifting of a 40-year ban on crude oil exports. Through September U.S. exports of crude oil were more than triple the annual levels in the first full year of exports after the lifting of the export ban. In May exports of crude topped MMbpd for the first time in U.S. history ( figure ) Melek and Ojeda ( ) found that the ban was binding during the period but that when general equilibrium effects are taken into account the macroeconomic effects of removal are negligible because of adjustments in the types of crude oil refined in the United States. This suggests that crude oil exports alone do not increase U.S. GDP because crude oil and refined product prices adjust. However in trade that does boost GDP the United States imports a large volume of oil and capitalizes on the large and complex refining sector to produce refined products that are exported. Crude oil and refined petroleum product exports rose by percent in the first months of from the average level in driven by increased exports to Latin American nations ( figure ) The silver lining is the nondurable manufacturing jobs that are supported by imported oil. There is room for further gains in this direction. Despite increasing oil-refining capacity U.S. consumption of petroleum exceeds domestic refining capacity. | Chapter Macroeconomic effects. Abundant crude oil has other important spillovers notably to the macroeconomy. Trends in crude oil exports and shrinking net imports have implications for the economy s responsiveness to oil price shocks. The petroleum share of the U.S. trade balance is at historic lows ; the petroleum share of the deficit was percent in down percentage points from secular highs of over percent in The petroleum trade balance has narrowed steadily since its all-time high of $ billion in November ( figure ) Because petroleum prices are determined in a global market and are volatile reducing net imports of a product with inelastic demand allows domestic producers to capture windfall gains from higher prices that otherwise would be transferred to foreign producers. Oil price spikes have historically been correlated with negative growth effects for oil-importing economies ( Hamilton ) Exogenous oil price shocks have significant contractionary effects on GDP growth for the United States and also for most other developed economies ( Jim nez-Rodr guez and S nchez ) A large body of literature finds that oil price volatility imposes substantial costs on the economy affecting consumers directly and creating uncertainty that disrupts business investment ( Jaffe and Soligo ; Parry and Darmstadter ; Kilian ; Baumeister and Gertsman ; Brown and Huntington ) Separating the role of oil price shocks in measuring effects on real GDP growth has traditionally been a difficult empirical task. Efforts Unleashing the Power of American Energy | | Chapter to tease out the effects of oil price changes are impaired by the endogenous effects of monetary tightening and other countercyclical policies aimed at correcting these trends ( Hoover and Perez ; Barsky and Kilian ) As the United States continues to expand its position as an exporter in global oil markets it better insulates itself from the adverse welfare and GDP consequences of high oil prices and price spikes. Although the United States remains a net importer of petroleum products its smaller net import share leaves it with less exposure to oil price shocks. For example between and the average landed cost of imported crude oil decreased from $ to $ per barrel contributing to a $ billion lower oil import bill. Because of lower imports a similar price difference during the first three quarters of would have only saved $ billion. In a stunning reversal if the United States becomes an annual net exporter it may view supply restrictions elsewhere in the world as an opportunity rather than a threat. The speed with which this transition has taken place is unprecedented. A second effect of the changing U.S. net petroleum position is that it may increase protection from the business cycle that is exacerbated by high oil prices. Kilian and Vigfusson ( ) observe that in the period since U.S. economic recessions have been universally preceded by increases in the price of oil. However as the authors note increases in real oil prices do not always predict an economic contraction in a subsequent period. One metric for defining sustained increases in the price of oil is the cumulative net oil price increase over three years ( Hamilton ) Figure displays the apparent correlation between persistent upward pressure on the price of oil and recessions between and After Years the U.S. Is Again a Net Exporter of Natural Gas Domestic production proven reserves and export capacity have all increased for U.S. natural gas. The supply shock for gas has created a question of where gas should flow to balance the market. Domestic consumption has increased led by electricity generation. Petrochemical investments are up contributing to a strong domestic chemical manufacturing base with ethane crackers along the Gulf Coast and in Pennsylvania. That leaves two main options for outlets : domestic transportation and foreign markets. With greater export capacity natural gas will play an important role as a strategic resource provided by the United States to countries around the world in addition to the trade balance in goods. The implications of exporting U.S.produced natural gas include higher prices in the United States and exposure to global natural gas market dynamics. Policy has the ability to affect either side of the trade-off between exports and domestic supply. The Administration has promoted increased export capacity streamlining the process for approval of export facilities and enabling a more active role in global natural gas markets. At this point private final investment decisions are needed for fully permitted Unleashing the Power of American Energy | Figure Real U.S. Refiners Acquisition Costs and Recessions Real cost ( dollars per barrel ) Aug-18 Refiner acquisition price Real net price increase Sources : Kilian and Vigfusson ( ) ; Energy Information Administration ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; National Bureau of Economic Reserach ; CEA calculations. Note : Real oil price is defined as the monthly average refiner acquisition cost for crude oil deflated using the CPI-U. The 3-year net oil increase measure is denoted as the end of a period in which the value of the real price of oil is greater than the price in the preceding 36-month period. Shading denotes a recession. additional export terminals. As shown below increasing export capacity offers opportunity but the competitive global liquefied natural gas ( LNG ) market must be considered before making large fixed investments. Natural gas is less fungible than petroleum limiting trade to transportation by pipeline or at much higher cost by chilling until it liquefies ( at F ) which reduces its volume by percent and allows long-distance bulk transporting by specialized tankers. In the average price of LNG was over two times the benchmark U.S. price at Henry Hub in Louisiana. However the costs associated with cooling for transportation plus the costs of transportation and regasifying at the destination in addition to covering the fixed costs of specialized liquefaction and regasification trains accumulate and reduce the economic value of expanded LNG shipments ( CEA ) Domestic production of natural gas has increased almost percent over the last decade and the EIA estimates that production increased by a further percent in ( EIA 2018i ) The estimated increase in production from to was the largest year-over-year growth on record. The growth of LNG exports helped the United States become a net exporter of natural gas in for the first time since The surplus was also driven by a capacity expansion of billion Bcfd ( percent ) into Mexico ( EIA 2018j ) Pipeline exports are almost always cheaper thanks to inherently lower transportation | Chapter costs. Increasing export volumes by either transportation mode helps support higher prices for U.S. producers. The majority of U.S. natural gas exports are by pipeline to Mexico and Canada. Delivering natural gas beyond U.S. land neighbors and U.S. domestic markets that are inaccessible by pipeline however requires exporting by sea after the natural gas has been liquefied. LNG has grown to be percent of total U.S. natural gas exports by volume. The capacities for both LNG exports and pipeline exports are projected to grow over the coming two years. Currently just three facilities in the United States have a combined capacity for LNG exports of Bcfd. However four additional LNG export facilities currently under construction will add Bcfd of capacity and a further four facilities that are approved but not yet under construction will potentially add a Bcfd of LNG export capacity ( EIA 2018h ) Although less flexible than the expansion of LNG capacity construction of more gas pipelines into Mexico could provide additional competitively-priced avenues for increasing U.S. gas exports. Capacity for planned pipelines from the United States to Mexico is projected to grow by nearly Bcfd from through Because the centers of Mexican demand are not located near the border complementary infrastructure investment on the Mexican side of the border is needed. In Mexico added Bcfd with an additional Bcfd under construction to move imports from south and west Texas further south to population centers ( Wyeno ) Liquefied natural gas. Not so long ago the United States was considered to be a critical import market for LNG. Investments in domestic regasification terminals to handle these imports were seen as critical for the country s energy future. Forecasts less than years old projected that the United States would run a net deficit in LNG trade through the extent of their 20-plus-year horizons. These predictions were so bleak on the export front that in the edition of the Annual Energy Outlook ( EIA ) the United States was forecast to import trillion cubic feet of liquefied natural gas in and export none. The ex post scenario instead saw the U.S. run a surplus of over billion cubic feet of natural gas in with exports almost times the magnitude of imports. Liquefaction of natural gas is the most economical way to export natural gas to other markets that are inaccessible by pipeline and thus the expansion of these LNG facilities has opened previously inaccessible foreign markets for deliveries of U.S. natural gas. LNG can be sent in bulk shipments using specialized tankers or in smaller containerized units. In spite of these developments the U.S. still imports LNG especially in the Northeast and noncontiguous states and territories where pipeline constraints are the relevant impediment to domestic shipment. Although U.S. natural gas can be exported it can not currently be moved between U.S. points because there are no cabotage-certified LNG tankers. New tankers would need to be built to allow this trade ; none have been built in the United States since Unleashing the Power of American Energy | U.S. LNG export capacity is largely clustered on the Gulf Coast. Cheniere Energy opened the first export facility and now has three liquefaction trains in operation in Sabine Pass Louisiana. This initial investment is the first of several liquefaction trains under construction that are expected to come online in the next two years. The second U.S. LNG export terminal to open was Cove Point in Maryland which came fully online in March Cove Point is located to take advantage of natural gas from the Appalachian Basin. After Cove Point opened U.S. LNG export capacity at this point was Bcfd or about percent of contemporary U.S. production ( FERC ) A third export facility in Corpus Christi loaded its first precommercial cargoes in November and expects to begin commercial shipments in Three additional LNG export terminals are currently under construction : one more in Texas one in Georgia and one more in Louisiana. Upon completion of all three terminals total U.S. LNG export capacity is expected to reach almost Bcfd. Beyond these projects Bcfd in other projects are fully permitted but not under construction for lack of a final investment decision. Figure shows how additional export capacity could increase the value of LNG exports given current price forecasts. U.S. LNG exports can be expected to be particularly competitive in markets with high natural gas demand and a limited access to local or pipelinesourced supply. China and Japan are the world s two largest importers of LNG and are likely to be attractive future markets in which to increase the U.S. share of LNG deliveries. Driven by antipollution government policies Japan and China together imported an average of Bcfd in nearly four times current U.S. export capacity. Many countries can supply LNG and China has chosen to impose tariffs on U.S. LNG imports in retaliation for U.S. tariffs on imports from China. Growth in the global LNG market overwhelms this effect because U.S. cargoes can be delivered around the world and do not rely on particular partners. European markets appear promising but may prove more difficult to penetrate for U.S. imports. European countries import most of their natural gas supply by pipeline from the Middle East and Russia limiting demand for the more expensive U.S. LNG exports. Pipeline transportation remains less costly than LNG for international shipments departing from the United States ( figure ) LNG accounted for only percent of European gas demand in while pipeline imports supplied percent of Europe s consumption ( BP ) Although the EU had Bcfd of regasification capacity in LNG imports totaled only Bcfd on average ( European Commission ) This spare capacity provides insurance against supply interruptions from Russian gas but the higher cost of delivered LNG makes it less attractive for long-term commercial contracts. Additional barriers to expansion of U.S. LNG exports may stem from the industry s focus on long-term contracts which traditionally have had destination clauses that limit the flexibility of trade to price signals. Long-term | Chapter contracts reassure financiers providing capital for expensive investments in capacity. In such LNG contract structures uncertainty over future prices and political or economic developments in the receiving country may weigh on U.S. LNG exports and investment abroad ( Zhuravleva ) These uncertainty factors may be particularly relevant in Eastern European countries which generally have weak and volatile economic regulatory and political conditions. In addition to long-term contracts spot trading is needed for the market to recognize arbitrage gains ; facilities that are locked into long-term contracts can not capitalize on cargoes of opportunity such as particularly high prices in distant markets. One contractual solution to the paradox of needing both long-term and spot trades is allowing brokers to bridge the gap by paying projects for capacity and marketing LNG where it is most profitable. Coal Exports One reason for greater coal demand has been overseas demand ; U.S. coal exports rose by percent in This aided both the steam and metallurgical coal sectors. Exports to Europe increased by percent while exports to Asia increased percent. Asian markets especially India and South Korea were leading purchasers of steam coal while European countries led by Unleashing the Power of American Energy | Ukraine and the Netherlands purchased a plurality of U.S. metallurgical coal exports ( EIA 2018c ) The coal industry has seen a minor reversal of downward trends starting in the fourth quarter of The United States exported nearly million short tons of coal in the first three quarters of up million short tons ( percent ) from ( figure ) This boom in exports was primarily driven by exports of steam coal which grew by percent in the first three quarters of over levels. U.S. coal production continued to exceed domestic consumption through allowing for renewed opportunities to further expand demand through exports ; U.S. production accounted for slightly less than percent of global consumption in ( BP ) The fuel costs of using coal to generate electricity remain among the lowest of any technology. However thanks to the technology s higher fixed costs and inherent inflexibilities coal-fired generation has lost market share to natural gas generation ( Fell and Kaffine ) However coal remains the main fuel by which many countries provide electricity to their citizens ( Wolak ) Coal-fired generation made up percent of electricity in non-OECD countries in and was just surpassed by natural gas in OECD countries to become the second-most-widely-used source of fuel for electric generation after natural gas ( BP ) The increased demand for electricity in developing regions helped bolster coal prices in leading to higher U.S. exports. Price | Chapter increases were especially pronounced in Europe and Japan where benchmark coal prices rose by and percent respectively ( BP ) Figure documents the dynamic response of U.S. coal exports vis- -vis export prices and how rising prices in contributed to export growth. Wolak ( ) examines the potential impact on the world coal market of increasing coal export capacity from the West Coast. Due to transportation cost differentials the net effect is to increase U.S. exports to the Pacific Basin and to reduce Chinese domestic production. Increased Chinese access to cleanerburning U.S. coal would drive up U.S. domestic coal prices and accelerate the switch to natural gas fired generation in the United States. Projects expanding the Pacific Northwest s export capacity have been proposed in Washington State although local pressure over environmental concerns has slowed progress. Energy policy has important implications for trade policy. Greater selfreliance reduces import dependence while growing exports strengthen links to other countries. Increased leverage might seem like an unambiguous asset but greater trade linkages also create potential vulnerabilities as trading partners recognize that U.S. interests may be sensitive to changes in trade flows. Unleashing the Power of American Energy | Strategic Value Energy trade can offer a strategic advantage to the United States. LNG exports to Europe provide an example of the strategic value of energy exports. In Lithuania received percent of its natural gas from Russia. But Lithuania has begun diversifying its energy supply building an LNG import terminal in Afterward Russia s share dropped to percent in Although the economic value of LNG exports to Lithuania is small the strategic value of providing allies with alternative energy supplies is relatively large if difficult to quantify. If the United States is the source of LNG shipments this policy provides a double dividend of strategic and trade benefits. The EU natural gas market also provides an example of the limitations of U.S. energy diplomacy. The EU has only reduced Russia s share from percent of imports in to percent in ( through August ) The United States only provided percent of the EU s LNG imports in Not all fuel transactions are dominated by strategic concerns. Venezuela exported percent of its crude oil to the United States in when Hugo Ch vez became president ; but the amount dropped to percent in Oil exports represented percent of Venezuela s exports in so the Venezuelan government has a strong incentive not to disrupt this trade. The U.S. refining sector has invested in processing Venezuelan crude oil that it can buy competitively on the market. Although strategic considerations alone might suggest that the United States should substitute away from Venezuelan supplies the advantageous economics of supply mean that the oil still flows. Because of its prominence oil trade is a geopolitical pressure point. In the United States sanctioned oil exports from Iran returning to a regime that was in place before the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. The stated goal of U.S. sanctions is to deprive the Iranian regime of oil revenue. In anticipation of implementation on November global oil prices rose through October Iran exported MMbpd in Before the November deadline Iranian oil exports for October were already down percent from their level to MMbpd ( figure ) In an effort to minimize harm to U.S. allies importing oil from Iran the United States granted six-month waivers exempting certain volumes from the sanctions. Eight such waivers were granted to China India Japan Turkey Italy Greece Taiwan and South Korea. Spare production capacity especially among OPEC members has been vital in stabilizing global oil markets in response to unexpected shocks due to factors ranging from natural disasters to geopolitical conflicts ( Pierru Smith and Zamrik ) Spare production capacity can be brought online within days and sustained for at least days. Spare capacity among OPEC producers is projected by the EIA to be slightly over MMbpd through ( figure ) Spare production capacity growth has been limited in recent years as Saudi | Chapter Figure Iranian Crude Oil Exports Barrels per day ( thousands ) Nov-18 average U.S. announces that sanctions will be reimposed Sanctions snap back Dec. Apr. Aug. Dec. Apr. Aug. Sources : Thomson Reuters ; CEA calculations. Arabia has reached capacity. Removing Iranian crude oil from the global market places additional pressure on suppliers and transfers spare capacity to Iran. Future supply interruptions may require cooperation in using spare capacity to avoid price spikes. Energy exports also create a vulnerability as other countries recognize that they can retaliate against U.S. exports. When China wanted to retaliate against the U.S. Section tariffs it imposed tariffs on LNG. In the United States exported Bcf of LNG to China or about percent of all U.S. LNG exports. Following imposition of retaliatory tariffs U.S. LNG exports to China dropped to zero. This reflects the near-perfect substitutability of commodity products like LNG and even crude oil. U.S. exports will not be shut out of the global marketplace but the destination could be affected by foreign trade policy much as U.S. agriculture has been targeted in the past. Energy Policy Despite the promising indications from booming fossil fuel production and the success in improving the U.S. fossil fuels trade balance a number of energy policy issues remain salient. In a market economy like the United States with a competitive energy sector opportunities to increase access to production are limited except for perhaps on Federal land and minerals. This section discusses a number of issues facing the electricity generation sector which are Unleashing the Power of American Energy | also important for fuels production because of the large share of fuels that are destined for electric generation units for example percent of U.S. coal is ultimately consumed by electric power generation. The electricity sector affects many important issues including renewable and nuclear electric generation. A third issue is the general relationship of regulation to the energy sector which has been a particular focus of deregulatory actions. Global environmental issues are an important issue facing the United States and other countries so the discussion concludes with an assessment of U.S. energy intensity and carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) emissions. International environmental policy potentially affects many linked markets as impending maritime fuel regulations illustrate. Increasing Access to Production Unlike the government of any other country in the world the U. S. Federal government directly controls only a minority of the country s produced resources because mineral ownership is largely in private hands. Although this unusual allocation has received credit for helping spur the technological revolution in oil and gas drilling ( Hefner ) it limits the ability of the Federal government to simply turn up the tap on production. A second channel for affecting production levels is through regulation. States not the Federal government are the primary regulators of oil and | Chapter gas extraction activity. Technological change poses a challenge for regulators ( Fitzgerald ) Only when an interstate or Federal issue is involved does the Federal government have a role ( see box ) Although the Obama Administration sought a more expansive Federal regulatory role the Trump Administration has worked to reduce unnecessary Federal regulations. Electricity Generation Electric power is the single largest energy sector in the United States.7 Two major economic forces have affected the sector : changing the traditional regulatory model that provided electricity through a vertically integrated industry and moving toward a more market-based system ; and technological change and its attendant price effects which have shifted the underlying economics of alternative generation technologies. Market design has been a central concern for electricity markets smoothing the transition from regulated vertically integrated utilities to increasing degrees of wholesale and retail competition. Fabrizio Rose and Wolfram ( ) documented the efficiency gains resulting from restructured electricity markets in which firms are exposed to more market forces rather than protected under regulation. The transition has not been seamless as Borenstein Bushnell and Wolak ( ) document in the case of California. The potential for market power is one of the primary motivations for utility regulation and is a key factor that should be considered in any restructuring. Market incumbents accustomed to capturing inframarginal rents may be disrupted by restructuring or may find new opportunities. Regional transmission organizations and independent system operators coordinate generation and transmission to ultimately satisfy the demands of electric consumers using a variety of more and less market-oriented structures. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission ( FERC ) oversees these grid operators and has considerable discretion in approving rate requests and operational plans. FERC could take a more interventionist role in addressing issues arising from the electricity grid ; as an independent regulatory body it has substantial discretion. Although the regulatory structures are similar the different physical characteristics of electricity as compared with natural gas help explain the slower buildout of electricity transmission infrastructure ( Adamson ) Because electric generation units are long-lived investments with long payback periods disruptive changes can lead to a premature retirement of units. As a policy issue this problems stems from concern about the resiliency of the grid to severe weather events cyber threats and other sources of interruption to fuel deliveries and ultimately electricity. There is some evidence that fuel supply deficiencies lead to electricity outages. In the EIA reported This includes utility-scale electric generation and combined heat and power plants. Unleashing the Power of American Energy | Box The Federal Role in Promoting Domestic Fuels Production : The Case of Alaska The discovery of the billion barrel Prudhoe Bay oil field on Alaska s North Slope remains one of the largest single discoveries in U.S. history. At its production peak Alaska was the top-producing U.S. State with total crude oil production of MMbpd representing nearly percent of U.S. production. Since Alaskan production has declined and by it was less than a quarter of its peak production ( barrels per day ) and percent of total U.S. crude oil. Two aspects of the rise and fall in Alaskan oil production relate to Federal policy. First infrastructure is a critical element in order to realize the value of large and remote energy reserves like Prudhoe Bay and Federal cooperation was needed. Second in states with large shares of Federal land ownership access to federally owned lands and minerals can play a critical role in promoting domestic production. Prudhoe Bay which is on the Alaskan northern plain alongside the Arctic Ocean is the most remote and inhospitable oil and gas operating environment in the United States ( figure 5-ii ) It is distant from national and global consumers. Marketing the crude oil required constructing a 4-foot diameter pipeline miles across the state. The construction of the TransAlaska Pipeline System ( TAPS ) required Congressional approval ; legislation was signed into law in with the first crude oil flowing from Prudhoe Bay through the pipeline in ( AOGHS ) Today percent of Alaska s total oil production comes from the North Slope region and flows through TAPS and thence by tanker to other destinations. Normal geophysical decline on the North Slope however threatens the continued operation of TAPS. As throughput falls to barrels per day a fraction of the historic peak of MMbpd corrosion ice formation wax deposition water dropout and geotechnical concerns threaten operations. Throughput below barrels per day is projected to severely reduce the reliability of pipeline operations ( EIA 2018a ; Alyeska Pipeline Service Company ) Land and mineral ownership play an important role in production declines. Although percent of Alaska s land is administered by the Federal government ( Argueta Hanson and Vincent ) the Prudhoe Bay discovery occurred on land owned by the State of Alaska. As the wells in Prudhoe Bay and nearby fields have matured exploration has stretched along the coastal plain. The State land where Prudhoe Bay is situated is bordered on either side by federally administered land. To the east is the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge ( ANWR ) and to the west is the National Petroleum Reserve Alaska ( NPR-A ) ( figure 5-ii ) The NPR-A is million acres and currently has limited exploration and production activity. A study by the U.S. Geological Survey ( USGS 2017b ) estimated total undiscovered technically recoverable reserves in the NPR-A to be billion barrels of oil and trillion cubic feet of natural gas. This was a major upward revision from the previous | Chapter  $ "  $ $   * -/ # )   '  .&   / #    / $     / $ * )  '   $ '  ' $ !   ! "       )   / #   *  ./  '   '  $ )      *       * ' * " $   '     ) "  ) ! * (  / $ * )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * ) USGS estimate of less than billion barrels and was informed in part thanks to increased exploration activity and the beginning phases of production in through ( USGS ) The ANWR is a large tract of protected land though only percent of the refuge is of interest for oil and gas activity. This area on the coastal plain known as the area covers million acres of the million acre reserve. As a previously protected area only one exploratory well has been drilled in the area which was completed in ( EIA 2018a ) Despite a lack of exploration and its small size relative to the NPR-A the most recent USGS assessment of the area published in estimated mean technically recoverable reserves of billion barrels ( USGS ) Federal policy in prioritized expanded production on federally administered lands on Alaska s North Slope and was a year of breakthrough success in this long-running effort ( Hahn and Passell ) In December the Bureau of Land Management offered the largest ever lease sale in the NPR-A with tracts that cover a total of million acres available for bid. Previously there were authorized leases covering million acres. The President later signed a law ( as part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ) requiring that a competitive leasing program be established for oil and gas exploration and production in the area of ANWR. The EIA has estimated that crude oil production from the area would begin in peaking in at barrels per day with cumulative production in the mean case at billion barrels between and Under the EIA s ANWR Unleashing the Power of American Energy | high resource case total crude oil production could greatly increase and approach the peak ( figure 5-iii ) Policy to expand production on other federally administered lands including the NPR-A could further increase production forecasts. Figure 5-iii. Alaska Crude Oil Production and Arctic National Wildlife Refuge Production Forecasts Barrels per day ( thousands ) High-resource case Mean-resource case Low-resource case Base case Source : Energy Information Administration. Note : through forecast values are taken from the EIA s Annual Energy Outlook. major disturbances or unusual occurrences in the electricity supply system affecting a total of gigawatts of capacity ( EIA 2018e ) Fuel supply deficiency accounted for percent of these events and percent of the total lost capacity ( EIA 2018g ) The low incidence and relatively small impact are testaments to the overall reliability of the national grid. However more focused studies in particular regions have found evidence of substantial vulnerabilities ( NEISO ; Balash et al. ; PJM Interconnection ) In utility-scale electricity generation was dominated by roughly equal amounts of natural gas and coal at about percent of the total followed by nuclear ( percent ) and renewables including hydroelectric ( percent ) ( EIA 2018g ) This is a substantial change in the generation mix from the preceding decade. Between and coal on average made up percent of electricity generated while natural gas made up percent and all renewable energy accounted for less than percent ( EIA 2018g ) | Chapter One challenge to the traditional system is the emergence of utility-scale renewable generation that operates at or near zero marginal cost. These sources are generally nondispatchable so that they enter the generation mix first at zero cost. Renewable sources are intermittent so the generation can fluctuate for uncontrollable reasons : such as variation in wind speeds for wind farms or in cloud cover for solar generation. The reliability of the grid therefore depends on the ability of other generation units to smooth out intermittency or to firm the renewable generation into a reliable stream of power. Nuclear and large-scale coal generation units are not well suited to provide this firming service which sometimes attracts a price premium. Natural gas fired units particularly open-cycle turbines are particularly well suited for the task. The interaction of renewable capacity and natural gas generation that can firm renewables has been causally linked to reduction in coal-fired generation ( Fell and Kaffine ) Operating costs are separable into fuel costs and operations and maintenance costs that are incurred to keep a plant available. Some plants have higher costs than others ; from an economic perspective operating the lowestcost plants provides the greatest value all else being equal. The competitiveness of natural gas and renewable generation especially in restructured electric markets indicates the importance of low operating costs. Nuclear plants have the lowest mean total operating costs for any generation technology except for hydroelectric. It is worth noting that the existing nuclear reactors have been online for decades and the substantial fixed costs required to build units have already been amortized. The recent experience with cost overruns for new-build nuclear units underscores the importance of fixed costs to the bottom line of plant operators. The revenues required to earn an economic profit may be higher than the figures listed here due to sunk costs though these are likely to vary on a plant ( or even unit ) basis. Mean operating costs vary across types of generation units. If prices move in lockstep with the varying costs margins remain the same. However in part because of varying market structures and generation portfolios regional wholesale and retail prices vary. In conjunction with cost differences price variation leads to differences in operating margins. Generation costs and operation and maintenance costs are not the only relevant costs. Different generation technologies create varying amounts of emissions and waste. Coal generation emits relatively more air pollutants than other fossil fuels and creates a second by-product in the form of ash that requires special handling for disposal. In contrast nuclear generation is emission-free though it raises its own particular long-lived issue in the form of nuclear waste which also requires special disposal. Natural gas falls somewhere in-between with lesser amounts of harmful ( and greenhouse ) emissions than coal. A program accounting for the economic value of emissions could provide a boost to nuclear generation depending on the value of emissions. Unleashing the Power of American Energy | For example in selected markets nuclear units may be eligible for zero emission credits that supplement revenue from wholesale electricity sales. Market design and efforts to dictate the dispatch order of plants must be carefully considered to avoid unintended consequences. Holding constant the stock of generation units the likely effect of dispatching high-cost units more frequently is to reduce the cost of the marginal megawatt and reduce the market-clearing wholesale price in competitive generation markets. This means that the cost of keeping high-cost units running can be underestimated because the gap between market-determined prices and operating costs will widen as a result of the policy. Using two-part tariffs or other mechanisms to address these concerns may provide workable solutions and regional flexibility to accommodate different grid characteristics. The strategic need for an electricity generation reserve to promote the grid s resilience is a challenge that is analogous to many other economic problems. The entire portfolio of generation assets in the United States could be eligible to be part of a reserve with different strategic weights placed on various types of generation for example nuclear or coal-fired generation might provide greater resilience benefits and therefore be preferentially selected into the reserve. Generation assets in regions of the country that are more susceptible to natural disasters or other exogenous interruptions might be more valuable to include in the reserve. Focusing the strategic needs into unit- or plant-specific weights can be accommodated in a voluntary reserve system much like conservation programs that elicit landowner participation while minimizing public expenditures. A similar mechanism could be used to provide the strategic benefits of a generation reserve while minimizing the downstream costs to electricity consumers. In addition to minimizing the cost such a program would retain private initiative to opt into the reserve with the lowest qualified bids selected rather than relying on the judgment of bureaucrats to select the most preferred units. Renewables. Renewable generation technologies like wind and solar have marginal costs that are very close to zero. The fuel costs are zero at least when the wind is blowing or the sun is shining. However building windmills and solar farms requires substantial capital expenditures and the relatively high fixed costs may not outweigh the low marginal costs that come with generation. Recognizing this difference Federal policymakers have worked to provide incentives to increase installations of renewable generation capacity and penetration of these technologies into the generation mix. The Business Investment Tax Credit ( ITC ) and the Production Tax Credit ( PTC ) are the main Federal subsidies targeting renewable electric generation.8 Renewables are targeted by a wide variety of State programs including Renewable Portfolio Standards and build requirements such as those promulgated in December by the California Building Standards Commission which will require new homes to have solar panels. | Chapter The ITC was established in and recently extended through under the Bipartisan Budget Act. The ITC provides accelerated depreciation schedules for renewable energy investments by providing an initial percent depreciation rate in the year the infrastructure is installed with the accelerated depreciation rate falling incrementally to percent in the years after This effectively front-loads the depreciation of investments in renewable energy infrastructure for tax purposes and lowers the cost of capital. All else being equal this reduces the private fixed costs of investing in renewable generation. Once renewable capacity is installed the low marginal costs are relatively easy to cover. The PTC established in and most recently renewed in ( H.R. Sec. ) and operates a bit differently. Rather than trying to reduce the fixed costs associated with construction and installation the PTC provides an inflation-adjusted per-megawatt-hour ( MWh ) tax credit for the generation of renewable energy ( wind solar closed biomass and geothermal systems ) For qualifying renewable generation infrastructure ( facilities not claiming the ITC ) constructed before the PTC provides a payment during a facility s first years of service. Only new wind facilities qualify for the PTC since January ; in the PTC is slated to be phased out entirely. Because of the inflation adjustment the nominal value of the PTC has grown over time. For facilities beginning construction in the PTC was $ per MWh. Qualified wind-based generation was given a three-year phasedown period where the generation credit is reduced by and finally percent for facilities commencing construction in and respectively. The EIA ( 2018b ) presents amortized values of Federal renewable energy subsidies in its annual projections of levelized costs of electricity for new generation resources. The EIA s most recent report values the amortized tax credit for solar PV at $ ( $ ) per MWh for generation resources entering into service in This is smaller than the contemporary $ subsidy per MWh provided by the PTC for wind facilities commencing construction before but larger than its current value of $ per MWh for facilities being constructed starting in ( figure ) Thanks to very low marginal costs the increased penetration of renewable generation technologies has helped lower consumer costs at the margin ( Cullen ; Kaffine McBee and Lieskovsky ; Novan ) However the displacement of existing nonrenewable generation resources is an important policy question. Bushnell and Novan ( ) focus on western electricity markets and find that the short-term response to additional renewable generation has helped lower average prices. However the dispatch of intermittent renewable sources creates both higher and lower prices during the day the net effect of which is to undermine the economic viability of existing baseload generators. A redesigning and rethinking of wholesale markets may be needed to accommodate low-cost renewables without sacrificing existing capability. Unleashing the Power of American Energy | Figure CEA Estimates of Federal Electricity Generation Subsidies by Fuel Type for Fiscal Year Subsidy ( dollars per megawatt-hour ) Nuclear Coal Solar PV Wind Sources : Energy Information Administration ; Internal Revenue Service ; CEA calculations. Note : PV = photovoltaic. Subsidy levels from the Investment Tax Credit for solar generation were unavailable for Estimates are from the EIA s Annual Energy Outlook for new generation deflated to These estimates may understate the level of subsidy in due to the falling price of solar photovoltaic technology over time. Nuclear power. Since the days of Hubbert nuclear power has enjoyed the status of a forward-looking technology. Today the United States licensed light-water commercial reactors have an uncertain outlook. Of these reactors generated some electric power in the fourth quarter of ( Nuclear Regulatory Commission ) Between and utility-scale nuclear power plants ceased operations. This represented a net decrease of slightly under megawatts or percent of nuclear generation capacity. Between and more nuclear generating facilities are scheduled to be shuttered with a net loss of gigawatts or percent of s year-end capacity. Two new units are scheduled to come online in adding gigawatts of new capacity. Of the plants scheduled to close are permitted by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to operate longer an average of years. Deregulatory actions have increased efficiency and safety across a diverse mix of generation ( Davis and Wolfram ; Hausman ) However new concerns have been raised among government agencies over the resilience on the U.S. grid to disruption from natural or intentional causes. The vulnerability of nondispatchable generation and also dispatchable generation with limited The Oyster Creek Nuclear Generation Station in Forked River New Jersey was shut down in September but retains an active operating license with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. | Chapter onsite fuel storage have been cited as potential reliability concerns for the American power system. During the Trump Administration FERC and the Northeastern independent system operators have borne increased scrutiny related to the resilience of the electricity infrastructure including nuclear facilities. Nuclear power is a reliable source of generation but reliability itself does not translate into resilience in the event of a disruption. Though reliability is measured by the ability to deliver the quantity and quality of power that consumers demand resilience is the ability of the system to recover from an adverse shock like a weather event or an attack. The transmission and distribution systems of wires are one of the most vulnerable parts of the electric grid as the experience of Puerto Rico since Hurricane Maria illustrates. Finding the optimal balance between lowest-cost marginal generation and more resilient baseload coverage is not a novel challenge faced by governing bodies and operators in regions with restructured wholesale markets. Efforts to identify the correct levels of emergency generation peak capacity and excess capacity have led regulatory agencies to implement a diverse set of systems to ensure that the grid can handle seasonal or unexpected shocks to demand. The constant baseload output associated with nuclear generation has limited its flexibility in restructured and more competitive markets. Because nuclear generators are price takers and thus must accept the market rate for the electricity they generate rather than face the relatively large costs of a stepdown or shutdown nuclear plants face continuing exposure to volatility in electricity prices ( Davis and Hausman ) This situation has become especially pressing in the wake of falling natural gas prices and the implementation of more efficient combined cycle technology over time as the availability of natural gas generation pushes down wholesale electric prices at the margin ( Linn Muehlenbachs and Wang ) Jenkins ( ) tested alternative explanations for lower prices received by nuclear generators and found that cheap natural gas had the largest effect by far though renewable penetration and stagnating electricity demand had statistically significant effects. Lower wholesale electric costs caused by falling gas prices have undercut margins in nuclear plant revenues that may otherwise have been realized by nuclear operators over the past five years due to falling costs ( figure ) The Nuclear Energy Institute ( NEI ) estimates that the real costs of nuclear generation have fallen by $ per MWh ( percent ) over the past five years. Some of this reduction may be due to market forces pressuring closure of noneconomic plants ; however this decrease in real costs has outpaced the rate at which real retail electricity prices have fallen over the same period. The NEI estimates that the majority of these savings to have come from the lower costs of capital which fell by percent between and to $ per MWh of generation. Unleashing the Power of American Energy | Figure Average Total Cost for Investor-Owned Utilities by Fuel Type Hydroelectric Nuclear Gas turbine and small-scale Steam coal Average total cost ( dollars per megawatt-hour ) Source : Energy Information Administration. Notes : Average expenses are weighted by net generation. The gas turbine and small-scale category includes gas turbine internal combustion photovoltaic and wind plant generation. Hydroelectric consists of both conventional and pumped storage technologies. The United States nuclear reactors are aging and construction of new ones has been very slow. Since only gigawatts of nuclear generation capacity have been added out of a total of gigawatts of new capacity ( EIA 2018d ) Two nuclear units are currently under construction but the financial struggles of these plants underscore the challenges for the civil nuclear sector. In Georgia Power a subsidiary of Southern Company began construction of two gigawatt Westinghouse AP1000 reactors at its Vogtle site. Funding for these new units at the Vogtle plant is backed by two unconditional loan guarantees from the U.S. Department of Energy totaling $ billion. Construction of the units is behind schedule and over budget. Moreover construction of two similar reactors at the Summer site in South Carolina was abandoned in because of escalating costs. Construction of the new units slowed when the designer of the reactors Westinghouse Nuclear filed for bankruptcy in March Although some work has continued at Vogtle the Summer project has been abandoned.11 The cost of the units has climbed with the delays ; because these are the only new This long-delayed project was initiated in The reactor was finished in and was put into service in The outlook is somewhat improved after the first AP1000 reactor went into commercial operation at the Sanmen facility in China in September ( IAEA ) demonstrating that the new reactor design is feasible. | Chapter reactors being built in the United States the realized costs are important for setting expectations for other licensed units that have not yet begun construction. As of November the costs of completing both new reactors at Vogtle were at least $ billion with construction to hopefully be completed by the end of Such high fixed costs render nuclear uncompetitive without additional sources of revenue. The cost overruns to date on the Summer and Vogtle plants alone add $ per MWh to the levelized costs of electricity from these plants even under lifetime dispatch factors above percent. The EIA currently projects levelized costs of $ per MWh leaving little headroom for these plants between costs and wholesale prices even without including cost overruns. Deregulation A priority of the Trump Administration has been to reduce unnecessary Federal regulatory burdens. Executive Order was issued to promote energy independence and economic growth by developing energy resources and reviewing agency actions and regulations ( FR ) Since the beginning of the Administration over regulatory actions have been taken many of them reducing regulatory burdens or exempting certain activities and affecting energy production or consumption. A total of regulatory actions affecting the energy sector were completed through the end of fiscal year with projected present value savings of over $ billion. Two examples relevant to the energy sector are the Waste Prevention rule for oil and gas production and the Stream Protection Rule which had an outsized impact on coal operations. In September the Bureau of Land Management ( BLM ) rescinded certain requirements of a rule pertaining to the waste prevention and management of oil and gas resources produced on Federal lands. The new rule reestablished long-standing requirements and eliminated duplicative requirements for oil and gas drilling and extraction operations on Federal and tribal lands. With respect to the flaring of associated natural gas from oil wells the BLM will defer to State or tribal regulations in determining if flaring will be royalty-free. In many cases this will mean waiving the obligation to pay Federal royalties on flared gas. In February Congress passed and President Trump signed a resolution pursuant to the Congressional Review Act repealing the Stream Protection Rule ( FR ) which had taken effect on January The repeal is estimated to generate an annualized $ million in cost savings for the surface and underground coal mining industries. Another completed action was the repeal of the Federal coal leasing program moratorium. Because western coal resources make up percent of national production and about percent of western production is from federally owned minerals ( GAO ; CEA 2016b ) the rules for the leasing and production of these minerals can affect the amount of resource that is Unleashing the Power of American Energy | commercially available ( EIA 2018c ) Passed in January of the moratorium was drafted in tandem with the BLM s order to study how to modernize Federal coal leasing. Auctions were suspended until the analysis was completed which was expected to be in The repeal meant that the Federal leasing program for coal reverted to the preexisting rules although the leasing rules have undergone subsequent changes under the Trump Administration ( FR ) This action is estimated to have made available for extraction an additional billion short tons of federally owned coal reserves in the Powder River Basin alone ( USGS 2017a ; BLM ) The Federal government also auctions leases for oil and gas development both for onshore minerals and in offshore areas. Onshore lease sales in were another tale of booms and busts. Although a September auction in Nevada garnered zero bids one week earlier a sale of parcels in New Mexico brought in a stupendous $ million in revenue. Bullish expectations for growth in the Permian Basin s outlook and pipeline capacity continue to drive increased interest in expanding production. Year-to-date sales in were over twice the previous record level and nearly three times those made in ( ONRR ) Two of the most economically significant deregulatory actions for energy have been proposed but not finalized. Repeal of the Clean Power Plan ( CPP ) and the Waters of the United States ( WOTUS ) rule are under way. Both these regulations were subject to legal challenges and stays that delayed implementation. Given the pending rulemakings the expected level of future regulation has been dramatically reduced. The Obama Administration passed the CPP in October with the goal of reducing CO2 emissions from existing electric utility generating units.12 The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) codified final emission guidelines establishing State-specific CO2 emission performance rates and implementation schedules for generating units. In February the CPP was enjoined by the U.S. Supreme Court at the request of West Virginia and other states which argued that the rule exceeded the EPA s authority. A repeal of the CPP was first proposed in October by the Trump Administration following pushback from State governments and industry proponents concerned about costs to consumers and outsized effects on coal-fired generation. The EPA proposed the Affordable Clean Energy rule in August as a replacement for the CPP. The final regulatory impact analysis is complete but the rule has yet to be finalized. The Obama Administration passed WOTUS in which expanded the interpretation of navigable waters under the Clean Water Act ; this term was interpreted to include tributaries and bodies of water adjacent to Federal The Carbon Pollution Emission Guidelines for Existing Stationary Sources : Electric Generating Units ( commonly referred to as the Clean Power Plan CPP ) can be found at CFR part subpart UUUU as promulgated October | Chapter Figure Energy Intensity of GDP Energy intensity ( MBtu per dollar of GDP ) Higher energy consumption per unit output United States OECD less U.S. Lower energy consumption per unit output EU-27 Source : Energy Information Administration ; CEA calculations. Note : Thousands of British thermal units ( MBtu ) per dollars of GDP at purchasing power parity of dollar-denominated expenditures. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development includes Australia Austria Belgium Canada Chile the Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Israel Italy Japan South Korea Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico the Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey the United Kingdom and the United States. waters including wetlands ponds and lakes which critics argued was jurisdictional overreach. A proposal to formally rescind the WOTUS rule was issued in July and several public meetings on a new rule proposal took place during the fall of The executive order urges regulators to interpret navigable waters in a manner consistent with Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia s opinion in Rapanos v. United States ; Scalia argued that navigable waters should only include navigable waters in fact. Environmental Implications Energy inputs are essential to economic performance but emissions are an increasing concern as the realities of climate change are confronted around the world. Compared with some others the American economy has a relatively high energy intensity meaning that more energy is used per $ in output in the United States than in other countries. In U.S. energy intensity ( measured as British thermal units per $ in output at purchasing power parity ) was less than half the same measure in ( figure ) However the U.S. measure is percent higher than the OECD ex-U.S. average and over percent higher than the average of the EU member countries ( EIA 2018i ) This relatively high dependence on energy for output helps explain why the United States has the largest negative growth effects associated with increasing oil Unleashing the Power of American Energy | Figure Annual World Carbon Dioxide Emissions CO2 emissions index ( = ) China India World United States Europe and Eurasia Source : Department of Energy ; Energy Information Administration ; United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ; CEA calculations. Note : CO2 = carbon dioxide. Emissions levels are indexed to country-level CO2 emissions. Levels for are estimates from the EIA s International Energy Outlook. prices in the Group of Seven ( Jim nez-Rodr guez and S nchez ) The continental geography of the United States may be a factor by requiring more energy in the transportation sector which is heavily dependent on petroleum. However over time the energy intensity of U.S. GDP has declined as energy users have sought to be more efficient and the decreased net petroleum import position is likely to reduce the harm from future crude oil price shocks. A second relevant measure of energy use is the total level of emissions. The United States has remained below the average global growth rate for global CO2 emissions since the multilateral ratification of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC ) in Although the United States was among one of the eventual signatories to the extension of the original UNFCCC it never ratified the Kyoto Protocol which was the first international agreement with binding emission abatement commitments. Under this agreement the United States would have been obligated to reduce emissions of a number of greenhouse gases by percent below the | Chapter level and to achieve this reduction for an average of the years ( figure ) One concern at the time was that other countries would not be bound by similar standards. U.S. gross CO2 emissions are estimated to have grown at an average annual rate of percent during the period between and while emissions in China and India are estimated to have grown at average rates more than times as fast ( and percent a year respectively ) ( EIA ) The European countries and Japan committed to respectively and percent emission reductions under Kyoto but both failed to meet these goals. Emissions during the period eclipsed the reduction benchmarks by percent for the EU and percent for Japan ( EIA 2018i ) ; see box Although the U.S. Congress did not ratify the Kyoto Protocol U.S. emissions markedly broke their trend after the agreement took effect in Although U.S. emissions grew by percent between and emissions in were down percent from levels. This inflection in U.S. emission trends was concurrent with a similar pattern in the European nations which shrank their emissions by percent between and after they grew by over percent in the period Many factors affect emissions. Although technological change has been an important driver for the United States other countries have adopted a policy-based approach. For example the EU Emissions Trading System has helped participating countries reduce their CO2 emissions by percent starting in the year before the policy took effect until The U.S. reduction of percent during the same period was largely achieved without a Federal policy intervention. Other types of emissions reveal a similar story : emissions of six air pollutants ( carbon monoxide particulate matter sulfur dioxide nitrous oxides and volatile organic compounds ) have all declined since Shapiro and Walker ( ) statistically decompose the declining emissions intensity of U.S. manufacturing and find support for increasing regulatory stringency rather than compositional shifts in manufacturing ( see boxes and ) Gaseous emissions into the atmosphere can cause greenhouse effects by directly absorbing radiation or by affecting radiative forcing and cloud formation. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) developed the Global Warming Potential ( GWP ) measurement to compare relative ability for anthropogenic emissions to trap heat. The GWP measures the equivalent amount of CO2 emissions that would be required to create an equal amount of radiative forcing caused by the emission of ton of a given gas over a 100-year horizon. The IPCC s accounting lists these GWPs for inventoried emissions : methane ( CH4 ) = nitrous oxide ( N2O ) = hydrofluorocarbons ( HFCs ) = to perfluorocarbons ( PFCs ) = to sulfur hexafluoride ( SF6 ) = and nitrogen trifluoride ( NF3 ) = Unleashing the Power of American Energy | Box Long-Term Improvements in Environmental Quality By many measurements air and water quality in the United States has improved dramatically in the last years and additional gains continue to be seen. Since concentrations of sulfur dioxide in the air have fallen by percent nitrogen dioxide by percent lead particulates by percent and carbon monoxide by percent ( EPA 2018a 2018c ) Less sulfur and nitrogen in the air has meant less acid rain and healthier lakes while lower levels of lead and carbon monoxide protect citizens from respiratory illness ( Sullivan et al. ) Water quality has also improved markedly in other dimensions with streams and lakes having more dissolved oxygen and less bacteria ( Keiser and Shapiro ) The improvements stem from various sources including innovations in the private sector and government policies. An illustrative example is the decline in sulfur dioxide emissions ( see figure 5-iv left axis ) The most recent declines have come as abundant natural gas made available through hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling has encouraged the retirement of coal-fired electricity generation as described in the section of the text on coal production. The electricity generation sector accounted for more than percent of the total decline in sulfur dioxide emissions from to ( the last year of available data ) with large reductions since the mid-2000s Figure 5-iv. Sulfur Dioxide Emissions and Rainwater Acidity Metric tons ( thousands ) Precipitation acidity ( average pH ) Total sulfur dioxide emissions ( left axis ) Average pH ( right axis ) Electric power generation emissions ( left axis ) Sources : Environmental Protection Agency ; National Atmospheric Deposition Program ; CEA calculations. Note : Average national rainwater pH is calculated as the precipitation-weighted negative logarithm of the concentration of hydrogen ions in rainwater accross measurement sites in the United States. | Chapter when natural gas production began expanding. The more recent reductions in emissions build on early reductions that occurred following the Clean Air Act Amendments and an associated Federal cap-and-trade program implemented in Less sulfur dioxide in the air has also improved water quality. When sulfur dioxide interacts with water and oxygen it creates sulfuric acid and leads to acid rain which makes streams and lakes more acidic and less hospitable to fish and other aquatic life. Data on the chemical properties of precipitation across the U.S. show that acidity has declined since with large improvements in the last decade. Data collected by the National Atmospheric Deposition Program ( NADP ) from measurement sites show that the acidity of rainwater fell by percent from to Box International Environmental Standards and Liquid Fuels Markets : IMO Under a agreement by the International Maritime Organization ( IMO ) an percent reduction in the sulfur content in marine bunker fuel used by ocean-going vessels will be imposed on January Sulfur emissions have been regulated in the United States primarily in the electricity generation and transportation sectors due to sulfur dioxide s adverse effects on public health ( Burtraw and Szambelan ) Within miles of U.S. coastlines in waters known as Emission Control Areas ( ECAs ) ships must already limit the sulfur content of fuel burned to percent ( see figure 5-v ) Similar ECAs exist in coastal waters off Canada and Northern Europe. Although the United States already adheres to a stricter sulfur standard the IMO s decision to limit sulfur content in marine fuels to percent in the open seas could have consequences for global fuel prices and shipping costs ( IEA ) Ships can pursue various strategies in order to comply with the new regulation including refitting to LNG-fueled engines the installation of scrubbers to remove sulfur from exhaust and switching to lower-sulfur fuels. Given the high capital costs and supply constraints associated with refitting or installing scrubbers initially the majority of ships will likely comply by switching to a fuel compliant with the percent sulfur limit predominantly either distillate fuels ( marine gas oil MGO ) or a lower-sulfur-content residual fuels ( ultra-low or very-low-sulfur fuel oil ULSFO and VLSFO ) It is possible that some vessels will not comply initially and the penalties are unclear at this point. The percentage of noncomplying ships will affect the amount of total high-sulfur fuel oil that will be displaced by MGO or ULSFO. Global bunker fuel demand is estimated currently to be MMbpd. HSFO and MGO constitute most bunker fuel demand with HSFO consumption estimated to be roughly MMbpd and MGO consumption estimated to Unleashing the Power of American Energy | Figure 5-v. Global Marine Fuel Sulfur Limits Sulfur content ( percentage by mass ) Open seas sulfur limit Jan-21 % % % reduction in % % Emission control area sulfur limit % % Source : Energy Information Administration. be MMbpd. LNG and LSFO ( including VLSFO and ULSFO ) currently constitute trivial portions of bunker fuel consumption. Though global bunker fuel represents about percent of total oil demand fuel switching by ships in may cause significant disruptions in specific product markets with consequent price movements for all users of fuel. Demand shifts to compliant fuels in January will be met by increasing refinery runs of MGO and ULSFO. Total desulfurization capacity by the global refining fleet is estimated to be MMbpd. IMO will strain refiners because MMbpd of HSFO will be displaced. As a result the IEA ( ) estimates that existing ULSFO capacity will be able to cover only MMbpd or percent of initial HSFO displacement. Consequently percent of initial HSFO displacement will be filled by MGO for total bunker fuel demand to remain unchanged between and requiring greater diesel throughput by refiners. The IEA estimates that diesel capacity will increase by MMbpd by though only MMbpd of this additional capacity will go toward marine bunker fuel versus other diesel consumers. Under the IEA s estimates of refining capacity and supply of MGO and ULSFO this would leave a shortfall in compliant fuel to fill HSFO displacement ranging from MMbpd ( under a high-end estimate of additional diesel and ULSFO capacity ) to MMbpd ( under a low-end estimate of additional diesel and ULSFO capacity ) ( IEA ) The shortfall will likely trigger higher prices | Chapter though estimates of price shocks to fuels including diesel gasoline and jet fuel vary substantially. To meet increasing MGO and ULSFO demand in the long run refineries will need to increase their desulfurization capacity. Meeting MGO demand will require reconfiguration to optimize distillate product capacity. Meeting ULSFO demand will require upgrading to include the addition of cokers hydrocracker hydrotreater and sulfur reduction units ( Imsirovic and Prior ) Although the United States followed by the Middle East Russia and China is projected to provide most of the incremental diesel production in ULSFO production will be driven by complex refiners. A total of of the most complex refiners globally as measured by the Nelson Index are in the United States ( Bahndari et al. ) The U.S. refining industry is well positioned to benefit from increased global demand for both MGO and ULSFO in However U.S. fuel consumers may pay higher prices in the medium term as a result. Conclusion America s energy sector has bright prospects thanks to technological change and abundant resources that are already delivering record-breaking production. Improving technology has helped U.S. fossil fuel production led by oil and natural gas to defy projections and reach an all-time high in Investments in technology have relied on an appetite for risk-taking on the part of extraction firms and mineral owners. Successful innovation has expanded the U.S. resource base and now offers the prospect of decades of continued production. Lower expectations of the regulatory burden for extraction activities have also helped stimulate production though the empirical magnitude of this effect has not been estimated. Domestic production will help provide energy resources to the U.S. economy that should bolster growth. The United States production has expanded so much that both domestic consumption and exports have increased. Natural gas consumption continues to hit all-time highs and is increasingly penetrating electric power generation. This penetration has disrupted legacy baseload generation including nuclear and coal. As grid operators wrestle with how to increase resilience and ensure continued reliability the future balance between the legacy baseload and newer generators like natural gas and renewables will be struck and this balance may differ regionally. Expanded production also yields a dividend in America s foreign trade and its interactions with partners and allies. Growing exports of crude oil refined petroleum products natural gas and coal are all evidence of greater linkages. For the first time since the United States is a net exporter of natural gas. The shrinking level of U.S. net imports of petroleum provides indirect Unleashing the Power of American Energy | benefits through macroeconomic channels by reducing sensitivity to oil price shocks. If the United States becomes an annual net exporter of petroleum higher oil prices would on average help the U.S. economy. In this case the net gains for producers and to their private partners that own mineral deposits would outweigh the higher costs for consumers. Such a change would have a number of important policy implications. Policies focused on reducing regulatory hurdles and eliminating distorting subsidies and preferences will provide the greatest gains in cost-effectiveness and efficiency. This is especially true in electricity markets where a dramatic increase in renewable generation capacity has threatened traditional generation assets. The restructuring of electricity markets is a deregulatory action if carried out effectively ; future restructuring will need to account for renewables and to be more responsive to consumer demand given that dynamic pricing and other strategies offer substantial efficiency gains. | Chapter x Chapter Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape Although it has been more than a decade since the financial crisis of its consequences continue to be felt. It revealed the financial sector s vulnerability to instability. And it also exposed shortcomings in the government s support for financial institutions that exacerbated the crisis. This experience vividly demonstrated the enormous consequences that can result from systemic financial crises if they are not properly addressed and it revealed the need for measured reforms that could strengthen the financial system without imposing regulatory burdens that do little to enhance financial stability. Unfortunately the reforms spelled out in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act fell far short of these standards. In a rush to respond forcefully to the financial crisis the Dodd-Frank Act became law in without there having been sufficient study of the factors that led to the crisis nor of the costs and benefits of its provisions. Too many of Dodd-Frank s provisions were redundant unnecessarily complex and overreaching in their application. As we argue in this chapter the results of this flawed approach to regulatory reform were an increase in the regulatory burden and heightened uncertainty. We believe this situation exacerbated the slowest pace of economic growth in any U.S. expansion since From its start the Trump Administration has maintained a focus on creating and implementing a more measured approach to financial regulation that can preserve stability while addressing the shortcomings of the Dodd-Frank Act. Two weeks after taking office President Trump issued an Executive Order outlining seven Core Principles for Regulating the United States Financial System. This Executive Order also directed the U.S. Department of the Treasury to determine the extent to which current laws regulations and other policies promote or inhibit conformance to these Core Principles. Thus far the Treasury has released four reports on the state of regulation that have resulted in more than specific policy recommendations. In addition the Treasury has released reports dealing with the operation of the Financial Stability Oversight Council and the Orderly Liquidation Authority the resolution facility created by the Dodd Frank Act. Action has quickly followed. On May the President signed into law one of the single most important pieces of deregulation of his Administration to date : the Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act also known as S.2155. As this chapter explains this law reduces the regulatory burden in a number of ways but without affecting the safety and soundness of the financial system. T his chapter begins with a summary of some of the events that led up to and marked the culmination of the financial crisis of These events epitomize some of the policies that needed to be addressed in the wake of the crisis. The second section describes the Dodd-Frank Act and how it fell short in a number of ways in restoring the full capacity of the U.S. financial industry. The third section outlines this Administration s approach to financial reform which directly addresses the problem of systemic risk without undermining the banking industry s ability to support the economy and contribute to the prosperity of the American people. The Causes and Consequences of the Systemic Crisis The sequence of events that led up to the financial crisis and accounts of how the crisis unfolded have been explored in great detail elsewhere ( e.g. Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission ; FDIC ) Although many policies and practices exacerbated the crisis government policies that focused on increasing homeownership at any cost credit-rating agencies falling asleep at the switch weak underwriting standards risky mortgage structures and a misplaced faith that the housing market would always go up to name a few this chapter focuses on examples of crucial regulatory failures that led to the crisis. | Chapter Reinhart and Rogoff ( ) define a systemic banking crisis as the result of either ( ) bank runs that lead to bank failures or ( ) the failure of one or more important institutions that results in a string of additional failures. Systemic financial crises have been shown to render a nation s banking system unable to carry out its fundamental role in the economy ( Reinhart and Rogoff ) Because banks are critically important agents of the monetary system systemic crises can have very large adverse effects on real economic activity and real people. In recent decades banking activities have increasingly migrated to nonbank financial institutions such as money market funds hedge funds and a variety of other investment vehicles. To the extent that these nonbank institutions fund themselves with short-term liabilities they are also subject to runs that threaten the financial system s stability. The Boom/Bust Cycle in Residential Real Estate As we discuss later in this chapter the historic rise in U.S. home prices between the mid-1990s and the mid-2000s and the historic decline in home prices that ensued constituted a sequence of events that resulted in the financial crisis of But these were by no means exogenous events that arose outside the financial system. Instead the rise in home prices was fueled by an ample supply of mortgage credit at favorable rates and starting in an unprecedented relaxation of mortgage lending standards. While home prices were rising virtually every group involved in the financial system was reaping short-term benefits. Mortgage lenders originated large volumes of loans. Homeowners saw increases in the value of their homes. Home builders saw record sales. Homebuyers were able to obtain credit on relaxed terms with a minimum of due diligence. Housing investors were able to finance multiple homes at once and mortgage investors earned high yields in what was otherwise a low-yield environment. This self-reinforcing cycle of optimism only lasted as long as home prices continued to rise. At the national level home prices more than doubled between and In a number of large coastal markets home prices increased even faster during this period growing by an average of percent among the six coastal cities included in the S&P CoreLogic Case-Shiller 10-City Composite Home Price Index ( figures and ) During U.S. first-lien mortgage originations totaled $ trillion of which the vast majority ( $ trillion ) were prime mortgages government mortgages or jumbo mortgages.1 These totals remain all-time highs for mortgage originations in these categories. Mortgage refinancings hit $ trillion in or percent of total mortgage originations both of which were also historic highs. But as mortgage interest rates rose in originations of prime mortgages fell by more than half. In that same year the mortgage lending Jumbo mortgages are those that are generally made to prime borrowers but exceed the conforming size limit of the government-sponsored enterprises and must be privately financed. Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape |  $ "       * * " $     # $ ' ' * (   $   )     / $ * )  '    '0  Home price index ( = ) Dec-11  *    /  )       * *  * /   #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * )    $ "   )    $ )      * * " $      # $ ' '  * (   $  )      $ /4  *   ) " '   )    )  $  *   )   $ " *  $  ( $   # $ ) " / * )  # * ) $    * -&   (     "   * ./ * )  ) $ /    /  / Increase in home price level ( percent )  *    /  )       * *       '  '  / $ * )  * /    /   ) /  / #  $ )    $ )  # * (  $    /2 )    (   )     (   | Chapter business abruptly shifted to riskier subprime and Alt-A mortgages. Between and more than $ trillion in subprime and Alt-A mortgages were originated three times the dollar amount originated in the previous three years. Many of these would eventually be backed by the U.S. government and by taxpayers who were often on the hook for losses in these portfolios ( see box ) When credit standards were lowered the market became hotter and home prices rose even faster. Home prices had been growing faster than disposable personal incomes since but they accelerated to double digits in and peaked at an annual rate of more than percent in Despite the risks inherent in subprime Alt-A and nontraditional mortgage loans these mortgages performed very well as long as home prices continued to rise. In subprime mortgages past due by days or more made up just percent of total balances. Average U.S. home prices peaked in February During the next five years they would decline on net by percent. Price declines were even more pronounced in cities where nontraditional affordability loans had increased the most again some of which were on the books of the government-sponsored enterprises ( Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac ) and where home prices had risen the fastest before To compete for its lost market share the Federal Housing Administration of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development lowered its down payment requirements and relaxed its underwriting standards. Just as all parties involved appeared to prosper in the self-reinforcing cycle of the housing boom virtually all parties including taxpayers would be adversely affected by the self-reinforcing housing bust that started in By one measure the total value of U.S. home equity declined by more than half between and trimming total household net worth by $ trillion. Because subprime borrowers could not repay when their loans reset and could not qualify to refinance when the value of their home declined subprime mortgage performance declined sharply. By subprime mortgages past due by days or more quadrupled to percent. The annual number of mortgage foreclosures nearly tripled on average from between and to million between and Though not all these foreclosure proceedings would result in the repossession of a home those that did introduced deadweight costs of up to percent of the value of the property ( Capone ) Forced sale of repossessed properties played a substantial role in the self-reinforcing cycle that was driving home prices downward ( figures and ) The ultimate losses to the holders of mortgage credit have been somewhat difficult to estimate. These losses accrued to federally insured banks to thrifts and credit unions to the government-sponsored enterprises ( GSEs ) including Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and to holders of private mortgage-backed Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | Box Defining Subprime Alt-A and Nontraditional Mortgages Subprime Alt-A and nontraditional mortgages were categories of high-risk loans that included terms or underwriting standards that made them much riskier than prime loans. Subprime mortgages were made to households with limited or impaired credit histories. Most of them came with a relatively affordable introductory rate for the first two or three years and imposed heavy penalties on borrowers who chose to refinance during that introductory period. After this introductory period the interest rate was reset to a much higher level which the borrower could avoid only with a refinancing and by paying additional fees. Alt-A was the label given to a class of mortgage loans that were generally made to households with stronger credit histories. But they often eased underwriting standards including the requirement for borrowers to document their incomes. Of the Alt-A mortgages originated in percent required little or no documentation of borrower income. Nontraditional mortgages were a large subset of Alt-A loans that allowed borrowers to defer repayment of principal through interest-only payment option and negativeamortization structures. Both before and after the housing crisis subprime Alt-A and nontraditional mortgage loans were considered too risky to make. This judgment was validated by the exceptionally high default rate they incurred during the  $ "  $  The  $  $ )   $ (   )    '/   *  )    $ ) "  $ ) / *  / #   $ )  )  $  '   $ $ Share of total mortgage originations ( percent )  *   ) $    * -/ "  "   $ )  )   | Chapter housing crisis. Among subprime loans made in percent defaulted within months. For Alt-A loans cumulative defaults for that vintage were percent while for prime loans the default rate was percent. Figure 6-i shows the rise in these types of mortgages in the years leading up to the financial crisis. securities ( MBSs ) which largely backed subprime and nontraditional mortgages. It was the private MBSs and the derivatives based on their value which had been distributed to institutions and investors around the world that made the toll of mortgage losses especially difficult to estimate. Nonetheless the total losses on U.S. mortgages and mortgage-related instruments during the crisis have been projected to range into the hundreds of billions of dollars.2 Implicit Government Support That Undermined Market Discipline Mortgage finance had evolved a great deal in the half century leading up to the crisis. As recently as depository institutions ( banks and savings institutions ) held percent of total mortgage debt outstanding. It was in the 1970s that the GSEs began to build a substantial market share in financing mortgage credit. Their share of mortgage loans outstanding hit percent in percent in and more than percent in every year between and The growing presence of the GSEs in the mortgage market arose in part from the financial and technological innovations that favored their wholesale approach. A provision of the Tax Reform Act of defined the real estate mortgage investment conduit as a tax-preferred vehicle for funding mortgages in securitized pools funded by a wide range of investors. The resulting division of mortgage origination funding and servicing has been called the unbundling of mortgage finance. But their ultimate competitive advantage came from their close relationship with the Federal government. The GSEs are exempt from State and local taxes and from Federal regulations on the issuance and holdings of securities. Investors perceive an implicit Federal guarantee on the MBSs they issued and their securities have exemptions or are given another type of special status under a number of Federal regulations. These implicit guarantees and exemptions resulted in a subsidy that totaled about basis points in the precrisis period and benefited both mortgage borrowers and GSE shareholders ( Ligon and Beach ) For example see reports by the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission ( FCIC xvi ) and the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) A Heritage Foundation study cites research by Passmore Sherlund and Burgess ( ) and other sources. Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape |  $ "       $ )      * * " $      # $ ' '  * (   $   )      $ /4  *   ) " '   )    )  $  *   )   $ " *  $  ( $   # $ ) " / * )  # * ) $    * -&   (     "   * ./ * )  ) $ /    /  / Decrease in home price level ( percent )  *    /  )       * *        '  '  / $ * )  * /    /   ) /  / #      $ )  # * ( $    /2 )    (     )     (    $ "     ) /age  * !     * ) ) / $ * )  '    $ (  * -/ "  "      *   *    ./     Share days or more past due ( percent )  *    * -/ "  "    ) &   *  $  / $ * ) | Chapter Because of the implicit guarantee the GSEs were able to operate with higher leverage than other financial institutions while still maintaining confidence in the strength of their MBS guarantee. Studies find that in they operated with leverage that was significantly greater than their commercial bank competitors ( Baily Litan and Johnson ) These factors provided an implicit subsidy to the GSEs that enabled them to grow and that may have encouraged them to take on more risk. Besides expanding their securitization businesses the GSEs also took advantage of their implicit guarantee and low capital requirements to issue subsidized debt to fund investments in mortgage loans that they retained on their balance sheets. Their combined debt obligations totaled $ trillion at the end of According to a report by the International Monetary Fund [ GSEs ] were pivotal in developing key markets for securitized credit and hedging instruments but their implicit guarantee and social policy mandates [ exacerbated ] a softening in credit discipline and a buildup of systemic risk ( IMF ) Wallison ( ) cites the expansion of the GSEs affordable housing goals in the late 1990s and early 2000s as one factor that led the GSEs to lower their lending standards. He also maintains that though it was difficult to estimate year-by-year GSE purchases of subprime and Alt-A loans they made up percent of loans held or securitized by the GSEs as of June However other data and research suggest that private MBSs had a large role in financing the increase in subprime and Alt-A lending starting in ( Belsky and Richardson ) Originations of subprime and Alt-A mortgages during their peak years of totaled $ trillion. In those same years issuance of private MBSs backed by subprime and Alt-A loans totaled $ trillion accounting for percent of originations in dollar terms ( figure ) The sources of risk introduced through private MBS mortgage conduits were similar to the sources of risk for the GSEs. They operated with high rates of leverage which in this case was the small share of the mortgage pools that were backed by the subordinate tranches that were in a first-loss position. In addition their portfolios were characterized by imperfect information that created moral hazard or the incentive to take on risk at the expense of their investors. This imperfect information was in part the product of the overoptimistic credit ratings that were applied to private MBSs by credit-rating agencies. For example of all the private MBSs rated by Moody s in as investment grade ( Baa or higher ) percent would ultimately be downgraded to junk status. The MBS downgrades by Standard and Poor s ( S&P ) and Fitch were of similar magnitude ( FCIC ) Another factor that amplified the risks were the many structured investment vehicles ( SIVs ) that held private MBSs and funded them with short-term wholesale market-based instruments. Gary Gorton ( ) is generally credited Wallison ( ) cites work by Pinto ( ) that estimates the GSEs total exposure to subprime and Alt-A loans. Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape |  $ "    #   * !     * (   * -/ "  "    /  '      $ )  )  $  '    / *  )  )    * (  ) $  ) $ * )  /   $  /       )   ! $ )  )    * (  ) $      )       * * '.  / #  * $ / *  $ ) ./ $ /0/ $ * ) Share of U.S. home mortgage debt ( percent )  *     '      ) &  * !   ain/  * $        '  '  / $ * )  * /     s   " * ) ( ) / * ) *   ) / $ s        /    &    $ /4 with identifying the role of the SIVs in financing subprime mortgages their funding strategies and how they exacerbated the financial crisis. Brunnermeier and others ( ) also examined the relationship between asset funding and systemic risk with a focus on how financial regulations have historically failed to distinguish between short-term and long-term funding sources. With this portfolio structure the SIVs performed the functions of maturity transformation and credit enhancement that are traditionally carried out by banks. As with banks this transformation created value and returns but also proved to be subject to runs during a period of financial distress. During the precrisis years the SIVs had substantial exposures ( about percent ) to private MBSs and an even larger exposure ( more than percent ) to other financial institutions ( FCIC ) They held stable valuations and were able to obtain funding through the financial markets as long as home prices continued to rise. These stable valuations were suddenly cast into doubt in the summer of when home prices began to fall and the subprime and nontraditional mortgages that backed the private MBSs began to default in large numbers. It was then that investors in the repurchase agreements ( repos ) and commercial paper that funded SIVs became much more reluctant to continue doing so. They required vastly higher haircuts on their collateral or simply stopped investing in SIVs altogether. When investors confidence collapsed the large banks and investment companies that had created the SIVs faced significant | Chapter liquidity demands themselves having provided credit and liquidity lines to the SIVs. Though they were not legally obligated to do so these sponsors frequently stood behind the SIVs they had sponsored because they were also heavily dependent on repo financing ( figure ) The rise of off-balance-sheet financing of subprime and nontraditional mortgages was a leap into the dark for financial markets. Trillions of dollars in credit were indirectly provided to U.S. homebuyers by investors from around the world. When home prices were rising and when mortgage defaults were low this private nonbank financing arrangement was thought by many to distribute U.S. mortgage risk in an optimal way. However when home prices began to decline it quickly became clear that the private MBSs that were financing subprime and nontraditional mortgage loans were much riskier than anticipated. Moreover because private MBSs had come to play a substantial role as collateral for short-term borrowing their downgrades created a major disruption in the overnight lending market. The run on repo that resulted was reminiscent of the destructive bank runs that had been associated with previous systemic crises in the United States and around the world. An Ineffective and Uncoordinated Regulatory Response Regulatory arbitrage that moved risky mortgage lending away from regulated depository institutions and toward private and governments-sponsored conduits played a role in undermining market discipline. But financial regulators also failed to detect and respond to emerging risks in the mortgage markets. At the end of regulated depository institutions still held $ trillion in mortgage loans. Regulatory authority over mortgage lending by banks and thrifts was divided between four Federal regulators and State regulators. This divided authority tended to undermine these regulators ability to prevent or respond to the emerging crisis. For example State measures intended to reduce predatory mortgage lending during the precrisis years were overridden by the Office of Thrift Supervision and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ( OCC ) which successfully claimed that their authority preempted that of the State regulators. Even before Dodd-Frank imposed a flurry of new postcrisis regulations regulators already had a number of authorities that could have addressed emerging risks in mortgage lending before the crisis. The Truth in Lending Act gave the Federal Reserve the authority to establish rules governing mortgage lending that would apply to any type of lender. Although the Fed did implement this authority in its Regulation Z the rule s enforcement was left to a multiplicity of Federal and State regulators ( FCIC ) The Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act gave the Federal Reserve additional powers to regulate abusive and predatory lending practices that especially affected low-income borrowers. This was perhaps the farthest-reaching Federal authority to address emerging risks in mortgage lending. However this power was Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | Figure Gross Repurchase Agreement Funding to Banks and Broker-Dealers Dollars ( trillions ) : Q1 Source : Federal Reserve. Note : Data are as of December publication. Shading denotes a recession. not exercised until when the housing crisis was already well under way ( Lincoln ) Regulatory capital standards that were in place before the crisis proved to be insufficient to preserve the financial viability of a number of large complex banks during the crisis. Moreover the risk-weighting approach of these capital standards actually created incentives to take on more risk. The Basel I standards put in place in turned out to promote bank holdings of MBSs as opposed to holding whole mortgage loans. Under these standards passthrough MBSs issued by the GSEs were given a low percent risk weight. A amendment tied these risk weightings in part to agency credit ratings which also generally resulted in a low risk weight for GSE obligations. These low risk weights permitted the holders of GSE bonds to hold less capital than if they had actually held the underlying mortgage loans which had risk weights of to percent. Moreover the GSEs percent MBS risk weight also applied to private MBSs after provided that they received high ratings from the credit-rating agencies. As discussed above the structured approach to funding private MBSs generally enabled their senior tranches to receive a AAA rating qualifying them for the percent risk weight. Wallison ( ) estimates that this disparity in risk weighting resulted in a reduction in risk-based capital requirements from percent for banks holding whole mortgages to just percent for banks holding MBSs. Although holding | Chapter securities as opposed to loans could enhance the liquidity of bank portfolios their liquidity ultimately depends on the quality of these securities. As discussed above it was the sudden illiquidity of private MBSs and the externalities this introduced in the financial markets that exacerbated the financial crisis. Like the vast majority of their private sector counterparts most regulatory economists also did not realize the risks that were building in housing markets and mortgage finance until it was too late. One factor may have been the sudden change in mortgage lending practices that occurred in Introducing large volumes of high-risk mortgages accelerated the rate of increase in home prices making the housing market an apparent source of strength in the economy. But to the extent that the price increases were the product of risky mortgage lending they could not be sustained. When home prices leveled off and then began to fall in defaults and foreclosures rose sharply. The resulting instability in the housing and mortgage markets would eventually snowball into what became a systemic financial crisis. The Consequences of the Financial Crisis The financial crisis of was an explosion of the risks that had been building in mortgage finance and the financial system as a whole. Rescues of large banks and nonbank financial companies during previous crises had helped to create the perception that the largest banking organizations would be deemed Too Big to Fail and that their investors would be protected from loss in a crisis. These expectations were shattered on September when Lehman Brothers a $ billion investment bank did not receive such assistance and was forced to declare Chapter bankruptcy. Lehman Brothers bankruptcy meant that many of its counterparties around the world would not be made whole and would find their claims tied up for years leading to large losses. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were placed in a government conservatorship on September In combination Freddie and Fannie held or guaranteed $ trillion in mortgage debt or about percent of U.S. households total mortgage obligations. The GSEs continue to operate in conservatorship more than years after the crisis. At the height of the crisis three extraordinary programs of government support were implemented to restore liquidity to financial markets solidify the capital base and the banking system s funding and enable financial institutions and markets to make credit available to finance an economic recovery. First the Federal Reserve expanded greatly on its traditional lender-of-lastresort function by introducing a series of special liquidity facilities that made loans available for longer terms to a wider range of institutions and on a wider range of collateral than it had ever done through the discount window. Second Congress initially authorized the sum of $ billion for the Troubled Assets Relief Program known as TARP to assist financial institutions in dealing with the large volumes of impaired assets on their balance sheets. And third in Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape |  $ "     / $ * )  '  )   * ) "  (   ) ( ' * ( ) /    /  Percent    ) ( ' * ( ) /   / * ) " / (  ) ( ' * ( ) /   /  *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * )  * /  #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * ) October the FDIC instituted its Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program to help stabilize the banking industry s funding base. These three assistance programs represented an unprecedented expansion of government support for the banking system. In total the financial commitments behind these programs has been estimated at about $ trillion although the programs net cost was a small fraction of this amount. The programs can be described as successful in addressing the immediate dangers posed by the crisis. But over the longer term they set new precedents for government support that undermine market discipline in banking. Moreover they violate the principle that financial institutions themselves and not taxpayers should be responsible for their losses. The shockwaves of the financial crisis caused enormous harm to real economic activity. From peak to trough real GDP fell by more than percent making this the deepest U.S. recession since the 1930s. In the six months after September the industrial production index for durable materials fell by percent its largest decline in more than years. The monthly unemployment rate peaked near percent in October the highest rate since June Around the time of the crisis the United States experienced the longest stretch of unemployment above percent over three years since the Great Depression. From peak to trough nearly million nonfarm workers lost their jobs ( figure ) | Chapter The net economic effects of the crisis have generally been expressed as the shortfall between potential U.S. GDP and actual GDP in the wake of the crisis. Studies that have projected the long-term effect of the crisis on GDP generally arrive at estimates of forgone economic activity that exceed $ trillion ( GAO ; Luttrell Atkinson and Rosenblum ) The enormous scale of these effects have become an important consideration in evaluating the impact of the Dodd-Frank Act which was passed as a response to the crisis. The Consequences of the Dodd-Frank Act After the financial crisis there was a push to reform the regulation of the U.S. financial system. The large economic dislocations resulting from the crisis were still obvious as were the potential benefits of policies that could reduce the likelihood and cost of a future systemic crisis. However in the rush to implement reforms the costs and benefits of various regulatory reforms were not properly analyzed and weighed. In the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission ( FCIC ) was created to examine the causes of the crisis. Its final report was released in January six months after sweeping reforms were made under the Dodd-Frank Act. The failure to construct an appropriate framework for considering costs and benefits before passing legislation led to reforms that were often overreaching misguided and inefficient. This failure to analyze fully and properly the likely effects of new regulatory policies made the costs of the crisis greater than they needed to be. Researchers have found evidence of a number of regulatory problems that have emerged in the postcrisis period including regulatory arbitrage rising compliance costs and financial market illiquidity.5 Addressing Systemic Risk The Dodd-Frank Act aimed to address key factors that had undermined market discipline and helped trigger the systemic crisis. It created new processes in an attempt to identify and respond to emerging threats to financial stability. Title I of the act created the Financial Stability Oversight Council chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury and including as members the heads of eight financial regulatory agencies an independent insurance expert and five nonvoting members. The council was given detailed criteria for determining whether a company will be subject to Federal Reserve supervision and the application of enhanced prudential standards. Separately Dodd-Frank also imposed enhanced prudential standards on all bank holding companies with assets of $ billion or more. Title I of Dodd-Frank also required every banking company with at least $ billion in assets and every designated nonbank financial company to hold See Choi Holcomb and Morgan ( ) ; Peirce Robinson and Stratmann ( ) ; and Roberts Sarkar and Shachar ( ) Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | more capital and liquidity to ensure their safety and soundness and to file an annual resolution plan that could be used as a guide for their rapid and orderly resolution through bankruptcy ( figures and ) Title II of Dodd-Frank established an orderly liquidation process to quickly and efficiently liquidate or otherwise resolve a large complex financial institution that is close to failing. It established a two-part test under which the Secretary of the Treasury establishes that the institution is in default or is in danger of default and then evaluates the systemic risk that would be involved with such a default. Title II requires that bankruptcy first be considered as a means to resolve the failed institution. If bankruptcy is deemed unable to bring about an orderly resolution Title II provides the FDIC with receivership powers that apply to bank holding companies or nonbank financial companies. It establishes a fixed order of claims that helps to ensure that the executives directors and shareholders of the institution stand last in line to receive payment. The overarching goal of the Dodd-Frank reforms which sought to end Too Big to Fail strengthen capital and liquidity requirements and restore market discipline was to prevent a future bailout by U.S. taxpayers. However the generally one-size-fits-all approach that Dodd-Frank took in pursuing these goals turned out to be unnecessarily costly and in some cases counterproductive. Moreover an overreliance on regulatory discipline as opposed to market discipline has turned out to rely too much on the judgment of bank regulators which are not infallible ( Viscusi and Gayer ) Dodd-Frank s Ill-Considered Approach The economist Paul Romer once said that a crisis is a terrible thing to waste and the Obama Administration paraphrased him in the wake of the financial crisis placing government deeply into the markets especially the financial ones. The complex series of events that led to the crisis called for careful study before reforms were rushed out the door. Legislation passed in May created the FCIC to examine the causes of the crisis. The FCIC s report and conclusions released in January did not receive bipartisan support but they did provide first-hand accounts of a wide range of bankers regulators and analysts that could have been considered as reforms were being planned. Unfortunately Congress passed and President Obama signed the DoddFrank Act even before the FCIC released its report. Congress rushed out this 849-page piece of legislation which mandated new rules and regulations. Dodd-Frank would stand out from previous financial legislation in the degree to which it mandates how American businesses can and can not conduct the financial transactions that are vital to both their well-being and that of the U.S. economy. Even in the dense world of Federal regulation Dodd-Frank stands out in its size complexity and redundancy. It addressed regulatory policy at a | Chapter  $ "    $     $ /  '    / $ *  * !         $     $ /  '  $    * ( ( * )    $ /  ' Share of risk-weighted assets ( percent )   *      '      ) &  * !     * -&  * /       =  " ' *   '  .4./ ( $   ''4  $ ( * -/  ) /    ) &. ; these are    ) &.  $ / #   /.  of more  / #  )    $ ' ' $ * )  $ "   $ $   /.  * !           #   )        $       ) /  "  * !  / * /  '   /.  $ " # /   $   #   )        $  ' ! /   $ Dollars ( millions ) Percentage of total assets  *      '  * $ /  )  )    * *  / $ * )        '  '  / $ * )  * /         " ' *   '  .4./ ( $   ''4  $ ( * -/  ) /    ) &.  / #    ) &.  #    /.  * !  ( *  / #  )    $ ' ' $ * ) Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | number of agencies ; created a new regulatory body the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau ( CFPB ) ; and merged another agency the Office of Thrift Supervision out of existence. It required the Federal financial regulatory agencies to create new rules of which have been finalized and to complete more than studies. A study using data from RegData showed that Dodd-Frank had placed new restrictions on the U.S. financial industry and the economy as a whole ( McLaughlin Francis and Sherouse ) The Trump Administration has made it a priority to address the regulatory overreach created by the Dodd-Frank Act while also striving to ensure the safety and soundness of the Nation s financial system. The discussion here addresses the consequences of some of Dodd-Frank s most important regulatory reforms and how they have in many cases failed to resolve the issues that led to the financial crisis. Dodd-Frank s Consequences Although it has been eight and a half years since Dodd-Frank was signed into law it still has not been fully implemented due in large part to its complexity. However the initial results of this partisan legislation are not encouraging. Until a recent uptick in growth the postcrisis economic recovery has been atypically weak. The economic expansion began in July and at the end of it had concluded its 114th month making it the second-longest expansion in U.S. history. Until it was also among the most tepid expansions on record. Real economic growth averaged percent between the middle of ( the start of the expansion ) and the end of This marked the slowest growth in any expansion since the National Income and Product Accounts were introduced in Before the severest downturn during this era had been the doubledip recession of and A combination of a pro-growth agenda including tax relief deregulation and price stability led the Reagan Recovery that ensued. This long period of growth started off with two years of growth that averaged percent and average annual growth of percent during the entire expansion. The election of President Trump in November produced an immediate increase in small business confidence that has remained in place ever since.7 The 4-quarter moving average of real GDP growth has risen for consecutive quarters exceeding percent for only the fifth time in the quarters of the expansion. In the second quarter of after the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) real economic growth rose to an annualized rate of 6RegData measures the number of regulatory restrictions in a textual analysis that identifies words and phrases that have been added to the Federal Register that are generally associated with a required or prohibited activity. Further discussion of the effect of the election on business confidence and the effect of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act on economic activity can be found in chapter of this Report. | Chapter more than percent for the first time in four years. The recovery of business confidence hiring and investment spending since suggests that we will see higher potential growth in the years ahead. The slow pace of growth in the first eight years of the expansion was at least in part attributable to the persistent effects of the severe recession. But the regulatory requirements imposed during this period including those mandated by the Dodd-Frank Act were also responsible for holding back the pace of the economic recovery.8 A study projected that Dodd-Frank s requirements and the compliance costs it continues to introduce will result in a reduction of about $ billion in GDP between and ( Holtz-Eakin ) Although the financial crisis had lingering effects throughout the economy long after the recession officially ended additional public policy choices also played a role in slower growth than would have typically been expected after such a deep recession. Some of these policies reduced labor force participation labor productivity and capital investment and thus were factors in the subpar macro performance through ( figure ) Dodd-Frank was especially a factor in discouraging small business lending and mortgage lending and in promoting consolidation among small and midsized banks ( Peirce Robinson and Stratmann ) The importance of small businesses to the U.S. economy goes well beyond the roughly two-thirds of new jobs they typically create. Small businesses have traditionally been a source of strength for their communities and a source of innovation where new and different ideas can be pursued. They rely heavily for funding on community banks which have a local focus that helps them meet the credit needs of small businesses. Small businesses were hit especially hard by the recession and they recovered slowly during the early years of the expansion. Since mid-2010 small loans to farms and businesses held by FDIC-insured institutions have declined by percent while total farm and business loans have increased by more than percent. The monthly Small Business Economic Trends report which is published by the National Federation of Independent Business recorded some of its lowest annual values on record for small-business optimism during the early stages of the recovery. The federation s optimism index would rise above its long-term average only once over months ending in November Small business optimism has remained above the historical average in every month since then. Mortgage lending has also been slow to recover since the crisis. The annual volume of purchase mortgage originations in remained below that of the peak years The level of mortgage debt outstanding in the third quarter of also remained lower that of the peak level reached in Chapter of this Report includes an extensive discussion of the effects of regulation on economic activity. Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape |  $ "      "    * ) * ( $    * 2/ #      ) $ * )   $ *   Compound annual growth rate  Current expansion  *     * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /  #  ) "  $ )   '      $    '  '  /   ! * (  the  &  / *  /- * " #  * !   ) $ * )  $ *  Moreover mortgage finance has become increasingly dominated by the GSEs including Fannie Mae Freddie Mac and Ginnie Mae in spite of their role in the crisis. These entities have accounted for funding percent of the net increase in mortgage lending over the past two years. The increasing dominance of the GSEs can be attributed in no small part to the higher requirements placed on portfolio mortgage lending and private mortgage securitization. As mandated by Dodd-Frank the interagency Risk Retention Rule requires private issuers of MBSs to retain at least percent of the credit risk in the mortgage pool unless the loan meets the definition of a Qualified Residential Mortgage that makes it a low-risk loan. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are not subject to this rule while operating in conservatorship or receivership with capital support from the Federal government. Another area of concern about Dodd-Frank is the overall increase in compliance cost it imposes particularly on small and midsized banks. The hundreds of regulations required under Dodd-Frank and the thousands of pages of detailed requirements included with each regulation have raised concerns about what has come to be called regulatory burden ( Hoskins and Labonte ) This burden refers not only to the marginal cost imposed by new rules but also to the cumulative increase in the number and scope of | Chapter Box Measuring the Regulatory Burden on the Financial Sector Banking is one of the most regulated U.S. industries. McLaughlin and Sherouse ( ) ranked U.S. industries in terms of the regulatory restrictions they face. They found that though the median industry faced regulatory restrictions depository and nondepository credit intermediation both faced over restrictions. The only industries facing more restrictions were petroleum and coal production electric power generation and motor vehicle manufacturing. As with total noninterest expenses there are economies of scale in regulatory compliance. For example Dahl and others ( ) found that mean total compliance costs were about percent of total noninterest expenses in for banks with less than $ million in assets compared with percent for banks with assets between $ billion and $ billion. Regulation may also impose a wide range of indirect costs on banks and their customers that exceed the paperwork costs associated with compliance. These include the opportunity costs of loans not made and products not offered along with effects on deposit rates offered and loan rates charged by regulated banks. Such costs not only hurt the bottom line of the bank but can also reduce the welfare of bank customers and economic activity generally. Through the fourth quarter of community banks held just percent of the total loans of FDIC-insured institutions but they held percent of the industry s small loans to farms and businesses. Recent research finds that by raising fixed regulatory compliance costs the Dodd-Frank Act disproportionately raised the average cost of loan origination by small banks and reduced their share of small commercial and industrial loans ( Bordo and Duca ) They further observe a relative tightening of bank credit standards on commercial and industrial loans to small versus large firms in response to Dodd-Frank. regulations imposed on banks over time.9 They consist of both the overhead costs of complying with a regulation and the opportunity costs of restrictions on bank activities. These costs raise concerns about their effect on both bank performance and the cost and availability of credit ( see box ) In the FDIC s Community Banking Study community bankers reported that no one regulation or practice had a significant effect on their institution. Instead they cited the cumulative effects of all the regulatory requirements that have built up over time. They also explained that the increases in the regulatory cost over the previous five years could be attributed to the time spent by both regulatory specialists and employees that typically carry out other responsibilities ( FDIC appendix B ) Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | A More Measured Approach to Financial Regulation Since its first days in office the Trump Administration has been working to correct the regulatory overreach introduced by the Dodd-Frank Act and to restore the ability of the financial system to support growth in the economy and our Nation s standard of living. Core Principles for Regulating the U.S. Financial System Seven Core Principles for financial regulation were outlined in Executive Order issued in February These principles reflect a commitment to taking measures that will : Empower Americans to make independent financial decisions and informed choices in the marketplace save for retirement and build individual wealth. Prevent taxpayer-funded bailouts. Foster economic growth and vibrant financial markets through more rigorous regulatory impact analysis that addresses systemic risk and market failures such as moral hazard and information asymmetry. Enable American companies to be competitive with foreign firms in domestic and foreign markets. Advance American interests in international financial regulatory negotiations and meetings. Make regulation efficient effective and appropriately tailored. Restore public accountability within Federal financial regulatory agencies and rationalize the Federal financial regulatory framework. These Core Principles are designed to promote the ability of financial institutions to do their job of providing credit and other financial services to the U.S. economy. Under Dodd-Frank banks have been regulated like public utilities where government oversight boards dictate the manner in which business should be conducted. The Administration s approach is consistent with a greater reliance on market discipline and somewhat less reliance on regulatory discipline. The leaders of financial regulatory agencies that have been appointed by the Administration understand and endorse this concept. And this will make it possible for them to pursue a more coordinated and measured approach to reform that will not undermine financial stability but will make regulation simpler and less costly to implement. Recommendations for Meeting the Core Principles During the past two years the U.S. Department of the Treasury has issued four reports that made detailed recommendations consistent with the Administration s Core Principles. These four reports have focused in order | Chapter on ( ) banks and credit unions ; ( ) capital markets ; ( ) asset management and insurance ; and ( ) nonbank financials financial technology ( known as fintech ) and innovation. With regard to depository institutions the Treasury has recommended a series of changes designed to simplify regulations and reduce their implementation costs while maintaining high standards of safety and soundness and ensuring the accountability of the financial system to the American public. These recommendations are summarized and discussed in the next paragraphs. A number of these recommendations were implemented in the Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act of which is generally referred to as S.2155. These cases are noted in the next paragraphs and the overall effects of S.2155 are summarized later in the chapter.10 Improving regulatory efficiency and effectiveness. To address the U.S. regulatory structure consideration should be given to changes in the regulatory structure that reduce fragmentation overlap and duplication among Federal financial regulators. This could include consolidating regulators with similar missions as well as more clearly defining regulatory mandates. At a minimum steps should be taken to increase the coordination of supervision and examination activities. The experience of the financial crisis points to the need for improved coordination among the financial regulators. While risks were rapidly building in subprime and Alt-A lending the need to coordinate across several regulatory agencies made it more difficult to respond in a timely way. Interagency guidance issued in and on commercial real estate lending and mortgage lending did little to discourage the riskiest nonbank lenders but it did lead to industry concerns that regulators were placing strict caps on making loans in those categories. To improve the regulatory engagement model sound governance of financial institutions where policies are developed and their implementation is monitored is essential. Hopt ( ) emphasizes the need to clearly separate the management and control functions and to assign committees to carry out specific governance responsibilities. The failure of board governance and oversight of their banking organizations was found to be a major impediment to risk management and a factor exacerbating the financial crisis. A successful governance model requires both highly qualified board members and a commitment to procedures that promote discipline and accountability across the organization. The approach currently taken by regulators may not be promoting effective governance. Prescriptive regulations may tend to blur the division of responsibilities between the board and management and impose a These recommendations are paraphrased in the next subsections from the U.S. Department of the Treasury s report A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities : Banks and Credit Unions ( U.S. Department of the Treasury ) Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | one-size-fits-all approach that unnecessarily restricts banking activities and the services they provide to their customers. This is particularly problematic for midsized and community financial institutions which have less formal governance structures. It would be helpful to clearly define the board s role and responsibilities for regulatory oversight and governance and to do so more consistently across regulatory jurisdictions. More transparency and consistency across the agencies could help to assure all regulated banks that they are being treated fairly. Encouraging more constructive engagement between bank regulators board members and managers would help to ensure that the bank itself can more effectively meet the needs of its customers while managing the risks it faces. This requires that the board be held to the highest standards when implementing regulatory compliance procedures and that the board not the regulator hold management to the same standards. A step forward in improving the governance of large banks was the Federal Reserve s August proposal now out for comment to create a governance-rating system for banks with assets greater than $ billion. It is also important to enhance the use of regulatory cost-benefit analysis. As concerns about regulatory burden have increased in the postcrisis period cost-benefit analysis has taken on a more prominent role in financial regulation. There are requirements for cost-benefit analysis in rulemaking that apply to most Federal agencies. These requirements have been outlined in Executive Order ( ) and in the subsequent Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) Circular A-4 ( ) These directives call for an analysis of proposed rules that addresses ( ) the policy objectives of the proposed rule ; ( ) the rule s expected effects including costs and benefits for the parties directly involved as well as externalities that are created for other stakeholders ; and ( ) an analysis of regulatory alternatives. The independent financial regulatory agencies have long been exempt from oversight by OMB in most aspects of regulatory analysis. At the same time these agencies have increasingly adopted a cost-benefit approach to rulemaking and have devoted more resources to regulatory analysis in recent years. This analysis has been largely based on the main requirements outlined by OMB s directives. Financial regulators are also subject to a number of legislative mandates that serve to make the regulatory process more transparent and better informed. For example the Administrative Procedure Act established general requirements for a notice-and-comment process that keeps the industry and the public informed about proposed rules and solicits their comments which often provides valuable information that can inform the rulemaking process. The Regulatory Flexibility Act known as RegFlex requires agencies to consider the impact of regulations on small entities. If a rulemaking is expected to | Chapter have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities the agency is required to assess that impact.11 There is an active debate as to whether cost-benefit analysis can be a reliable guide to regulatory policy in banking and finance. Some question whether it is possible to reliably project much less quantify the costs and the benefits of bank regulations ( Coates ) Given the discussion above of imperfect information and market failures in banking it is clear that important outcomes in banking and finance depend heavily on intangible factors such as public confidence and market liquidity. Requiring strict quantification of costs and benefits in financial regulation is viewed by some as being both unrealistic and an excessive restriction on the ability of independent regulators to apply their judgment in addressing emerging risks. Others including Sunstein ( ) contend that a useful cost-benefit analysis can still be performed even when there are serious gaps in the available information on costs and benefits. These two schools of thought might not be as far apart as they initially seem. The experience of the financial crisis and the regulatory burdens that were imposed after the crisis both point to rather obvious conclusions about the relative costs and benefits of regulations that apply to various types of institutions. One conclusion is that regulation is relatively more burdensome for small and midsized banks than for large banks. Research has repeatedly shown that regulatory compliance costs are subject to economies of scale as are other types of nonregulatory overhead expenses. Regulation also imposes external costs on the customers of small and midsized banks which disproportionally include small businesses. The value of small businesses in creating new jobs and new businesses is widely recognized and has been a motivating force behind calls for applying cost-benefit analysis to bank regulations. Another fairly obvious conclusion from the financial crisis is that the benefits of safety and soundness regulations are exponentially higher when applied to systemically important institutions than when they are applied to small and midsized institutions. As the experience of the crisis clearly showed the negative externalities associated with the failures of systemically important institutions included severe distress in global financial markets and enormous losses in U.S. economic activity. The magnitude and the incidence of these negative externalities largely determine the benefits of regulations that reduce the probability of failure ( box ) The framework for cost-benefit analysis by financial regulators could be improved. They should be encouraged to adopt uniform and consistent methods to analyze costs and benefits and to ensure that their cost-benefit analyses exhibit as much analytical rigor as possible. The standards of transparency and public accountability will be served by conducting rigorous cost-benefit This requirement was established under the Regulatory Flexibility Act Public Law Stat. ( U.S.C. ) Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | analyses and making better use of notices of proposed rulemakings to solicit public comment that is helpful in evaluating a rule s possible effects. This type of public analysis will be particularly helpful for proposed regulations that are economically significant as defined in Executive Order Aligning the financial system to support the U.S. economy. With the goal of ensuring access to credit the Treasury report on banks and credit unions identified a series of regulatory factors that may be unnecessarily limiting access to credit for consumers and businesses ( U.S. Department of the Treasury ) Addressing these constraints on credit availability will be necessary to enable the U.S. economy to operate at its full potential. Regulatory constraints also should not be allowed to unduly restrict banks ability to meet their customers needs in a rapidly changing financial marketplace. The U.S. has been and should continue to be a global leader in introducing innovative new financial products. The regulatory environment should support this innovation while ensuring that it does not compromise the financial system s stability or fail to protect the interests of consumers. Among the most important elements in achieving this balance are the requirements for capital and liquidity. Adequate capitalization of bank balance sheets helps to ensure that banks face market discipline that reduces their incentives to take excessive risks. At the same time higher capital standards can limit the ability of banks to add new loans to their balance sheets. Achieving this balance is important to promoting stability while ensuring that the availability of credit is not impaired. With regard to engaging and leading the global marketplace the competitiveness of American financial institutions in global markets is another area that was addressed in the Treasury report. It recommended active participation by U.S. regulators in global forums and emphasized the need for coordination among U.S. regulatory agencies. Banking is very much a global marketplace. Not only do the largest U.S. banks have interests abroad but foreign banks have continued to play a larger role in U.S. financial markets. Coordination between regulatory jurisdictions around the world has improved since the financial crisis. On net these trends should be seen as positive developments over the long term. The U.S. regulatory agencies should engage their counterparts overseas in ways that serve the interests of U.S. financial institutions the U.S. economy and the American people. The Treasury made several recommendations addressing bank capital standards. More study is needed of the somewhat complex capital and liquidity requirements that have been placed on U.S. global systemically important banks ( G-SIBs ) If not properly calibrated these regulations could place U.S. banks at a competitive disadvantage without contributing to financial stability and safe and sound banking. Additional research should explore several aspects of G-SIB regulation including the U.S. G-SIB surcharge the mandatory minimum debt ratio included in the Federal Reserve s total loss | Chapter Box Evaluating the Costs and Benefits of Bank Regulations An example of the trade-off between benefits and costs as applied to large banks can be seen in the FDIC s final Rule on Recordkeeping for Timely Deposit Insurance Determination. This rule addresses a particular problem that the FDIC has faced in closing failed institutions in a timely and efficient manner due to the difficulty in identifying related deposit accounts from large bank systems. The problem arises in part from complex coverage rules spelled out in statutes along with the sometimes disconnected information systems that large banks have accumulated over the years through acquisitions. The rule requires banking organizations with more than million deposit accounts to improve their data systems to facilitate the calculation of the deposit insurance coverage for each account. When the final rule was adopted the FDIC estimated that it would apply to apply to institutions each with million or more deposit accounts. Taken together these institutions hold more than $ trillion in total assets and manage over million deposit accounts. Some but not all of these institutions could be considered systemically important. But the FDIC s experience in resolving institutions with so many accounts shows that it is doubtful that they could be promptly resolved unless their data systems met the standards of the rule. The result could be a significant delay in the full availability of funds to bank depositors which threatens to reduce the confidence of other large institutions that their funds would be promptly available in a time of distress. The benefit of the rule is measured in terms of the assurance that depositors would have prompt access to their funds as well as the confidence of depositors in other large institutions. The accuracy of any estimate of the dollar value of these benefits is doubtful at best. However as the experience of the recent financial crisis has shown maintaining confidence in the financial system offers potentially large benefits to the public. The costs of complying with the rule are not negligible. Based on a consultant s estimate that is documented in the rule s preamble the initial and ongoing costs of implementation will likely be about $ million. This figure represents percent of the pretax income of these banks in Another way to place these costs in context is that they represent cents for every one of the million accounts these institutions manage. Equally important are the potential opportunity costs that may be imposed on banks that are subject to the rule. For example banks may shy away from the million account threshold to avoid incurring the cost of implementing this rule. Though these opportunity costs are more difficult to quantify than compliance costs these negative external effects should be taken into account when considering the potential effects of such a rule. The decision as to whether the rule s benefits outweighed its costs was made on the basis of this information and the judgment of the FDIC s Board of Directors. Whether it is worth basis points of pretax earnings for one year Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | and the opportunity costs of forgone business opportunities to enhance the stability of the financial system is ultimately a judgment call. What is important is that this judgment be informed with good information where available and not clouded by estimates whose accuracy may be vastly overstated. absorbing capacity and minimum debt rule and the calibration of the [ enhanced supplementary leverage ratio ] applied to each banking company ( U.S. Department of the Treasury ) The Treasury report continued to be supportive of the ongoing Basel Committee process. The goals of establishing international bank capital standards are to strengthen the capital standards that apply to G-SIBs in general and level the competitive playing field by establishing a floor for global riskbased capital standards. The complexity of capital rules for G-SIBs remains a challenge in achieving these goals. U.S. bank regulators will need to carefully consider the implications of any changes in the Basel III standardized approach to account for credit risk. It is important to evaluate both the possible impact on systemic risk and the effect on credit availability. Making these evaluations public as capital rules are introduced will be helpful to inform this debate as to the proper balance inherent in capital regulation. Reducing the regulatory burden and unnecessary complexity through tailoring. Allowing community banks and credit unions to thrive is a key aspect of the Treasury report s recommendations. Previous discussions of economies of scale in regulatory compliance and the widespread diseconomies associated with the potential failure of a systemically important institution inescapably lead to the conclusion that most community banks and credit unions are overregulated. These institutions have a role in the U.S. economy that is more important in relative terms than the share of industry assets they hold. For example in there were U.S. counties in which the only banking office was one operated by a community bank ( Breitenstein and McGee ) Yet these smaller institutions pose virtually no systemic risk that would justify burdensome regulation. Moreover they are diverse in terms of their business models and customer bases and can benefit from less rigid regulatory requirements. These considerations have led to calls for tailoring regulatory requirements in banking to better meet the needs and challenges that pertain to individual institutions. A report by the Congressional Research Service ( Perkins ) defines tailoring as a departure from current threshold-based ( typically assetbased ) standards for regulation to new standards that would ( ) raise or lower the current threshold ; ( ) abandon numerical thresholds altogether ; or ( ) use | Chapter alternative methods to tailor regulation based on bank activities capital levels or greater regulator discretion. Introducing regulatory thresholds of this type can potentially distort the decisions made by regulated banks as they seek to maneuver around regulatory requirements. Accordingly the more financial regulation can be tailored to match the business model and complexity of individual institutions the more efficient the regulatory system will be in preserving safety and soundness promoting innovation and minimizing regulatory burden. Examples thus far of tailoring regulation have included the expansion of size-based exemptions from a number of regulatory requirements. For example the Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act of or S.2155 simplified the capital standards applied to banks with assets less than $ billion and exempted them from the U.S. Basel III risk-based capital system. It also raised the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement asset threshold from $ billion to $ billion. Requirements for data reporting are being relaxed for banks with up to $ billion in assets and the frequency of on-site examinations are being relaxed for banks with assets of less than $ billion. And the threshold for exemption from the CFPB s ability-to-repay / qualified mortgage rule was raised from $ billion to $ billion. Based in part on a Treasury recommendation the National Credit Union Administration has raised the threshold for stress-testing requirements for federally insured credit unions from $ billion to $ billion in assets. The National Credit Union Administration has also raised the asset size threshold for applying a risk-weighted capital framework from $ million to $ million. These steps promote greater equality with bank capital requirements that apply to commercial banks of a similar size and complexity. Refining capital liquidity and leverage standards. Improving and appropriately tailoring the regulatory standards for capital leverage and liquidity remain an essential element of postcrisis regulatory reforms. The Treasury report made a number of recommendations aimed at both decreasing the burden of statutory stress-testing and improving its effectiveness by tailoring the stress-testing requirements to the size and complexity of banks. The May enactment of S.2155 implemented many of these recommendations. Section of Dodd-Frank required the Federal Reserve to establish enhanced prudential standards for certain bank holding companies and foreign banking organizations and for nonbank financial companies that have been designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council as systemically important financial institutions ( SIFIs ) These standards included enhanced requirements for : Risk-based and leverage capital and liquidity. The submission of periodic resolution plans. Limits on single-counterparty credit exposures. Periodic stress tests to evaluate capital adequacy. Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | A debt-to-equity limit to be applied to companies that the Financial Stability Oversight Council determined pose a grave threat to financial stability. Section also authorized the Federal Reserve to establish additional prudential standards including three enumerated standards a contingent capital requirement enhanced public disclosures and short-term debt limits and other prudential standards that the Federal Reserve determined to be appropriate ( Federal Reserve Board of Governors ) The Treasury report contained a number of recommendations to better tailor the requirements placed on midsized and regional banks those with total assets between $ billion and $ billion to the actual risk that they pose to financial stability. For the company-led annual Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test ( DFAST ) the report recommended raising the dollar threshold above the $ billion level to reduce the regulatory burden placed on banks that are in fact not systemically important. This recommendation was largely implemented with the May passage of S.2155. Under S.2155 institutions with total assets below $ billion are exempt from DFAST while banks with assets between $ billion and $ billion are only subject to DFAST at the discretion of the Federal Reserve. This approach gives regulators the flexibility to tailor the stress-testing requirement to each bank s business model balance sheet and organizational complexity. It not only reduces the compliance burden of banks that are not systemically important but also relieves them from assessments related to enhanced regulation. The Treasury report also recommended adjusting the thresholds applied under the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review ( CCAR ) and to adjust the review to a two-year cycle. Given that stress-testing results are forecast over a nine-quarter cycle extending the CCAR review cycle to two years should not compromise the review s quality. These changes however are covered by separate legal authorities and will need to be implemented over time on an interagency basis. Another important element of the Treasury report s recommendations was a proposed off-ramp exemption from compliance with DFAST CCAR and certain other prudential standards for any bank that elects to maintain a sufficiently high level of capital. Providing this choice of a simplified capital standard over a more complex standard will help to ensure that the institution is subject to capital requirements that are appropriate to its particular situation thereby helping to minimize the regulatory cost of compliance. This too has largely been implemented through the Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act. In addition the Treasury recommended that the Federal Reserve subject its stress-testing and capital planning review frameworks to public notice and comment. This type of transparency will help to inform market participants about the nature of this analysis and enable them to make more informed | Chapter decisions about the institutions that are subject to these reviews. In February the Federal Reserve finalized its implementation of enhanced disclosure of the models used in its supervisory stress test ( see box ) The Treasury report also made specific recommendations related to a number of other important Dodd-Frank standards including those related to liquidity and funding for SIFIs the resolution plans filed by SIFIs under Title I of Dodd-Frank the Supplementary Leverage Ratio the enhanced Supplementary Leverage Ratio that forms part of bank capital requirements and the Volcker Rule s limitations on proprietary trading. In each of these areas what was originally a well-motivated attempt to address areas of risktaking that preceded the banking crisis turned out to be an overprescribed fix that unnecessarily raised the costs of regulatory compliance. The recommendations of the Treasury report include narrowing the application of the liquidity coverage ratio and recalibrating how the Net Stable Funding Ratio and Fundamental Review of the Trading Book interact with the liquidity coverage ratio and other relevant regulations. In addition the report showed how the requirement for resolution plans to be filed by SIFIs under Title I of Dodd-Frank could be relaxed without abandoning an important element of lowering the potential for systemic risk. This measured tailoring of regulatory requirements to match the risks that are being addressed is a fundamental element of the regulatory reform efforts that have been and continue to be pursued by the Administration. Regulatory reforms enacted thus far. Having established this agenda for reform with the Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and the Consumer Protection Act of the Administration is concentrating on implementing it. The most prominent accomplishment to date in implementing the Administration s agenda was the May passage of the Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act ( hereafter the act ) also referred to as S.2155. Unlike the Dodd-Frank Act S.2155 garnered significant bipartisan support receiving a vote in the U.S. Senate and a vote in the U.S. House of Representatives before being signed into law by the President. The act exemplifies the shift away from the insufficiently tailored regulation found in portions of Dodd-Frank and to a more right-sized approach. These changes directly address some of the shortcomings of the Dodd-Frank Act described earlier in this chapter and does so in four main areas Titles I though IV of the act. Title I provides relief to portfolio mortgage lenders who originate and hold residential mortgage loans on their balance sheet. Its expected effect will be to loosen unnecessary regulatory constraints on the availability of mortgage credit to U.S. households. Dodd-Frank had created a potential liability for banks that originated loans that later defaulted unless those loans met the terms of the qualified mortgage a definition established in by the CFPB. Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | Box Restoring Market Discipline in Banking Market discipline can be promoted by equity capital requirements and practices for failed bank resolution that help to ensure that the owners of the bank are first in line to absorb losses if the bank should fail. It has proven to be a highly effective and sometimes disruptive means to limit risk-taking among financial institutions. Market discipline is the antithesis of moral hazard where the costs of risk-taking are imposed on parties other than the owners of the bank. At the same time a sudden collapse in the confidence of bank depositors and bondholders can exert enough market discipline to force the failure of the bank. There are two basic approaches to enhancing the market discipline that discourage banks from taking on excessive risk : a minimum capital requirement and a framework to resolve failed banks in an orderly fashion. Minimum capital requirements represent a commitment in advance of private capital to absorb losses incurred by the bank. As such this capital helps to limit moral hazard. The more capital the bank holds the greater the share of failure cost that will be absorbed by the bank s owners before losses are imposed on other stakeholders. Other things being equal this alignment of incentives to take risks will limit the subsidization of risk-taking bank owners and will result in a level of risk-taking that is closer to the socially optimal level. Undercapitalized banks have been cited as factors exacerbating both the savings-and-loan crisis of the late 1980s and the financial crisis of ( FDIC ) An orderly resolution process to resolve failed banks is another essential element of market discipline. An orderly bank resolution will impose losses on equity claims first and then on unsecured debt before imposing losses on uninsured depositors and the FDIC s Deposit Insurance Fund. This process helps to ensure that the equity holders that control the bank are in a first-loss position even if their equity can not completely cover the losses generated by the failure. An orderly resolution process for failed banks is essential for longterm financial stability. Since more than FDIC-insured institutions have failed and have been resolved with no losses to insured depositors. During the recent crisis we saw instances in which the FDIC chose not to impose losses on the equity and debt holders of very large and complex failing banks and instead provided them with open bank assistance. These exceptions from normal procedures were based on concerns that imposing losses on uninsured creditors would transmit these losses to other banks and financial companies and worsen the systemic crisis. In the short run this expansion of government support clearly helped to maintain the stability of the financial system. Over the long term these actions could be expected to undermine market discipline subsidize growth and risk-taking and create competitive inequities between large and small banks. These considerations underlie the provisions of Section of the Dodd-Frank Act which effectively ended the FDIC s authority to provide open bank assistance even in a crisis situation. | Chapter To summarize a regulatory approach based on market discipline must ( ) create strong capital standards that limit moral hazard and ( ) enhance the ability to properly impose market discipline in the event of a failure. Historical experience shows that the ability to maintain market discipline according to these principles has been inversely related to the size and complexity of the institutions to which they are applied. The potential liability for defaulted loans under the ability-to-repay provision of Dodd-Frank was thought to impose market discipline on the mortgage lending process. But it also applied to mortgage loans held on the bank balance sheet which already faced market discipline to the extent that private capital stood first in line to cover any losses from the loan. Title I simply extends the presumption of ability-to-repay compliance to all mortgages originated and held by banks and credit unions with assets under $ billion which will be presumed to meet the definition of a qualified mortgage. Title I also provides an exemption for depository institutions that make few mortgage loans from reporting requirements under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. Title I of the act defers to the judgment of the managers of small and midsized banks about the quality of the mortgages they make and hold on their own balance sheets and steps back from having regulators make this judgment for them. Title II s provisions are aimed at reducing the regulatory burden placed on community banks without undermining the market discipline they face. Title II exempts banks with under $ billion in assets from the Volcker Rule which prohibits proprietary trading by banks. This exemption reflects the fact that very few small and midsized banks engage in proprietary trading. Title II also established the new Community Bank Leverage Ratio. Banks with limited amounts of certain assets and off-balance-sheet exposures will be able to choose this relatively simple measure of capitalization and be exempted from the more complicated Basel risk-based capital standards. In its November proposal to implement the Community Bank Leverage Ratio the FDIC proposed setting the standard at percent of tangible equity to total assets. An estimated percent of community banks would be eligible to adopt this simplified capital standard. The provisions of Title II are designed to simplify and streamline the regulatory standards that apply to community banks. Their relatively simple business models do not require complex regulatory approaches. And the economies of scale they face in the cost of regulatory compliance make it imperative that the standards applied to them are simple and straightforward ( box ) Title III of the Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act addresses a number of issues related to consumer protection. Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | One of these is the need to give consumers more control over their own credit reports which are a valuable reputational asset for all Americans. Title III requires the credit reporting agencies to provide updated fraud alerts to consumers for at least a year following a security incident and gives consumers a right to place security freezes on their credit reports for free to prevent them from being inappropriately downgraded. Credit-reporting agencies will be required to omit certain medical debts from the credit reports of U.S. veterans. These requirements recognize the importance of the consumer financial information on which we all rely to gain access to credit. Although these provisions do not directly affect the safety and soundness of regulated banks they do recognize the priority of fairness in handling this valuable and sensitive information. Title IV of the act addresses what was probably the biggest cost-benefit miscalculation made in the Dodd-Frank Act. Dodd-Frank required that all banking organizations with assets of $ billion or more be subject to enhanced prudential standards. This approach relies too heavily on asset size as a measure of systemic importance. A better measure of the systemic importance of a particular bank is the FDIC s ability to resolve the institution successfully without creating financial instability. In cases where an institution is deemed resolvable subjecting it to heightened regulatory requirements imposes high regulatory costs but gives very little benefit in terms of preserving financial stability. The designation carries with it a number of regulatory requirements designed to introduce regulatory discipline as well as market discipline to designated institutions. To the extent that the institution is already resolvable there would appear to be little benefit to the designation. In a case like this the considerable regulatory costs imposed on SIFIs are for naught. Under Title IV banks with $ billion or more in assets continue to be subject to the heightened regulatory standards already imposed by DoddFrank. Banks with between $ billion and $ billion in assets are statutorily required to be subject only to the Dodd-Frank Act s supervisory stress tests while the Federal Reserve has the ability to impose other regulatory requirements as appropriate. Banks with assets between $ billion and $ billion will no longer be subject to the heightened regulatory requirements under Dodd-Frank. The regulatory relief provided to midsized and regional banks will be an important step toward enhancing the banking system s ability to meet the credit needs of the U.S. economy. At the end of there were banks with between $ billion and $ billion in total assets. Together they hold percent of the banking industry s assets. But few or none of them can truly be deemed to pose a systemic risk. As a result the benefits of subjecting them to heightened prudential requirements in which they are likely to fall far short of the costs they incur by being regulated in this manner are questionable. | Chapter Box Factors Driving the Long-Term Consolidation in Banking The number of federally insured banks and savings institutions declined from at the end of to at the end of a total decline of percent. This consolidation has been characterized by two main features. First there has been a dramatic decline in the number of very small institutions those with assets less than $ million. In there were institutions with assets less than $ million making up percent of federally insured banks and thrifts. By this number had declined to just making up just percent of all banks and thrifts. Some percent of the net decline in federally insured institutions over this period took place among banks with less than $ million in assets. This decline of the smallest banks can be attributed in large part to economies of scale in banking. A rough measure of economies of scale is the difference in total noninterest expenses as a percentage of average assets for banks in different size categories. FDIC-insured community banks reported a noninterest expense ratio of percent in compared with percent for the larger noncommunity banks. This 16-basis-point difference in overhead expenses translates into expenses that were $ billion higher than they would have been at the ratio reported by noncommunity banks. This figure represents more than percent of community bank net income in Hughes and others ( ) compare average operating costs and costs associated with overhead reporting and compliance and telecommunica  $ "  $ $   * ) * ' $   / $ * )  $ )       ) & $ ) "   )    # $ ! /  Industries Number of institution charters at the end of the year  * ( (  $  '    ) &.   )    $ ) "  $ ) ./ $ /0/ $ * )     ''4  $ )     ) &.   )   / # $ ! /.  *      '  * $ /  )  )    * *  / $ * )     '  * (  *  )    ) &   *      '   * $ /  )  )   * *  / $ * )  * /  Data for c * ( (  $  '    ) &.   )   $ ) "  $ ) ./ $ /0/ $ * )    ! * (  # $ ./ * $   '  *   Data for f   ''4  $ )     ) &.   )   / # $ ! /.    ! * (    ' '  * -/.   )   / # $ ! /  ! $ )  )  $  '  * -/.  Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | tions across three asset size categories. They show that large community banks and midsized banks both have efficiency advantages over small community banks. Looking back to the mid-1980s we see that total noninterest expenses as a percentage of average assets have diverged from what was rough parity in the late 1990s to an advantage of up to basis points for the largest banks by Larger banks may benefit from economies of scale in absorbing the costs of technology and regulatory compliance both of which have become more important over time. The second main feature of banking industry consolidation since the mid-1980s has been the emergence of a few very large institutions that have absorbed large shares of industry assets. The share of industry assets held by the four largest banking organizations rose from percent in to percent at the end of Here too economies of scale have played an important role. The ratio of noninterest expenses to total assets for banks larger than $ billion in total assets fell by more than basis points between and Consolidation since has come about through failures ( between the end of and the end of ) intercompany mergers ( since ) and intracompany consolidation of charters ( since ) Most of the failures took place during two crisis periods first in the 1980s and early 1990s and then following the financial crisis of Voluntary  $ "  $ $ $   #   * !  )  0./-4   /.  '         ) & $ ) "  "  ) $  / $ * )   #  /     (  / #   *   " ./       ) /  # '      #  -/  0'/ $ (  / '4    $     / #  ! *  '  " ./    ) & $ ) " * "  ) $  / $ * )   ) /  # '       ) & $ ) "  * "  ) $  / $ * )  / #  /     (  / #  ! *  '  " ./  $ )  Share of industry assets at the end of the quarter   *      '   * $ / )  )    * *  / $ * )        '  '  / $ * ) | Chapter mergers and charter consolidations during this period were spurred not only by the prospect of economies of scale but also by the decline in regulatory restrictions on branching and interstate banking. Geographic deregulation facilitated the formation of larger more efficient banks. Though this promoted greater efficiency and opportunities for diversification it also helped create large complex banks that have benefited from the perceived implicit government support of systemically important banks ( figures 6-ii and 6-iii ) There are a number of pending regulatory proposals to implement the provisions of S.2155. Taken together Titles I though IV of the act represent a new approach to regulating financial institutions that reflect the Core Principles delineated at the outset of this Administration. They will relieve community and regional banks from excessive and costly regulatory requirements that should really only apply to SIFIs. Moreover they preserve the elements of regulatory reform that were designed to contain the systemic risks that led to the financial crisis of But they take an approach that appropriately tailors regulatory requirements according to the activities and structure of the bank and the level of risk that it poses to financial stability. Signing the bipartisan S.2155 bill into law is the most visible reform yet put into place by President Trump. This act is expected to have a range of long-term benefits for financial institutions the economy and the public. It levels the competitive playing field between the smaller community banks and credit unions and the larger more complex financial institutions. It recognizes the vital importance of small and midsized banks as well as the high costs and negligible benefits of subjecting them to regulatory requirements better suited for the largest financial institutions. S.2155 is expected to reduce regulatory burdens and help to expand the credit made available to small businesses that are the lifeblood of local communities across the nation. Additional steps taken to address regulatory concerns. As important as S.2155 is in scaling back costly and unnecessary regulations a number of other less well-known measures have been adopted that also represent progress in implementing the Administration s agenda. Addressing the CFPB s arbitration rule was one crucial step. In July the CFPB released a rule intended to ban certain financial companies from using mandatory arbitration clauses in consumer contracts and to permit consumers to participate in class action lawsuits. But the new rule was later reconsidered after it was shown to adversely increase the cost of credit for consumers. In November the rule was nullified under the Congressional Review Act after a joint resolution to do so was signed into law by President Trump. Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | Another priority is reform of the Community Reinvestment Act ( CRA ) In the CRA was enacted to encourage banks to meet the credit needs of all segments of their communities including low- and moderate-income households. In response to growing feedback including from the Department of the Treasury that the CRA requires modernizing ( especially with the rise in online banking ) in August the OCC published its Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking to seek input on the best ways to update the regulatory framework that supports the CRA. To improve credit availability in the areas most in need the OCC is soliciting input on topics such as how to improve the current approach to performance evaluations expand the activities that qualify for CRA and better define communities. The data collection rule under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act also needs improvement. In the CFPB had issued an update to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act which expanded data disclosure requirements for lending institutions. The new rule which was set to go into effect January was delayed pending a review of and improvements to the CFPB s data security systems. The CFPB with interagency assistance concluded that its security posture is well-organized and maintained and it has recently sought comments from relevant parties as it considers whether changes to its data governance and data collections programs would be appropriate. It seeks to balance the protection of privacy without hindering its ability to accomplish its objectives and statutory mandate. Another needed initiative is updating the commercial real estate appraisal rule. In a coordinated effort between the OCC the Federal Reserve and the FDIC effective in April the threshold for commercial real estate appraisals was raised from $ to $ The rule amends Title XI of the Financial Institutions Reform Recovery and Enforcement Act of partly in response to concerns among relevant stakeholders that the prior threshold level did not reflect the appreciation of commercial real estate in the years since the threshold was initially set. The three agencies determined that the increased appraisal level would materially reduce regulatory burden and the amount of transactions requiring an appraisal while not sacrificing the safety and soundness of financial institutions. The regulatory capital rule for small banks with respect to transitions is another improvement. The OCC the Federal Reserve and the FDIC adopted a final Transitions Rule that extends the regulatory capital treatment for certain items for smaller banks. The relief provided under this rule specifically applies to banking organizations that are not subject to the capital rules advanced approaches which tend to be smaller banks. This rule went into effect on January And finally the regulatory capital rule for small banks with respect to simplifications is being considered. The Simplification Rule which was proposed by the OCC the Federal Reserve and the FDIC in October would | Chapter aim to simplify compliance with certain aspects of the capital rule particularly for smaller banks. Conclusion This chapter has chronicled the financial crisis of years ago its causes its costs and its consequences. The financial crisis of was the most severe systemic financial event in the U.S. since at least the 1930s. It was a selfreinforcing crisis that arose within the financial industry itself but soon spread to the wider economy. The crisis exposed weaknesses in institutional and regulatory structures that were in dire need of reform. Before it was over the Federal government was required to provide assistance to financial institutions that was unprecedented in its scale and its scope. Notwithstanding this extraordinary support the crisis took a heavy toll on U.S. economic activity that affected the vast majority of Americans. The declines in manufacturing construction employment and overall economic activity that came after the crisis were historically large and long lasting. These economic effects underscored the need for an appropriate regulatory response that would enhance the stability of financial markets and institutions and would protect the American people from the consequences of enduring a future crisis. The Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission was organized in to examine the causes of the crisis and inform the regulatory reforms that were sure to follow. The FCIC released a 662-page report in January documenting the various factors that exacerbated the financial crisis. This report did not receive bipartisan support. But it did provide first-hand accounts of a wide range of bankers regulators and analysts that could have been considered as reforms were being planned. Yet even before this report was published Congress passed the Dodd-Frank Act a sweeping overhaul of financial regulation that did not result in a rapid economic recovery and that has had a number of unintended consequences. The Dodd-Frank Act has proven to be a misguided approach to regulatory reform. It called for almost new rules not all of which have been implemented. The act placed unnecessary burdens on banks and their customers through its frequent overreach and its prescriptive approach to regulation. There is a growing body of evidence that Dodd-Frank s one-sizefits-all approach has been very costly for community banks and for the small businesses that depend on them for credit. Studies confirm the economies of scale that are associated with regulatory compliance and support the notion that postcrisis regulatory changes have had a disproportionate effect on small and midsized banks. This regulatory approach has had substantial economic consequences. The average pace of economic growth in the first eight years of the expansion through was the slowest of any U.S. expansion since Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | Dodd-Frank was especially problematic in discouraging small business lending and in promoting consolidation among small and midsized banks. Although community banks had little to do with the onset of the financial crisis their numbers have fallen by more than or one-third since FDIC data show that community banks are vitally important to communities that are not served by larger institutions. They also make small business loans in proportions that are almost three times higher than their share of total industry loans. Similarly the importance of small businesses for the U.S. economy goes well beyond the roughly two-thirds of new jobs they typically create. Small businesses have traditionally been a source of strength for their communities and a source of innovation where new and different ideas can be pursued. They spark innovation. And they rely heavily for funding on community banks which have a local focus that helps them meet their credit needs. From its first days the Trump Administration outlined a more informed approach to financial regulation that will make the Nation s financial system more efficient and more effective. Seven Core Principles for financial regulation were outlined at the outset of the Administration calling for an end to taxpayer bailouts a more accountable regulatory framework more and better analysis before imposing new regulations a leveling of the competitive playing field between U.S. and foreign banks and other steps to enable Americans to make their own informed financial decisions in a stable financial system. From the start it was emphasized that well-reasoned financial reforms would be essential to bring the pace of the United States economic growth and its standard of living up to their true potential. During the past two years the Department of the Treasury has issued four reports that made detailed recommendations consistent with the Administration s Core Principles. With regard to depository institutions the Treasury has recommended a series of changes designed to simplify regulations and reduce their implementation costs while maintaining high standards of safety and soundness and ensuring the accountability of the financial system to the American public. These recommendations have been discussed at length in this chapter. A number of these recommendations were implemented in the Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act of which was enacted in May and is generally referred to as S.2155. The act addresses some of the most important shortcomings associated with Dodd-Frank and does so in a way that does not undermine the safety and soundness of the banking industry. It provides regulatory relief to small banks by recognizing their judgment in terms of the mortgage loans they hold simplifying their capital requirements and giving them a presumption of compliance with regard to proprietary trading which few of them do in the first place. Most importantly S.2155 scales back the heightened regulatory standards that were applied to midsized banks those with assets between $ | Chapter billion and $ billion that were treated as systemically important banks under Dodd-Frank. As a result more than midsized and regional banks that hold percent of industry assets can get relief from unnecessary regulatory standards that would otherwise limit their ability to grow prosper and serve their customers. This change is an example of how a one-size-fits-all approach is giving way to tailored regulatory standards that are matched to the actual level of risk imposed by each institution. The Administration s agenda is ambitious and its accomplishments thus far are many. This effort is part of the Administration s overall push along with other forms of deregulation ( see chapter ) and tax reform ( see chapter ) to reverse the historically slow economic growth of the immediate postcrisis period and to enhance the performance of the economy so it can reach its true potential. The election of President Trump in November produced an immediate increase in small business confidence that has remained in place ever since. The pace of economic activity has quickened during the Administration s first two years. After the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act real economic growth rose to an annualized rate of more than percent for the first time in four years. The recovery in business confidence hiring and investment spending since suggests that we will see higher potential growth in the years ahead. Most important these commonsense adjustments to the financial regulatory framework signal an end to the war on Wall Street that took place in the immediate aftermath of the financial crisis. The implicit support for the largest banks and the government-sponsored enterprises has been rolled back by the reforms enacted thus far. The diverse U.S. financial system will continue to include elements that meet the needs of corporations of Main Street and of everyone and everything in between. A smoothly functioning and prosperous financial industry has long been one of the pillars that has supported the development of the U.S. economy into the largest and most stable in the world. The sensible financial reforms being pursued by the Trump Administration suggest that this institutional strength is back and will endure in the decades to come. Ensuring a Balanced Financial Regulatory Landscape | x Chapter Adapting to Technological Change with Artificial Intelligence while Mitigating Cyber Threats Although technological change has always had significant effects on economic activity artificial intelligence ( AI ) and high-speed automation are among its most important recent manifestations. The expansion of computing power and availability of big data have fueled remarkable advances in computer science enabling technology to perform tasks that traditionally required humans and significant amounts of time. However along with these advances prospects for encouraging continued productivity growth they also threaten to significantly disrupt the labor market particularly among people whose work involves routine and manual tasks. Astute policymaking will play an integral role in leveraging technology as an asset for the country while mitigating potential disruptions. The first section of this chapter briefly defines AI and corresponding advances in computer science. AI s most distinctive feature is that it can be used to manage a wide range of highly complex tasks with little required supervision relative to conventional technology. This general applicability broadens the types of tasks where AI could plausibly be a substitute for human labor underscoring both the economic promise of AI and its potential risks. The second section places AI within the broader historical context of technological change and highlights the CEA s predictions for its short- medium- and long-run effects on productivity and wages. Although we may experience a span of years where AI substitutes for human-based labor for many tasks AI like much technological change will ultimately benefit labor through greater productivity and real wage growth. The third section explores AI s heterogeneous effects and automation across industries and the skill distribution. Using autonomous vehicles as a case study we show that one of the key factors for understanding the impact of technological change on employment is the price elasticity of demand. AI is expected to have a positive net effect on industrial employment though there could be subsector-specific price declines based on changing consumer demand. The fourth section pivots to the possible risks of technological advances. Building on findings in the Economic Report of the President on the cost of cybersecurity breaches we analyze how measurement problems related to these breaches make it difficult to estimate their costs. We present new data from on the pervasiveness of cybersecurity vulnerabilities and the paucity of firms responses to them across Fortune companies. The fifth and final section highlights the role of policy and the considerable strides that have been taken by the Trump Administration during the past two years. The Administration will continue to embrace technological change while maximizing its promise and minimizing its risk. R ecent years have seen enormous advances in computer science leading to skyrocketing hardware and software capabilities. The refinement of computers continues to advance at a rapid rate. The computational power that took up enormous refrigerated rooms a few decades ago has been miniaturized to a fraction of its former size. Moreover computer scientists and engineers have made remarkable discoveries in artificial intelligence ( AI ) and automation. These advances have complemented years of rapid growth in computer processing power along with the explosive growth in the availability of digitized data. According to two prominent scholars the key building blocks are already in place for digital technologies to be as important and transformational to society and the economy as the steam engine ( Brynjolfsson and McAfee ) In last year s Report we highlighted one aspect of the rapid diffusion of computer technology : the increasing exposure of the economy to malicious cyber activity for example cybercrime. We found that cybercrime had | Chapter expanded so much that in alone that it caused up to $ billion in harm to the economy. Yet computers have of course created many more benefits than costs and their rapid evolution promises to fundamentally transform the economy in the decade ahead. In President Obama s Council of Economic Advisers published a sweeping report outlining the likely economic impact and policy challenges of accelerating technological change. One metric of how rapidly the sector is advancing is that already in and enough change has occurred so an update of the previous reports is essential for meeting the challenges of the next decade and beyond. We look ahead in wonder at the possibilities of advanced thinking machines but also worry that automation will proceed at such a rapid pace that many workers in today s economy will suddenly find themselves superfluous or disconnected from competitive job opportunities. We also consider the additional cybersecurity risks posed by the increased reliance on information technology. In this chapter we dig deeper than we did a year ago into the promise and risks of the ongoing computer science revolution. We begin by reviewing the latest developments in AI and automation discussing their likely economic effects. The central theme of the first section of this chapter is that a narrow static focus on possible job losses paints a misleading picture of AI s likely effects on the Nation s economic well-being. With technological advances specific types of legacy positions are usually eliminated though new jobs and evolving work roles are created increasing real wages national income and prosperity over time. Automation can complement labor adding to its value ; and even when it substitutes for labor in certain areas it can lead to higher employment in other types of work and raise overall economic welfare. This will likely be what happens as AI transforms more and more aspects of the economy though new challenges will arise about cybersecurity. In the years to come AI appears poised to automate tasks that had long been assumed to be out of reach. Thus we also analyze the important role of reskilling apprenticeship initiatives and future hiring processes to help mitigate the potentially disruptive employment effects of technological change and automation throughout the skill distribution. One key question for economists today is whether in addition to improving traditional productive processes AI will alter processes whereby creative new ideas are generated and implemented. In other words is AI simply the next phase in automation or is it a real break from the past with unique implications ? We explore both possibilities but conclude that AI is likely to have major effects on the value of different skill sets and the rate at which they appreciate and depreciate. In particular in the long run aggregate wages will be higher because of these new advances. We then turn to an update of our previous research on the economic vulnerabilities associated with the diffusion of technology and mobile computing capabilities into virtually every corner of our lives. Technology is leading to Adapting to Technological Change | new and constantly evolving complex security challenges because individuals firms and governments are already reliant on interconnected and interdependent technology. Whereas past conflicts unfolded on land sea and air future conflicts and criminal activity will increasingly take place in cyberspace. Drawing on new data we document that cyber vulnerabilities are quite prevalent even in Fortune companies with significant resources at their disposal. Although these new data do not allow us to update our estimate of the economic costs of malicious cyber activity the latest data suggest that our previous estimate might have been too low given the underreporting of cybercrime. We conclude by discussing the initiatives that are being implemented by the Trump Administration and the policy challenges that lawmakers will likely face in the years ahead. What Is Artificial Intelligence ? Although there is no universal definition of artificial intelligence ( AI ) the Future of Artificial Intelligence Act of ( H.R. ) for example defines AI as any artificial system that performs tasks under varying and unpredictable circumstances without significant human oversight or that can learn from their experience and improve their performance. They may solve tasks requiring human-like perception cognition planning learning communication or physical action. These intelligent systems generally use machine learning to form predictions and adaptively make adjustments based on new information in their environment ( Russell and Norvig ) Because AI has such a wide array of applications across sectors and disciplines it is viewed as a general purpose technology and important source of economic growth ( Agrawal Gans and Goldfarb ) Automation technologies usually focus on automating a specific process or multiple commonly understood processes to reduce labor intensity which differs greatly from highly complex human-like decision logic which has already been observed in the emerging embodiments of AI. Although the general concepts and algorithms within AI are decades old AI has emerged as an especially powerful and widely applied tool for A recent study by Deloitte ( ) contains survey results that point out ambiguity in how many top executives and everyday citizens define AI. Similarly in the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year the term artificial intelligence includes the following : ( ) Any artificial system that performs tasks under varying and unpredictable circumstances without significant human oversight or that can learn from experience and improve performance when exposed to data sets. ( ) An artificial system developed in computer software physical hardware or other context that solves tasks requiring human-like perception cognition planning learning communication or physical action. ( ) An artificial system designed to think or act like a human including cognitive architectures and neural networks. ( ) A set of techniques including machine learning that is designed to approximate a cognitive task. ( ) An artificial system designed to act rationally including an intelligent software agent or embodied robot that achieves goals using perception planning reasoning learning communicating decision making and acting. | Chapter Figure Error Rate of Image Classification by Artificial Intelligence and Humans Error rate ( percent ) AI Human Sources : Russakovsky et al. ( ) ; CEA calculations. performing not only existing tasks much more efficiently but also new tasks that were traditionally viewed as infeasible. To give just one example researchers have created AI algorithms capable of classifying images even more reliably than humans can do under certain conditions and at a much faster rate and scale than ever before ( figure ) although these algorithms can still be tricked by savvy programmers ( CSAIL ) More examples abound in other areas ranging from natural language processing to theorem proving ( Artificial Intelligence Index ) Other types of computer science and AI advances include solutions to automate high-skill human cognitive tasks such as automated reasoning and intelligent decision support systems ( Arai et al. ; Davenport and England ; Kerber Lange and Rowat ; Mulligan Davenport and England ) The convergence of two factors have made these remarkable advances possible. First accumulated decades of sustained growth in technology have led to an explosion in computing power. As Gordon Moore ( ) first observed computing power historically doubles every months. These advances have led to an increase in transistor density which combined with the declining cost of manufacturing integrated circuits have led to a staggering increase in Adapting to Technological Change | computing power ( Brynjolfsson and McAfee ) Moreover lower manufacturing costs for hardware have been complemented by annual price declines in cloud computing of percent between and ( Byrne Corrado and Sichel ) Second the colossal increase in data availability has complemented the surge in computing power allowing researchers to develop and test AI algorithms on much larger data sets.4 The emergence of big data has been driven by digitization which means the ability to take different types of information and media ranging from text to video and convert them into streams of ones and zeros the native language of computers and their kin ( Brynjolfsson and McAfee ) Researchers have also found creative ways to convert different types of digital media into comprehensive sets of numeric quantities which often involve feature engineering or optimizing the permutations of data inputs to produce reliable predictions ( Arel Rose and Karnowski ) Machine Learning Machine learning ( ML ) is integral to the design and implementation of AI ( Russel and Norvig ) Unlike computers which tend to execute a set of prespecified rules AI is defined by the ability to learn and adapt to its environment.5 There are three main types of ML algorithms supervised unsupervised and reinforcement learning which we summarize in the next paragraphs ( Hastie Tibshirani and Friedman ) First supervised learning algorithms take a set of descriptive variables that are matched with a corresponding label ( outcome variable ) and learns the relationship between the two. For example to predict college attainment a researcher could use data on whether the individual has a college degree together with a set of individual characteristics such as parental education and gender to estimate classification models. Supervised learning algorithms take a subset of the sample and search for the parameters that best fit the data based on a prespecified objective function. Second unsupervised learning algorithms in contrast to supervised ones take a set of feature variables as inputs and detect patterns in the data. Though these algorithms have not been as prolifically applied as supervised An integral part of the efficiency gains among producers of computer equipment is the rapid decline in effective prices of semiconductors due to advances in chip technology ( Triplett ) These empirical patterns have also continued during the past decade. For example Byrne Oliner and Sichel ( ) find that semiconductor prices fell by percent relative to the meager percent decline in the producer price index between and Computer scientists often refer to the process of developing and testing AI algorithms as training. The process refers to estimating model parameters on a subsample subsequently using the estimated parameters to predict out-of-sample. The quality of the out-of-sample prediction is used to sometimes iteratively tune model parameters. Russell and Norvig ( ) remark that algorithms in deterministic settings are not a form of AI because they are executing a set of preprogrammed tasks. | Chapter learning algorithms they are often used to simplify otherwise computationally demanding problems by reducing the number of variables that need to be kept track of sometimes referred to as dimensionality reduction ( Bonhomme Lamadon and Manresa ) Third reinforcement learning algorithms have been among the most influential class of algorithms in the emerging set of AI and big data applications. Unlike supervised and unsupervised algorithms reinforcement learning algorithms do not require complete representation of input/output pairs but rather only require an objective function. This function specifies how the intelligent system responds to its environment under arbitrary degrees of stochasticity ( i.e. the extent to which it involves a random variable ) Consider the game of chess which contains millions of potential moves. Though individuals face cognitive limitations that preclude internal simulation of thousands and potentially millions of scenarios simultaneously deep learning reinforcement learning algorithms have largely overcome these limitations. For example Google s new AI algorithm AlphaZero defeated the world s best chess engine Stockfish. Unlike Deep Blue the IBM supercomputer that defeated Garry Kasparov the world s leading chess champion in AlphaZero trained itself to play like a human but at an unprecedented scale and aptitude ( Gibbs ) One way a reader can picture this evolution of computing power is by considering the computer modeling of sports outcomes. It is now common for commentators at sporting events to announce midgame the probability given the current score that the team that is currently ahead in the score will indeed win the game. At one point during the American football championship game Super Bowl LI the New England Patriots had a mere percent chance of victory ( ESPN Analytics ) This probability was calculated based on data from previous games and an analysis of the percentage of times that a team went on to win after trailing by a certain margin deep into the third quarter. Algorithms used by various networks and media platforms allow for these odds to be constructed from historical performance data of past teams that have been in similar situations. Moreover as with other games like chess estimating probabilities of winning can grow in complexity because of real-time interactions between the players as well as the astronomical number of possible outcomes that can be reached even without repetitive actions between the start and end of a game. In a game with finite outcomes given an enormously powerful computer and a set of initial conditions describing the configuration of pieces on the board a program could explore all possible moves and responses from that state and solve the game. The optimal computer would then for a given player recommend a move from that initial state associated with the highest probability of victory for that player. Adapting to Technological Change | However because there are infinite possible future states associated with almost every state of the world in a chess match software must discover the types of moves that tend to lead to victory because exploring all future paths and developing a discrete solution is impossible for a problem with infinite outcomes. A computer equipped with AI however allows for a combination of human rationality with computing probabilities of victory. This provides improved predictions that can lead the AI algorithm to play the game rather than attempting to solve it. Applications of AI Technology Today facial recognition is possible because data ( e.g. images ) can be not only digitized but also collected and analyzed at scale. Suppose our AI machine in addition to assessing the remaining possible outcomes could also discern the identities of the players themselves and use this information to further revise its predictions based on knowledge about the two players. For instance the probabilities of victory associated with an advantageous position would need to be updated if player was an amateur and player was a professional. However if player s position was so advantageous that the odds of victory were percent even someone as talented as the professional could lose if forced to start from a severely disadvantaged position. In addition to assessing situations from a static perspective an AI algorithm that can discern the identity of the player through facial recognition can choose strategies that are tailored to the player s weaknesses. Another example of how AI can complement society and human tasks is through its effects on the delivery and production of educational services. One of the primary types of AI educational applications are personalized learning algorithms that allow instructors to tailor information to the unique ways that individuals learn. For example Georgia State University sends customized text messages to students during the college enrollment process which Page and Gehlbach ( ) find is associated with a 3.3-percentage-point increase in the probability that individuals will enroll on time. Similarly Arizona State University uses adaptive and hybrid learning platforms that enable teachers to offer more targeted learning experiences ( Bailey et al. ) These platforms provide instructors with real-time intelligence to assess how well their students understand each concept allowing instructors to pivot when needed to improve the learning experience. In sum economists find significant returns on student outcomes from these edtech programs ( Escueta et al. ) Given that at least percent of all employees will require significant reskilling and/or upskilling by ( World Economic Forum ) educational institutions will need to become increasingly adaptive finding ways to integrate technology to simultaneously reduce costs improve quality and raise agility. | Chapter AI systems have mastered tasks that have traditionally been performed by humans. One way of measuring the breadth of these AI-based applications is to examine the clusters of emerging research content. Using the universe of Scopus and Elsevier articles Elsevier ( ) identified seven clusters of AI capabilities including machine learning and probabilistic reasoning neural networks computer vision natural language processing and knowledge representation search and optimization fuzzy systems and planning and decisionmaking. Moreover using the subset of papers that have been uploaded to the research platform arXiv Elsevier ( ) finds that articles about core AI categories that are posted on arXiv have increased by percent in the past five years. These sustained research efforts will continue to expand AI s capabilities. Indeed Brynjolfsson and McAfee ( ) remark that we re going to see artificial intelligence do more and more and as this happens costs will go down outcomes will improve and our lives will get better. Already AI is being applied in four main areas of the marketplace according to Lee and Triolo ( ) : ( ) the Internet ( e.g. online marketplaces ) ; ( ) business ( e.g. datadriven decisionmaking ) ; ( ) perception ( e.g. facial and voice recognition ) ; and ( ) autonomous systems ( e.g. vehicles and drones ) Take for instance the domain of perception AI. One discovery helps individuals who have historically been visually impaired to use a device with digital sensors that can survey the physical environment and create sound waves through the bones of the head. The technology clips onto eyeglasses and after being oriented toward text within the user s vision and signaled to read the source by the wearer the device reads and verbalizes the text ( Brynjolfsson and McAfee ) Similarly Brynjolfsson and McElheran ( ) also illustrate how manufacturing establishments using data to influence their decisionmaking exhibit greater productivity than their counterparts. Companies in the digital economy will increasingly compete based on their ability to use data efficiently and strategically. Technological Progress and the Demand for Labor This section explores the interaction between technological progress and the demand for labor. First it gives a brief history of technological change and work. Then it describes the effects of technological progress on investment and wages. Finally it considers how specialization and comparative advantage affect trade between people and machines. A Brief History of Technological Change and Work Do technological advances reduce employment ? That is not a new question concern about job losses caused by automation dates back at least two centuries. During the early 19th century English artisans ( Luddites ) in the rapidly changing textile industry famously attempted to destroy the mills and Adapting to Technological Change | automated machine looms that they believed threatened their livelihoods. Despite the opposition of the Luddites to automation the next two centuries witnessed a transition to mechanization of much of the physical labor performed by workers ( Galor and Weil ) The agriculture sector provides a notable example. Tractors replaced horsepower and manual labor in 19thcentury plowing work and labor-intensive manual tasks were mechanized ( Rasmussen ) Similar examples abound among many types of skilled artisanal work after the introduction of machine tools as well as the transformation of manufacturing after advances such as steam power and electricity. Automation s effects on labor are no longer confined to manufacturing and agriculture ( Brynjolfsson and McAfee ; Autor ; Polson and Scott ) Computers and constantly evolving software have eliminated the need for many of the administrative and clerical tasks that had long been performed by white-collar workers in commercial business. Indeed before the word computer referred to a microprocessor on a desk it was a job title for a person who laboriously performed simple arithmetic or more complex mathematical calculations. Today an accountant or financial specialist can do in seconds what would have once taken hours or days of painstaking computation by a team of educated people. An online tax preparation system can do much of what a professional certified public accountant might have done while being faster and more accurate. White-collar work environments are likely to undergo further disruptive changes as AI technologies continue expanding into logistics and inventory management financial services complex language translation the writing of business reports and even legal services. Even medical diagnoses are likely to involve AI technologies in the foreseeable future. Economists and policymakers have long studied the question of job displacement caused by technological advancement. In just one example in Congress authorized the National Commission on Technology Automation and Economic Progress to study the effects of technological advancement particularly in relation to unemployment. The commission s report included the finding that technology eliminates jobs not work ( Bowen ) In a more contemporary discussion David Autor ( ) noted that journalists and even expert commentators tend to overstate the extent of machine substitution for human labor and ignore the strong complementarities between automation and labor that increase productivity raise earnings and augment demand for labor. Though the introduction of new technologies can create job displacement examining technological change from a historical perspective shows that these transformations do not lead to permanently lower employment but rather an increase in demand for new tasks ( Mokyr Vickers and Ziebarth ) | Chapter Effects of Technological Progress on Investment and Wages Capital investments such as in machines and software embody AI which Brynjolfsson Rock and Syverson ( ) call a general purpose technology. New investments that embody AI are expected to be more like ( closer substitutes for ) labor than traditional capital investments were. Here we begin by relating capital to labor and productivity and explain why labor is expected to receive most of the net benefits from AI in the long run. In particular we argue that though AI is expected to increase real wages on average the economy has three phases of adjustment where the wage effects are different. In the anticipation phase real wages are somewhat elevated as businesses begin to switch to activities that are intensive in cognitive tasks but still do not have machines to adequately perform those tasks. Then AI arrives and can fill many of the positions temporarily depressing real wages during the implementation phase as workers compete with the new machines. In the long run business formation catches up with the new technology and real wages are higher. Growth in labor productivity can come from changes in three distinct factors : a rise in the quality of labor which can occur with greater education training or skill attainment ; a rise in capital which occurs when firms invest in productive inputs such as machines factories or computers ; or a rise in what economists call total factor productivity ( TFP ) which pertains to other determinants of productivity ranging from regulatory frictions to unmeasured quality improvements ( Solow ) TFP growth often increases real wages and the return to capital in the short run because it makes the factors more productive.6 A greater return to capital also stimulates additional investment leading to business creation and growth. As a result of the additional capital real wages rise and because new capital competes with old capital the return to capital declines. Indeed a century or more of economic growth has increased real wages by more than a factor of five ( Fisk ; Zwart van Leeuwen and van Leeuwen-Li ) while the return to capital has been almost constant over time ( Caselli and Feyrer ; Mulligan and Threinen ) Nearly all the long-run benefits of TFP go to labor by reducing the effective prices of goods and services or by raising total compensation ( Caselli and Feyrer ; CEA 2018c ) Although real wages trend up and the return to capital does not as discussed above labor s share of gross domestic product ( GDP ) can be constant rising or falling depending on the type of technological change and the degree to which the new investment substitutes for labor in the production process. In other words some types of TFP growth may reduce labor s share of GDP in the long run even while the entire benefit from TFP growth goes to workers in the form of higher real wages. For example Karabarbounis and Neiman ( ) Our discussion of wages in the text that follows views it as representing all compensation from work including fringe benefits. Adapting to Technological Change | show that the decline in the relative price of investment goods ( e.g. due to the expansion of information technology and computers ) helps to account for the decline in the labor share. Although the TFP growth occurring during most of the 20th century did not reduce labor s share of national income ( Kaldor ) AI might reduce it in the long run to the degree that it is more substitutable for labor than 20thcentury capital investments were. The transition to a labor-substitutable AI is illustrated in figure from the perspective of the capital market. Because a downward-sloping capital demand curve shows the relationship between the amount of capital and its marginal contribution to output the area under the curve up to the equilibrium amount of capital is equal to the total amount of output. This output is divided between capital and labor with capital s income equal to the rectangular area which has dimensions equal to the amount of capital and the rental rate per unit of capital. In the figure the triangular area above the rectangle is the output not paid to capital which is labor income. The arrival of AI makes new capital investments more productive which is why the capital demand curve is shifted up by the discovery. Initially AI investments earn returns greater than the normal capital return as at the point b in figure which stimulates more investment. The additional investment begins to drive down the return to capital but more slowly than investment did in earlier eras because the new investment does not compete as directly with existing capital which is why the new demand curve is flatter than the old one. In the long run the return to capital falls back to normal the economy is at point c in figure and labor income has increased by the amount of the shaded area L.7 Labor s share is lower in the long run than it was before AI arrived as shown in the diagram by the fact that the rectangular increment to capital income is disproportionate to L. Ironically the addition to capital income is a symptom of more investment and real wage growth due to the assumption that AI investments are more substitutable for labor than older types of capital. In the short run after the arrival of AI new investment that is a good substitute for labor reduces real wages to the extent that human workers compete with AI for jobs and the additional business formation is not yet complete. This phase resembles the commonly expressed concern that workers would be harmed by AI. In terms of figure the capital rental rate r at point b is temporarily elevated at the expense of labor income. However it is important to also consider the phase before AI arrives. Here real wages are elevated by the anticipation of AI because businesses are formed with the expectation that they will eventually have both human and machine labor but in the meantime will need to perform their operations entirely with human labor. In the limit in which AI is a perfect substitute for human workers the area L is zero. The subsection of this chapter titled Trade between People and Machines explains why the perfect-substitution case is ruled out by market forces. | Chapter Figure The Effect of AI on the Amount of Capital and the Distribution of Factor Incomes Capital rental rate ( r ) Supply Short run b a L c Supply Long run Demand After AI Demand Before AI Q Before AI Aggregate quantity of capital ( Q ) Q After AI Source : Adapted from Jaffe et al. ( ) This stylized discussion highlights the situation that though AI can depress real wages for a period if it is a good substitute for labor ultimately AI will raise real wages above what they were before AI because of the investment and increased productivity that it stimulates. These conclusions are consistent with not only theoretical models of economics featuring AI in general equilibrium ( Aghion Jones and Jones ) but also with evidence on how the introduction of robots raised labor productivity across countries between and ( Graetz and Michaels ) Moreover taking the information technology ( IT ) revolution as an analogue Autor Katz and Krueger ( ) show that the introduction of computers led to strong and persistent growth for skilled workers which accounts for the increased demand ( and subsequent expansion of supply ) for workers who have gone to college. In summary even though AI is expected to temporarily decrease real wages in the long run it will increase real wages on average because of the investment it stimulates. The next section highlights the role of comparative advantage behind the reallocation of tasks across and within sectors of the labor market ( Acemoglu and Autor ) explaining how firms will apply AI in ways that are complementary to labor and therefore have a more positive effect on real wages and a less negative effect on labor s share of GDP than shown in figure Adapting to Technological Change | Trade between People and Machines When and how much is AI likely to substitute for human tasks ? The principle of comparative advantage tells us that human workers can benefit from being in the same market with machines even if these machines excel at many traditionally human tasks. The benefit comes from workers specialization in the tasks humans can do better than machines or at least the tasks where humans are at the smallest disadvantage ( Autor ) Specialization allows the machines to be used on their best tasks without wasting resources on tasks that people can do at a lower opportunity cost. To put it another way even if it were technologically possible to let machines do all tasks and do them better than humans do an owner of the machines would sacrifice profits by deploying them without regard for specialization. Consider the operation of a store that requires cashier tasks communication with suppliers the delivery of products and arranging displays. The AI machines perform the arrangement tasks times better ( in terms of speed and accuracy ) than humans and perform the other tasks times better. Given comparative advantage and assuming that the machines are cheap enough to justify using them for any task profit-maximizing deployment will have workers performing the arrangement tasks thereby freeing up machines to do the other tasks where they are especially productive. The theory of comparative advantage means that humans inevitably have a comparative role to play even if they do not have an absolute advantage in every task. Moreover the choice of which machines to deploy is not merely determined by what is technically possible with engineering and computer science.8 Robocop Star Wars C-3PO and other near-human machines are great entertainment but in many situations they would be poor investments precisely because of their close similarities to humans.9 Because machines and AI are ultimately another form of capital designing machines to complement rather than substitute for humans will be more profitable. In other words the potential for specialization implies that producers will look for ways to magnify differences with people. For example Abel and others ( ) explain how providing algorithms with expert ( human ) advice part of a broader class of Human-in-the-Loop Reinforcement Learning can improve various aspects of learning and prediction. Consider the analogous case of agricultural tobacco production. Though some countries like Brazil display very labor-intensive tobacco production ( Varga and Bonato ) U.S. production of tobacco is highly mechanized ( Sykes ) For a similar illustration from cotton production see FAO ( ) In this sense the mere presence of capital does not guarantee its use ; the opportunity cost of labor in an economy will drive the division of labor and degree of specialization. Lagakos and Waugh ( ) formalize these insights within a general equilibrium Roy model with agriculture and nonagriculture sectors. Research in human machine interaction finds situations in which people can more easily and intuitively work with robotic partners when the robots look and behave in ways similar to humans. In these cases people can project human expectations of how robots should act and thus do not need to be trained ( or study user manuals ) in order to figure out how to work with the robot. | Chapter The purposeful acquisition of comparative advantage has long been observed in human labor markets ( Becker and Murphy ) Consider an electrician and a carpenter who work together to build a high-quality house. Their comparative advantage is obvious at the time that they are building the house but neither of them was born with his or her specialized skills. They both chose to specialize knowing directly or perhaps indirectly through market prices that they would be a more valued member of a construction team if they could excel at carpentry or excel at electrical work rather than having mediocre skills at both types of tasks. Robotics research already suggests that productivity is enhanced when machines specialize ( Nitschke Schut and Eiben ) Also see for example box which describes the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency s ( DARPA s ) initiatives regarding partnering with machines. In light of these examples of complementarity between AI and humans the entertainment industry s anthropomorphic portrayal of robotics and artificial intelligence is somewhat misleading about how much these types of investments will substitute for human workers. The concern of course is that the price associated with human tasks will decline to a point where humans are driven out of the workforce and are not incentivized to work. For example some manufacturers might find that production is cheaper with complete automation rather than by retaining a mix of some human employees and AI. However specialization and trade also occur at the market level. A robot-intensive business may engage in one phase of production selling its output to a person-intensive business at a later phase of production. In this sense even if certain tasks traditionally performed by humans are instead now done by machines humans will nonetheless hold a comparative advantage for other tasks and thus will continue to play a role in production processes. Although there are some concerns about complete automation of human activities ( Frey and Osborne ) the emerging empirical evidence suggests that the main effects of AI and automation are on the composition of tasks within a job rather than on occupations in general. For example Brynjolfsson Rock and Mitchell ( ) introduce an index of suitability for machine learning ( SML ) and they find that though most occupations have at least some tasks that are SML few ( if any ) have tasks that are all SML. Similarly Nedelkoska and Quintini ( ) use data on skills across occupations and countries and they find that though percent of jobs are likely to be automated by over percent percent of jobs face a change of automation of percent or less. The key observation is that as automation progresses workers will increasingly be drawn to the jobs and tasks that are more difficult to automate. Astute policymaking will nonetheless play a role in promoting workforce development particularly for less educated workers through for example the Pledge to America s Workers which we discuss later in the chapter. Adapting to Technological Change | Box DARPA : Strategic Investments in Artificial Intelligence and Cybersecurity The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA ) is focused on a future where AI is a complement to humans in the production of goods services and ideas that is where humans can safely partner with machines more as colleagues rather than as tools ( DARPA 2018a ) To facilitate this vision DARPA is actively funding the development and application of a socalled third wave of AI technologies that would result in intelligent machines capable of reasoning in context. In particular DARPA announced a $ billion multiyear investment in new and existing programs in September These investment areas include security clearance vetting or accrediting software systems for operational deployment ; improving the robustness and reliability of AI systems ; enhancing the security and resiliency of machine learning and AI technologies ; reducing power data and performance inefficiencies ; and pioneering the next generation of AI algorithms and applications such as explainability and commonsense reasoning ( DARPA 2018a ) DARPA has already piloted a number of successful programs including the Cyber Grand Challenge in a competition that showcased the state of the art in Cyber Reasoning Systems ( DARPA 2018b ) Competing systems played an attack-defend style of Capture the Flag where contestants were tasked with developing AI algorithms to autonomously identify and patch vulnerabilities in their own software while simultaneously attacking the other teams weaknesses ( Hoadley and Lucas ) Although conventional cybersecurity programs may take up to several months to find and patch problems the competing and largely rules-based algorithms found the bugs in seconds. According to DARPA ( ) the need for automated scalable machine-speed vulnerability detection and patching is large and growing fast as more and more systems get connected to and become dependent upon the Internet. The major innovation in the Cyber Grand Challenge was the demonstration that AI can play both an offensive and defensive role. DARPA continues to build out these human-machine cyber detection capabilities for pinpointing and addressing vulnerabilities through its Computers and Humans Exploring Software Security program known as CHESS. The activities funded by CHESS involve helping computers and humans work collaboratively through tasks such as finding zero-day vulnerabilities at scale and speed. | Chapter The Uneven Effects of Technological Change This section delineates the uneven effects of technological change. It first considers these changes differential effects by occupation and skill. Then it explores the scale and factor-substitution effects of an industry s technological progress and how they moderate the effect on labor. Finally the section asks when we will see the effects of AI on the economy. Differential Effects by Occupation and Skill Many types of technological change affect workers and industries in heterogeneous ways. For example the widespread adoption of computers and information technology during the past several decades has enormously increased productivity for certain types of workers but has brought comparatively little or no productivity enhancement for others ( Acemoglu et al. ) Because earnings are determined by workers productivity such changes in technology are expected to have varying effects on workers with different sets of skills such as workers with or without a college or graduate education ( Katz and Murphy ) Economists have concluded that skill-biased technical change can account for most of the observed rise in earnings disparities between some higher-skilled workers ( whose productivity was greatly enhanced by technology like computers ) and some lower-skilled workers ( who were less affected ) which was amplified during the IT revolution ( Autor Katz and Krueger ; Autor Levy and Murnane ) This disparity is in part explained by the complementarity between capital and certain types of skills ( Krusell et al. ) In the context of AI and automation the complementary relationship means that there is processing power that mainly benefits workers who use computer technology. In this sense the more rapid increase in earnings among collegeeducated workers despite the corresponding rise in the supply of these workers represents a skills premium for individuals who can leverage technology to augment their productivity ( Juhn Murphy and Pierce ) The Scale and Factor-Substitution Effects of an Industry s Technological Progress Technological progress allows an industry to produce the same output with fewer inputs ( e.g. workers ) At first glance we might therefore expect workers to leave the industry and find work elsewhere. One could point to the example of changes in agriculture in the 20th century when the agricultural employment share dropped from to percent between and ( Autor ) at the same time that agricultural TFP rapidly increased ( Herrendorf Rogerson and Valentinyi ) See box for an example of technological change in the agricultural sector that has fueled productivity. Adapting to Technological Change | Box Technological Change in Agriculture and Rural America Agriculture has been one of the sectors experiencing rapid technological change including the computer science revolution. For example output per hour in the agricultural sector grew annually by percent between and whereas it grew annually by percent in manufacturing ( Wang et al. ) For example precision agriculture which refers to a broad class of AI applications allowing for precise control over agricultural inputs based on detailed site-specific data has allowed farmers to improve the productivity of soil by better understanding the characteristics that are most conducive to growth within a specific geographic area ; see figure 7-i for evidence on its incidence across peanut and soybean farming. Moreover these systems contain sensors that allow farmers to monitor crop yields and self-guided tractors and variable rate planters that vary their seeding and fertilizer rates based on fertility and past yield data. In brief these technologies have allowed corn and soybean farmers among others to produce more at lower costs ( Schimmelpfennig ) Figure 7-i. Precision Agriculture Use in Peanuts and Soybeans Peanuts Soybeans Share of planted acres ( percent ) Some form of Yield monitor GPS-based soil Variable rate Guidance or precision properties technology AutoSteering agriculture map system Source : United States Department of Agriculture. Note : GPS = Global Positioning System | Chapter AI is also used in animal agriculture. For example over robotic milking systems are in operation globally on dairy farms. According to Salfer and others ( ) farms using robotic milking systems are much more productive selling percent more milk per hired worker and percent more milk per cow. Moreover rather than displacing humans the introduction of automation in dairy farms has allowed labor and management to reallocate their time toward maintaining animal health analyzing records and managing reproduction and nutrition on the farms. For example John Deere runs a two-year associate degree program to help its employees not only stay current on the latest farming machine tools but also acquire new skills in data science ( Burkner et al. ) However rural Americans have not always seen the gains of technological progress ( Forman Goldfarb and Greenstein ) Motivated by these disparities President Trump signed Executive Order in January ( White House 2018c ) expanding and streamlining access to broadband in rural America. Given the importance of high-speed Internet access for data science capabilities connectivity in rural America is essential for its economic competitiveness. Moreover the Trump Administration is committed to investing in and promoting workforce development through for example the Pledge to America s Workers which we discuss in below in this chapter s main text. However as an industry s productivity advances it is producing each unit of output at a lower cost and thereby selling at lower prices. Consumers of this output respond by purchasing more which is a force toward more industry employment known as the scale effect on labor demand. The productivity revolution in agriculture did result in more production and higher sales of food. However because consumers demand for agricultural output is price inelastic consumers spend less of their budget on agriculture when it becomes cheaper the factor-substitution effect dominated the scale effect on the demand for agricultural labor.10 If demand for a good is price elastic meaning that consumers spend more of their budget on the good when prices fall then cost-reducing technology might raise that sector s shares of employment and GDP. Consider the recent history of taxi dispatchers who take calls from individuals desiring a ride and direct a driver to the pickup point. About a decade ago companies discovered how to use a smartphone to perform the tasks of the dispatcher and these companies famously distributed such an app to millions of smartphone users. The result was a dramatic increase in the number of people working in the transportation industry broadly understood to include drivers for Uber The decomposition of labor demand into scale and factor-substitution effects is usually attributed to Alfred Marshall ( ) and John Hicks ( ) Adapting to Technological Change | Lyft and other ride-sharing platforms. By observing what happened to overall employment in the industry ( which provides rides for passengers and which now includes ride sharing in addition to traditional taxis ) we can see that it had price-elastic demand. The cost reductions associated with the new technology increased the number of rides even more than it increased the number of humans giving rides. Although there is some difficulty in measuring participants in the sharing economy in ways that are directly comparable with traditional taxi employment there is emerging evidence of its expansion. For example JPMorgan Chase ( ) found that the share of families generating earnings on transportation platforms over the course of a year increased to percent of the labor force in March after the inception of ride sharing in about ( figure ) A large part of the increase came from the introduction of driver-partners in just three years under the Uber platform alone ( Hall and Krueger ) Increasing empirical evidence suggests that these ride-sharing applications not only have provided significant flexibility for drivers ( Chen et al. forthcoming ; Koustas ) but also have generated social welfare benefits for those who are not platform participants ( Cohen et al. ; Makridis and Paik ) These ride-sharing applications are an early pre autonomous vehicle ( AV ) manifestation of transportation as a service. Whereas transportation has traditionally been about assets ( i.e. vehicle ownership ) it may increasingly move toward services as more AVs enter the market. For example even though PricewaterhouseCoopers ( PwC ) estimates that the transportation sector may require million fewer cars in Europe and the U.S. by ( PwC 2018a ) it also estimates that the market for shared on-demand vehicles may grow to $ trillion by in comparison with $ billion in ( PwC 2018b ) Though predicting the growth in the AV market is outside the scope of this Report the emerging patterns in ride sharing and AVs are illustrative examples of the impact of technological change. When Will We See the Effects of AI on the Economy ? Some economists have noted a puzzling productivity paradox with the historical and ongoing patterns described above. Although most researchers agree that the recent advances in AI and automation promise production possibilities that are even greater than the initial emergence of the digital The National Academies ( ) also cite estimates pointing toward growth from to percent in alternative work arrangements between and According to Katz and Krueger ( ) who did a survey in November percent of workers report working through an online intermediary. Though there is debate about the measurement of alternative work arrangements a recent assessment by Katz and Krueger ( ) concludes that despite the only modest increase in these arrangements obtained from the and Contingent Work Surveys in the Current Population Survey this survey s data are likely underestimates. | Chapter Figure Share of Respondents Reporting Income from Ride-Sharing Platforms in the Past Year Percent Mar-18 Source : JPMorgan Chase ( ) economy ( Brynjolfsson and McAfee ) the growth of labor productivity at least in the way it has traditionally been measured has been surprisingly sluggish.12 For example in contrast to the percent annual growth in aggregate labor productivity seen in the United States between and its annual growth between and was only percent ( Syverson ) This pattern is consistent with growth across other economies ; Syverson ( ) found the annual growth rate in labor productivity was percent between and in sampled countries but fell to percent between and If technological change and the adoption of AI have been especially rapid during the past decade what can account for the slower growth of labor productivity ? One possibility is that the productivity effects of technology may have been oversold ( Gordon ) and the period of rapid growth of the Information Age was a temporary aberration in a long-run trend toward slower technology-related productivity growth ( Gordon ) However Oliner and Sichel ( ) show using a multisector neoclassical growth model with both IT and non-IT capital that the increase in IT and corresponding efficiency gains account for two-thirds of the increase in labor productivity for the nonfarm 12As the Nobel laureate Robert Solow famously said You can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics. Adapting to Technological Change | business sector over the 1990s.13 Moreover Byrne Oliner and Sichel ( ) apply the same framework and fit more recent data between and suggesting that there is no inconsistency with theory. Jorgensen and Stiroh ( ) also obtain slightly lower contributions to growth from computer hardware because they use a broader definition of output. Yet another related explanation is that the expansion of credit in the early 2000s led to a misallocation of investment into less productive sectors creating a drag on growth ( Borio et al. ) However productivity has recently ticked up ( e.g. see chapter of this Report ) Therefore secular stagnation and the misallocation of investment do not appear to be viable explanations. Another possibility is that our official estimates of growth and productivity fail to capture many of the recent gains from technological advancement. Many of today s new technologies involve little or no direct cost to consumers but give them great utility. These developments include for example Internet social networks information search capabilities and downloadable media. A quick Internet search today can yield information that a few generations ago would have required a team of individuals searching a university library such benefits are not captured in our measurement of GDP. Though these benefits are clearly important factors behind consumer welfare ( Brynjolfsson Eggers and Gannamaneni ) mismeasurement between and would need to be unrealistically high to account for the sluggish GDP growth relative to the overall trend ( Syverson ) Perhaps the strongest argument for why productivity statistics in recent history have not shown the expected benefits from the new technologies is that for practical reasons there have so far simply been lags between productivity and the widespread implementation of AI and ML. The theoretical genesis of this argument is an insight from Paul David ( ) Much as the dynamo and the computer were fundamental components of a broader technological infrastructure AI is a similar general purpose technology. Although these discoveries often have immediate effects on productivity their full impact is not realized until all the complementary investments are made thereby creating a lag with investment. Brynjolfsson Rock and Syverson ( ) apply this logic to AI reconciling the productivity paradox. Under their preferred interpretation of the data we are simply awaiting the results of a necessary trial-and-error process and the productivity benefits will eventually be realized. An integral part of the efficiency gains among producers of computer equipment is the rapid decline in effective prices of semiconductors due to advances in chip technology ( Triplett ) Byrne Oliner and Sichel ( ) find that semiconductor prices measured with a hedonic index fell at an estimated annual rate of percent between and much faster than the percent decline experienced by the microprocessor producer price index series that provides a broader measure that subsumes semiconductors. | Chapter Cybersecurity Risks of Increased Reliance on Computer Technology Although technological advances and the emergence of AI have the potential to raise productivity and economic growth the widespread reliance on technology also exposes the economy to new threats of malicious cyber activity. Cyber threat actors may be nation-states cyber terrorists organized criminal groups hacktivists ( individuals or collectives that aim to advance their social agenda through cyber interference ) or simply disgruntled individuals. These threats transcend the typical boundaries of conflict which have been analyzed through the lens of land sea and air. However the emergence of the Internet of Things implies that anything connected to the Internet is vulnerable to malicious cyber intrusions introducing threat vectors throughout the Internet ecosystem ( Hoffman ) Malicious cyber activity imposes costs on the U.S. economy through the theft of intellectual property and personally identifiable information denial-ofservice attacks data and equipment destruction and ransomware attacks. The CEA estimated this cost to be as high as $ billion in ( CEA 2018b ) Most innovations however lead to little-understood risks whether for new drugs or computer technologies. This section describes our current assessment of the scope of cyber vulnerabilities how they vary by industry and the factors that may exacerbate failures to adopt cybersecurity best practices. Assessing the Scope of the Cyber Threat The Economic Report of the President ( CEA 2018b ) estimated the costs of malicious cyber activity by adding up the costs experienced by the private sector the public sector and private individuals. It estimated the costs to the private sector using event-study methodology whereby it quantified the loss of firm value as a result of an adverse cyber event. It estimated the costs to the corporate sector using event-study methodology whereby it quantified the loss of firm value as a result of an adverse cyber event. The estimate further took into account the spillover effect of these costs to economically linked firms. On the basis of a sample of cyber incidents occurring between January and January the Report estimated that the total economic cost for ranged between $ and $ billion. Although these event studies provide an important starting point for evaluating the costs of cybersecurity incidents they presuppose that the timing of the event was reliably recorded and that investors knew the distribution of new risks induced by the event. However to give just one example when the largest recorded data breach according to the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse occurred in late it was not reported until September ( Lee ) Delays between the time when an incident takes place and the time it is reported are a function of not only a firm s ability to identify the incident but Adapting to Technological Change | also of varying State laws that mandate disclosure ( Bisogni ) The affected firm s own estimate of the damage caused by the breach has been updated and increased on several occasions illustrating how difficult it can be to accurately calculate the cost. Moreover data on the number of records or systems that have been breached often contain significant measurement error and sampling variability. In addition to reporting discrepancies across States there are also discrepancies across sectors. Makridis and Dean ( ) study sector discrepancies using data from the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse and the Department of Health and Human Services to investigate the relationship between recorded breaches and firm outcomes. Though they find some evidence of a negative association between productivity and record breaches in the Health and Human Services data where healthcare companies face greater disclosure requirements they do not find such evidence in the data from the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse covering all sectors. Publicly traded companies based on requirements from the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) must provide timely and ongoing information in the periodic reports of material cybersecurity risks and incidents that trigger disclosure obligations. Beyond the Federal securities laws other reporting standards in specific sectors like the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act may result in disclosures of other data breaches that are not material. Since the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center ( NCCIC ) of the Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) has served as the Nation s flagship cyber defense incident response and operational integration center. The NCCIC serves as the national hub for cyber and communication information technical expertise and operational integration operating a 24/7 watch floor tasked with providing situational awareness analysis and incident response capabilities to the Federal government ; private sector stakeholders ; and State Local Tribal and Territorial Partners. Through this process DHS has been collecting robust data on the types of incidents that are having an impact on the Nation. Furthermore the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) also maintains CyWatch a 24/7 command center for cyber intrusion prevention and response operations based on consensual monitoring and third parties that report to the FBI. CyWatch monitors must notify companies whose network security has been breached ( U.S.C. creates an obligation for Federal law enforcement agencies to notify victims of a crime ) After notification CyWatch shares information with its partner law enforcement agencies including the Department of Defense DHS and National Security Using data from the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse Bisogni Asghari and Van Eeten ( ) estimate that adoption of the inform credit agency and the notification publication by informed attorneys general State provisions would increase the number of publicly reported cybersecurity breaches by at least percent. | Chapter Figure Cybersecurity Breaches That Were Made Public Number of breaches Sources : Privacy Rights Clearinghouse ; CEA calculations. Agency to improve preparedness and attribution behind attacks and guide appropriate responses.15 Despite the serious limitations associated with data from the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse they nonetheless provide a time series proxy for the increased frequency of data breaches since ; see figure Although there is an upward trend in cyber breaches between and these data largely understate the number of data breaches ( Bisogni Asghari and Van Eeten ; ITRC ) The Internet Crime Complaint Center a partnership between the FBI and National White Collar Crime Center gives victims of cybercrime an accessible reporting mechanism for alerting the authorities about suspected criminal or civil violations. Although not directly comparable the Internet Crime Report announced a total of complaints of cyber breaches in Even though these complaints represent a broader range of potential Internet crimes the number far exceeds the publicly reported incidents. Recommending possible solutions for these cyber vulnerabilities requires an accurate understanding of their sources. We suggest that there are at least Though exact attribution in cyberspace is possible it requires not only technical expertise but also leadership and information sharing and coordinating across the layers of an organization ( Rid and Buchanan ) Adapting to Technological Change | two underlying drivers behind the above-mentioned empirical regularities. First organizations could lack informational awareness. Much like the quantitative management science literature on the adoption of best practices in business ( Bloom et al. ) many organizations might simply not be aware of basic cyber hygiene practices. Second the executives of organizations could suffer from incomplete incentives to promote cybersecurity practices. If for example financial metrics are easier to measure relative to cybersecurity then managers might allocate too little effort to cybersecurity due to a multitasking problem ( Holmstrom and Milgrom ) Particularly because cybersecurity breaches generate network externalities the private sector could underinvest in cybersecurity ( Gordon et al. ) Our preceding evidence on the lack of many basic cybersecurity practices among the most profitable companies in the U.S. economy suggests that a lack of information awareness and a lack of resources are unlikely to be the primary culprits behind existing vulnerabilities. Moreover the Cybersecurity Framework of the National Institute of Standards and Technology s ( NIST ) which details best practices is publicly available and has been disseminated through many channels. These facts suggest that the alternative culprit could be incomplete incentives arising from agency problems within organizations that lead managers to overlook cyber hygiene. Information sharing and dissemination of best practices must remain a priority particularly for small businesses that are more likely to lack the resources or infrastructure to search out and implement best practices. In particular information needs to be publicly available transparent and shared to disseminate best practices and call attention to dangerous practices. For example Gal-Or and Ghose ( ) show that industry-based information sharing and analysis centers can lead to improvements in social welfare but the degree of competition in the marketplace is an important moderating factor that determines whether a firm participates. In particular unless firms in an industry understand the downside associated with their vulnerability to cyberattacks they may not realize the gains that can come from collaboration through information sharing. Many security operations companies also provide a source of market discipline by promoting transparency and information vis- -vis cyber vulnerabilities ( such organizations that raise firms awareness of cybersecurity flaws are often referred to as white hat hackers ) Conversely a survey by Malwarebytes ( ) suggests that roughly in U.S. security professionals admit to considering participating in black hat hacker activity which involves exploiting discovered cybersecurity vulnerabilities for financial gain. Roughly percent of security professionals say they have known or know someone involved in black hat hacking activities. | Chapter Potential Vulnerabilities by Industry The prevalence of cyber threats suggests that firms are relatively unprepared to protect themselves. Indeed according to Hiscox ( 2018a ) in nearly threequarters of organizations based in the United Kingdom the United States Germany Spain and the Netherlands failed basic cyber readiness tests. Even though the United States ranks higher than most countries in cyber readiness ( Makridis and Smeets ) its preparedness is still poor enough to concern policymakers studying the impact of cyber insecurity on the U.S. economy. To better understand these cybersecurity risks at a more granular level Rapid7 an Internet security firm whose business model involves collecting publicly observable data on cybersecurity practices of any firm with an Internet presence shared its data for Fortune companies with the CEA. Using public data and a proprietary methodology Rapid7 matches uniquely identified Internet protocol addresses of Internet-connected devices to a specific firm. Though the security scan is voluntary only percent of Fortune firms opt out. These data show that the majority of Fortune companies are vulnerable to cyberattacks and thus fail to take even the most basic security measures. And though there are many metrics for gauging vulnerabilities we focus here on an important and transparent metric : whether email has been configured for protection against spam. Motivated by the frequency of phishing email attacks which are the most common method used by malicious cyber actors to penetrate network security configuring a secure email network is one of the first lines of defense. One metric for email security is whether the organization has adopted the Domain-Based Message Authentication Reporting & Conformance ( DMARC ) protocol. Although it is not a panacea for all types of phishing attacks DMARC allows senders and receivers to authenticate whether a message is legitimately from a sender. Adopting DMARC for email makes it easier for organizations to not only identify spam and phishing messages but also to keep them out of employees inboxes thereby reducing the probability that an employee accidentally clicks on a link. Moreover properly configured DMARC records are able to actively quarantine or reject emails that are a threat to safety by allowing the message s sender to signal to the recipient that the message is protected by a Sender Policy Framework and/or as DomainKeys Identified Mail. We note however that DMARC is only one metric out of many and that having it does not guarantee cyber safety. Figure reports the percentage of all Fortune firms without a DMARC email configuration together with value added across industrial sectors. This figure illustrates significant exposure across industries ranging from percent of firms in business services to percent of those in chemicals that are not implementing DMARC protocol. Moreover although we do not interpret the relationship between value added and a lack of DMARC as causal the data Adapting to Technological Change | suggest that a 10-percentage-point increase in share of firms without DMARC in a sector is associated with $ billion less in value added in that sector ( in dollars ) This suggests that greater adoption of DMARC could avoid breaches and phishing scams. Given that the combined market value of the Fortune firms is over $ trillion these results suggest that much of this value may be exposed to cyber thefts of intellectual property various destructive and ransomware attacks and the destruction of reputational capital. Moreover as outlined in the Economic Report of the President an attack on entities especially large publicly traded Fortune firms that are part of the Nation s critical infrastructure could have effects throughout the U.S. economy affecting other firms in the supply chain and individual customers. Given the limited preparedness among Fortune companies manifested by not only the failure to adopt DMARC but also a range of other cyber vulnerabilities detailed by Rapid7 ( ) an additional concern is that smaller firms may have even less robust cybersecurity measures in place ( Hiscox 2018b ) The Federal government continues to modernize its cyber practices. OMB and DHS worked together to transform the Trusted Internet Connection ( TIC ) policies and processes so that Federal departments and agencies can take advantage of common and advanced cloud computing capabilities to meet their requirements. AI is not specifically identified in the policy updates but departments and agencies are now able to use outside expertise in the cloud which can include using AI and other methods while continuously meeting appropriate cybersecurity and privacy controls. In alignment with the action steps identified in the Report to the President on Federal IT Modernization ( American Technology Council ) those cooperating in the interagency effort continue to identify if there are any real or perceived policy limitations by working through cases of real-world use that support their current and future needs. This continuous approach is instrumental for realizing the value of AI and other methods that best meet national needs. The Federal government is more prepared than the private sector to protect against phishing attacks which are a primary method for hackers to gain access to enterprises due to the Binding Operational Directive which introduced requirements for agencies to enhance email and web security. Using data from the Federal Cyber Exposure Scorecard figure plots the number of government agencies with various email configurations. In the figure fully rejects means that an organization has properly configured its email whereas no rejections means that it is vulnerable to an attack. Government agencies use of the DMARC email configuration is percent which is better than the average of percent in the private sector. Moreover of the Federal second-level dot-gov domains percent have a valid DMARC record with a policy of reject. Though adoption of DMARC is only one of many indicators of cyber hygiene and was linked to the implementation | Chapter Figure Industries That Are Most Lacking the DMARC Protocol Among Fortune Companies by Value Added Value added by industry ( billions ) Financials Business services Retail Healthcare Restaurants and leisure Transportation Technology Share of industry lacking the DMARC protocol Sources : Rapid7 ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations. Note : DMARC = Domain-Based Message Authentication Reporting & Conformance which is an email validation system designed to detect and prevent the use of forged sender addresses for phishing and email-based malware. Points are scaled by industry employment in and only the top sectors ( ranked by employment ) are plotted. Figure DMARC Protocol Use Across Government Agencies Number of agencies Fully reject Some rejection Source : Office of Management and Budget. No rejections Adapting to Technological Change | of Binding Operational Directive across Federal agencies these results nonetheless suggest that Federal cyber best practices could set an example for the private sector.16 The Role of Policy This section discusses the longer-run policy implications of both AI advancement and cybersecurity issues and details the Trump Administration s current policies in these areas. The discussion highlights the Administration s priorities for AI readiness and implementation reskilling and cybersecurity initiatives to contend with the changing nature of work and emerging technological threats. Policy Considerations as AI Advances : Preparing for a Reskilling Challenge As discussed in earlier in this chapter economists agree that technological change resulting from AI will affect the structure of the demand for labor in the years to come ( Brynjolfsson and McAfee ; Agrawal Gans and Goldfarb ) One potential challenge that policymakers could face as AI advances is an increase in the number of workers who need new skills to find work in a changed labor market. Reskilling efforts both for workers whose jobs have been displaced by technology and for those who need new skills to operate new technologies could become more urgent as the demand for labor enters a new phase of its decades-long evolution. For example the World Economic Forum ( ) found in a sample of firms that at least percent of all employees will require significant reskilling and/or upskilling by In the Obama Administration s Council of Economic Advisers examined the economics of AI including its possible effects on jobs in the future predicting that to million existing part- and full-time U.S. jobs may be threatened or substantially altered by AI. In addition it predicted roughly self-employed drivers ( ride-sharing workers ) would be at risk from a shift toward use of autonomous vehicles as of May estimates ( CEA ) However they also concluded that other workers could see a rise in productivity and increasing demand for certain skills. They identified four areas that could see a rise in labor demand : ( ) engaging with AI to complete tasks ( ) developing new AI tools ( ) supervising and maintaining AI tools to ensure they are achieving the desired aims and ( ) responding to paradigm shifts where entirely new approaches are needed ( CEA ) Because the jobs most vulnerable to automation are concentrated among lower-paid lesseducated workers reskilling programs could play an important role in helping avert further wage polarization and reallocating skills to where they are most Although it is also possible that the Federal government does not perform as well in other dimensions the data from Rapid7 ( ) suggest that the sample of Fortune companies also are exposed in other important dimensions of basic cybersecurity practices. | Chapter needed. The CEA ( ) made three primary recommendations : ( ) investing and developing AI for its many benefits in both the public and private sectors ( ) educating and training workers so they are prepared for the jobs of the future and ( ) helping workers transition across jobs to ensure shared gains from technological change. More recently in discussing how automation may interact with the economy and workforce the CEA ( 2018a ) has referred to an observation made in a report by the National Academies ( ) that continued advance of information technology implies workers will require skills that increasingly emphasize creativity adaptability and interpersonal skills over routine information processing and manual tasks. This report also reiterates findings by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) among others that workers who have not obtained a college degree are most at risk for displacement by automation. Similarly motivated by the declining college and cognitive skills premium as documented by Beaudry Green and Sand ( ) ; Valletta ( ) ; and Gallipoli and Makridis ( ) individuals in occupations that involve greater IT-based tasks have continued experiencing rising wage premiums. All these pieces of empirical evidence point to the need for digital skills in the emerging labor market. Policymakers may also address the concern that job losses from automation could disproportionately affect those who are least able to afford the tuition costs of reskilling programs up front and those who are least likely to be able to sustain a forfeiture of labor income for the duration of the reskilling period. Gallipoli and Makridis ( ) find that individuals in jobs that tend to require more routine and manual skills are especially exposed to the growing demand for IT-based tasks. Another factor to consider in future policymaking is the unpredictable nature of disruption on the workforce. In determining federally funded programs to address displaced workers the CEA ( 2018a ) cautions against programs targeting specific industries instead suggesting that keeping programs as flexible as possible reduces the need for continual re-optimization and increases the return on Federal dollars spent. In addition to studying reskilling challenges the Trump Administration has also established the President s National Council of the American Worker to develop and implement a strategy aimed at expanding educational attainment training and nontraditional degree programs that will prepare workers for the emergence of automation and AI ( White House 2018a ) Chapter of this Report discusses the reskilling challenge in detail including the job openings rates by industry. The opportunity for reskilling is perhaps greatest in the field of cybersecurity where there is a shortage of skilled workers ( Burning Glass ) Figure for example uses data from CyberSeek ( ) a partnership between Burning Glass Technologies the Computing Technology Industry Association and the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education to Adapting to Technological Change |  $ "    0++'4  )   (  )     / $ *  ! *     $ /4  *     *     &  characterize the ratio of supply and demand for cybersecurity workers across locations ( e.g. States ) Although no State has a ratio less than the vast crosssectional heterogeneity highlights how different State labor markets face very different intensities of shortage ( e.g. the District of Columbia has a value of vs. Kentucky which has a value of ) To put these numbers in perspective a value of means that half of a State s existing cybersecurity workforce would need to change jobs every year to meet new postings underscoring the amount of turnover that would be required to meet the skills gap. The Administration s Policies to Promote Cybersecurity It is essential that the Federal government and the private sector promote cyber best practices and cyber hygiene. For example as discussed above many Federal agencies have properly configured their email systems with DMARC. DHS s National Cybersecurity Assessments and Technical Services team determined that of the Federal agencies surveyed have cybersecurity programs that are either at risk or at high risk for at least four reasons according to OMB ( 2018a ) ; in the next paragraph we summarize these factors from the Federal Cybersecurity Risk Determination Report and Action Plan ( White House 2018a ) Government agencies along with the private sector are not always aware of the situational context and/or the resources that exist to tackle the current threat environment. For example percent of the Federal cyber | Chapter incidents that were reported in did not specifically identify an attack vector. Organizations continue to adopt best practices but there can be challenges with implementation. For example only percent of agencies have the ability to detect white-list software running on their systems.17 Moreover the lack of network visibility means that agencies may be unable to detect data exfiltration. For example only percent of agencies report that they have the ability to detect and investigate attempts to access large volumes of data. Finally the lack of organizational and managerial policies surrounding the ownership of cybersecurity risk results in chief information officers or chief information security officers who lack the authority to make the relevant organization-wide decisions but are nonetheless charged with the responsibility of maintaining network security. For example only percent of agencies achieved the government-wide target for encrypting inactive data. These challenges are only going to grow given the proliferation of data and increasing use of machine learning. Countries and malicious actors may turn toward counter-AI operations that attempt to alter and/or manipulate data ( Weinbaum and Shanahan ) Individuals throughout the Federal civilian government Department of Defense intelligence community and private sector will need to evolve to meet the expectations with identifying protecting detecting responding and recovering from threats in a timely manner. The Trump Administration particularly through OMB in partnership with the Department of Homeland Security NIST and the General Services Administration is working to actively address these shortcomings. For example the update to the TIC initiative is only one component of a broader effort by the Federal Chief Information Security Officer Council to obtain and test usecases particularly from the private sector ( OMB 2018c ) Moreover as discussed in box DARPA is developing new AI capabilities that help national security personnel more rapidly and reliably identify and address cybersecurity threats. The Administration s Policies to Maintain American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence The Trump Administration s AI agenda prioritizes advancing U.S. leadership in AI as well as helping the Nation s workforce adapt to the changes that are coming. As evidenced in the Administration s and budget priorities memoranda and highlighted at the White House AI summit in May the Administration continues to prioritize research-and-development funding for AI research and computing infrastructure machine learning and autonomous systems ( OSTP ) To complement these active financial investments the Administration also chartered the Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence under the National Science and Technology Council. This committee advises the White House on interagency research-and-development priorities to foster An application white list refers to a set of applications that are authorized to be present according to a well-defined benchmark ( Sedgewick Souppaya and Scarfone ) Adapting to Technological Change | collaboration between the private sector and academia to identify opportunities to leverage Federal data and computational resources and to improve the efficiency of government planning and coordination. The recent Executive Order on Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence has formalized these commitments by calling for increased prioritization of investments engaging in development of standards and training and workforce development initiatives ( White House ) Second the Administration has implemented policies that are conducive to more rapid economic growth and innovation by removing regulatory barriers including those on the deployment of AI-powered technologies. In September the Department of Transportation released an update of the Federal Automated Vehicles Policy providing nonregulatory guidance for AV developers which was later further updated in October to provide a framework and multimodal approach to the safe integration of AVs into the surface transportation system. Similarly the Administration is developing new rules in compliance with the Space Policy Directive to streamline the licensing process for commercial space enterprises ( White House 2018d ) The Administration is also taking steps internationally to ensure that there is a level playing field for AI technologies. For example at the World Trade Organization and in trade agreements like the United States Mexico Canada Agreement the Administration is protecting U.S. intellectual property and limiting the ability of foreign governments to require disclosure of proprietary computer source code and algorithms. These actions will better protect the competitiveness of our digital suppliers and promoting access to government-generated public data to enhance innovative use in commercial applications and services ( USTR ) Third the Administration has begun integrating advances in AI and related technologies to improve the delivery of government services to the American people. The President s Management Agenda calls for the use of automation software to improve the efficiency of government services and maximize the applications of Federal data to help evaluate and modify Federal programs ( OMB 2018b ) In addition in April the Department of Energy ( DOE ) and the Department of Veterans Affairs launched the Million Veteran Program Computational Health Analytics for Medical Precision to Improve Outcomes Now known as CHAMPION which uses high-performance computing infrastructure in the DOE National Laboratories to analyze large quantities of data and make recommendations that focus on suicide prevention and enhanced predictions and diagnoses of diseases ( DOE ) Recognizing that AI holds promise not only for greater economic opportunity but also for national security aims the Trump Administration has directed considerable resources and leadership into targeted strategic investments particularly at the nexus of AI and cybersecurity. One example as discussed in box is the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ( DARPA 2018c ) | Chapter which is actively investing in a third wave of AI technologies to make AI more transparent and accessible for deployment across both the public and private sectors. In particular these initiatives focus on identifying ways for humans to use AI as tools for more effectively completing their tasks and maintaining network security. To complement these broad-based research-and-development funding priorities the Administration signed a memorandum directing Secretary of Education DeVos to place high quality STEM [ science technology engineering and mathematics ] education particularly Computer Science at the forefront of the Department of Education s priorities ( White House 2017b ) The Department of Education is working to devote over $ million a year in grant funds toward these STEM and computer science activities in addition to exploring other administrative actions that will advance computer science in K and postsecondary institutions. Moreover box describes the emerging National Cyber Education Program which is a prime example of an initiative focused on increasing the supply of STEM talent specifically for the cybersecurity field. The Administration s Implementation of the National Cyber Strategy In addition to the National Security Strategy ( White House 2017a ) the Administration has also developed the comprehensive National Cyber Strategy the first of its kind in over years to address the cybersecurity challenges of the coming decades ( White House 2018b ) This strategy s fourfold overarching goals mirror the pillars of the National Security Strategy ; we paraphrase and synthesize these four objectives here together with their priority areas. The first objective is protecting the American people the Homeland and the American way of life. To do this the Administration is securing Federal networks and information securing critical infrastructure and combating cybercrime and improving incident reporting. Three priorities associated with this objective involve improving risk management and incident reporting practices modernizing Federal technology and security systems and streamlining processes and roles and responsibilities. The second objective is promoting American prosperity. To accomplish this the Administration is fostering a vibrant and resilient digital economy encouraging and protecting U.S. ingenuity and developing a superior cybersecurity workforce. The priorities associated with this objective include promoting an agile and next-generation digital infrastructure protecting intellectual property and creating a pipeline and incentive structure that cultivate highly skilled cybersecurity and technology workers. The third objective is to preserve peace through strength. To do this the Administration is enhancing cyber stability through norms of responsible Adapting to Technological Change | Box Educating the Cyber Workforce of Tomorrow One of the most commonly cited workforce challenges within both the public and private sectors is the shortage of skilled workers. According to recent estimates from International Information System Security Certification Consortium known as ISC there is a shortage of million cybersecurity employees globally ( ISC2 ) Moreover numerous survey results suggest that organizations are increasingly more likely to report a shortage of cybersecurity skills ( Oltsik ; Burning Glass ) Although there is debate about the its magnitude there is a general recognition that more workers are needed to fill the increasing demand for cybersecurity skills particularly as the paths by which hackers can gain access to computers and network servers expand in the growing digital economy. A national program that could help cultivate a new generation of cyber professionals prepared to meet the needs of the government the defense community and the private sector constitutes an Administration priority for both national security and the economy. One example of a long-run and scalable solution is the National Cyber Education Program which is a joint public private initiative supported by the Trump Administration that seeks to inspire and educate children in elementary through high school about potential career paths and tools for careers in cybersecurity. This program is a multipart public private education initiative within the NIST Framework and with themes from the National Integrated Cyber Education Research Center at its core and strong support and leadership from a large educational services firm that serves million K students and million teachers through its online education platform. This initiative includes these features : Core curricular cyber content for grades K Virtual professional development for improving skills among STEM and cybersecurity educators to deliver content effectively and across disciplines. Transformative learning tools and curricula for students to promote both technical content and real-world applications. A career portal for connecting students with cybersecurity opportunities in government and the private sector as well as regional conferences that provide access to counselors educators and industry professionals. Tools for cybersecurity industry partners to engage their local communities particularly schools through volunteerism and mentorship. The National Cyber Education Program has an estimated total budget of $ to $ million which will be provided by a combination of committed private sponsors. | Chapter behavior and attributing and deterring unacceptable behavior in cyberspace. A priority related to this objective is countering malign cyber influence with information operations and better intelligence. The fourth objective is to advance American influence. To accomplish this the Administration is promoting an open interoperable reliable and secure Internet and building international cyber capacity. Two priorities related to this objective include developing partnerships across the public and private sectors to promote innovation and cutting-edge technologies and promoting free and secure markets worldwide. As discussed in box the National Cyber Education Program is an example of a public private initiative that empowers teachers with the resources to improve learning outcomes and career pathways for students particular for the emerging cyber workforce. The Trump Administration is advancing these four objectives through a combination of short- and long-run efforts. In the long run U.S. policymakers seek to prioritize an active and prepared pipeline of technology workers with mastery of information security practices. In the short run the United States will continue strengthening network security especially in critical infrastructure sectors. OMB issued a memorandum in May detailing the risk assessment process which builds upon the Federal Information Security Modernization Act of Chief Information Officer metrics from and the Inspectors General metrics from ( OMB 2018a ) These metrics are based on the NIST Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity ( NIST ) which provides best practices to which both public and private organizations can adhere and aims to create predictability and encourage the adoption of best practices throughout government. Although no system in today s geopolitical environment is completely secure these actions are setting the groundwork for a safe and secure digital infrastructure ; see box for a discussion of how Estonia became one of the world s leading countries in digital infrastructure. Further Artificial Intelligence and Future of Work Policy Considerations Motivated by the increasingly rapid pace of technological change and its implications for individuals there are several lines of inquiry about the role of government.18 First some have suggested as part of the social safety net the We do not however discuss in depth the concerns about AI reaching a point of singularity or general intelligence whereby algorithms can create new ideas on their own without human assistance. Though the concept of singularity and the prospect of accelerated knowledge creation could lead to a large gain in productivity ( Nordhaus ) an alternative scenario is one where algorithms would begin to dictate decisionmaking over human judgment. These discussions are beyond the scope of this chapter and the bulk of ongoing policy deliberations. Adapting to Technological Change | Box Estonia : A Case Study of Modern Cybersecurity Practices Although residents of Estonia rarely had access to electronic devices or the Internet a few decades ago it has become an economic success story and digital leader in its region. Between and its real GDP grew by percent ( vs. percent in the United States ) According to the Estonian government percent of public services were available online as of Estonia does not use a centralized or master database but rather X-Road a software platform that allows links among its public and private e-service databases. According to the Estonian government X-Road saves over years of working time every year reducing bureaucracy and raising efficiency ( Vainsalu ) Though Estonia was effectively a disconnected society in the early 2000s moving toward a digital economy through the introduction of its X-road infrastructure has allowed the country to raise productivity and become more secure ( Vassil ) Consider for instance queries involving vehicle registration data. Typically this search would require three police officers working for about minutes ; but the X-Road software platform eases the retrieval of information so a single officer can complete the search within a few seconds ( Vassil ) All of Estonia s government services ranging from collecting taxes to health records for personalized medical services are made secure and readily accessible with the proper authentication credentials. These technological strides are arguably a major factor behind Estonia s emergence as one of the top countries for doing business ranking as the most competitive tax system in the OECD according to the Tax Foundation ( ) and as the seventh-most-free economy in the world according to the Heritage Foundation ( ) Interestingly the number of queries through X-Road has grown exponentially which is remarkable because similar digital services such as data repositories and services tend to grow linearly ( Vassil ) An integral part of Estonia s success through X-Road has been its data security and privacy features. For example citizens may use digital signatures secured with a 2,048-bit encryption to perform daily tasks such as banking and notarizing documents. Public safety has improved because the presence of digital identification cards has shortened response times to seconds or less for percent of emergency calls ( Estonia ) In fact as of the only legal transactions that one could not make online were marriage divorces and real estate. The core of these online activities is a digital signature law that created a framework for digital contracting. Of course the transition to a digital economy has come with increased targeting from other state and nonstate actors. Healthcare energy and the public sector face continuous cyberattacks primarily from malware infections or outdated software. Perhaps Estonia s largest attack was in ; it involved distributed denial-of-service attacks that disabled computer networks halting communication between the country s two largest banks | Chapter and causing reverberations for political parties. After the attack Estonia established the NATO Cooperative Cyber Defense Center of Excellence in its capital Tallin in addition to founding the Cyber Defense League which works to counter cyberattacks ( Czosseck Ottis and Talih rm ) These increased security precautions and this institutional infrastructure have helped thwart attacks including a large attempted attack on the country s digital identification cards raising public confidence. The system is highly secure because access to databases via X-Road is gated via a secure identification card using two-factor authentication and end-to-end encryption ( Estonia ) Estonia has continued to prioritize improving its digital economy in addition to developing a broader global network in partnership with other countries ; see for example Estonia s Digital Agenda which details plans to improve the well-being of its people and public administration through digitization ( Estonia ) provision of a universal basic income which would help individuals potentially suffering from job displacement. Proponents argue for example that the scale of technological change is unlike anything developed countries have experienced in the past and therefore social safety nets must evolve to adapt to the new risks. However a universal basic income would not only discourage work especially in light of the existing social safety net ( e.g. unemployment insurance and food stamps ) but would also undermine the intrinsic value that work plays in creating meaning and purpose in peoples lives ( Opportunity America ) Second given the wide array of applications of AI for national security and warfare there is an ongoing debate about whether AI should be regulated to prevent an AI arms race among countries ( Taddeo ; Horowitz ) Particularly because AI is a general purpose technology ( Agrawal Gans and Goldfarb ) the dual uses of AI developments mean that they will diffuse rapidly upon entering the private sector. One primary fear for example is that AI algorithms could make decisions about troop and/or drone deployments which would put human lives at risk without the traditional human decisionmaking process. Much like the concerns about autonomous vehicles and passenger safety some policymakers and researchers are calling for greater guidance on regulating AI when lives are at stake. Third although machine learning algorithms have been remarkably successful at predicting individual outcomes using increasingly accessible and granular data many researchers and policymakers have voiced concern about the potential for these algorithms to propagate bias and discrimination ( Kleinberg Mullainathan and Raghavan ) If the data on which algorithms are trained exhibit certain biases then AI could propagate these biases on a wider and more subtle scale. Though these concerns are valid the implications Adapting to Technological Change | for regulation are ambiguous. In particular Kleinberg Mullainathan and Raghavan ( ) outline three conditions that are required for algorithmic fairness at the heart of these debates about algorithmic classification showing that except in special cases no method can satisfy all three conditions simultaneously. In this sense though concerns about algorithmic fairness ought to continue being voiced policymakers should approach with caution when formulating policy to avoid simply reacting to the latest fad or worry. Fourth some are concerned that the emergence of big data and AI will pose a threat to competition because larger companies will be better equipped to train models on larger data ( Seamans ; Bessen ) For example companies with access to more data might be able to reduce business uncertainty by incorporating more information into their forecasts thereby obtaining lower costs of capital ( Begenau Farboodi and Veldkamp ) However a countervailing force is the impact of AI on the cost of entry and creative destruction. For instance the discovery and application of cloud computing allow firms to rent computer power and/or data storage. Aside from the to percent direct cost savings observed in government ( West ) the indirect effects on entry costs and competition particularly in concentrated markets may be larger ( Colciago and Etro ) Nonetheless regulation and competition policy around big data and AI will remain an active ongoing debate. Despite these general categories of concerns caution is especially important when considering prospective regulation. For example according to Stanford University s One Hundred Year Study of Artificial Intelligence The Study Panel s consensus is that attempts to regulate AI in general would be misguided because there is no clear definition of AI ( it isn t any one thing ) and the risks and considerations are very different in different domains ( Stanford University ) Moreover because AI is an inherently global technology regulation in one country could put companies that are competing in an international marketplace due to cross-country linkages at a significant disadvantage. Conclusion Recent advances in computer science and artificial intelligence technology are revolutionizing the U.S. economy. In many fields tasks that traditionally required humans can now easily be performed by AI algorithms. Although these discoveries have the potential to be as important and transformational to society and the economy as the steam engine according to Brynjolfsson and McAfee ( ) they are also creating known and unknown dependencies and challenges such as accelerated polarization in the labor market and increased exposure to cybersecurity threats. This chapter has defined and reviewed recent developments in AI and automation. Unlike traditional forms of information technology ( e.g. computers ) that require humans to provide instructions and programmatic | Chapter commands intelligent systems are defined by their applicability to a wide range of tasks that need little supervision. For example Google s new AI algorithm AlphaZero successfully trained itself how to play and subsequently defeat the world s best chess engine Stockfish. Similarly DARPA has also created tools capable of reliably and rapidly identifying cybersecurity vulnerabilities. Apart from these gaming and national security applications AI is also frequently applied in the private sector through for example data-driven decisionmaking business analytics and precision agriculture. Drawing on historical examples we have demonstrated the potential effects of AI technology on the U.S. labor market. Although advances in AI and the introduction of technology more broadly will inevitably change the composition of tasks and jobs by making some tasks typically performed by humans obsolete we have shown in the text above that humans will continue to have an important economic function because of their comparative advantage over AI in other tasks even if they do not hold an absolute advantage. This means that companies and entrepreneurs will find it more profitable to design technology capital that complements human capabilities. However to alleviate the potentially adverse effects of AI on individuals and jobs that are more exposed to disruption the Trump Administration has responded proactively by supporting and funding reskilling and apprenticeship initiatives in areas where humans retain a comparative advantage. For example the Pledge to America s Workers an initiative from the National Council for the American Worker already has over million pledges toward reskilling workers. In addition we have applied economic theory to analyze the wage patterns among industries that are adopting AI technology. In the initial anticipation phase firms know that they will be more productive but because they currently lack the AI capital raise real wages. However in the arrival phase which is typically the primary focus among the popular press the introduction of AI substitutes for labor as workers compete with machines thereby depressing real wages. But as business formation catches up with the new technology real wages ultimately rise to levels above what they were before AI. We have also explored ongoing cybersecurity vulnerabilities along with future threats as dependence on technology increases. The CEA ( 2018b ) estimated the cost of attacks on these vulnerabilities to be $ billion in Drawing on new data from Rapid7 across industries we find that cybersecurity vulnerabilities are more pronounced than previously thought even among well-established Fortune firms. The prevalence of these vulnerabilities coupled with the underreporting of public cybersecurity breaches suggests that traditional measures of the cost of malicious cyberattacks may be greater than previously anticipated. We have discussed potential causes behind the failure to adopt cybersecurity best practices in the private sector along with the policy implications including tools already being used by the Federal government to prevent malicious cyberattacks and phishing attempts. Adapting to Technological Change | We conclude by highlighting the Trump Administration s current policy initiatives to tackle the risks posed by continued technological change in the labor market and new cybersecurity threats. The National Council for the American Worker for example has introduced initiatives to promote reskilling and apprenticeships to help workers transition into new and emerging jobs. For example the Pledge to America s Workers already has over million commitments to these aims by companies. In a similar vein the National Cyber Strategy lays out a comprehensive framework for engaging and dealing with cybersecurity threats. For example the Federal Cybersecurity Risk Determination Report and Action Plan ( White House 2018a ) establishes a detailed risk assessment process based on best practices from the NIST Framework to create predictability and the adoption of best practices throughout the Federal government. Moreover by modernizing educational curricula and equipping teachers with new multimedia content and tools the emerging National Cyber Education Partnership will help address the cybersecurity skills gap that currently threatens U.S. economic and national security. The expansion of artificial intelligence and automation is already having profound effects on the U.S. economy and geopolitical landscape. Although we are only beginning to see their manifestations and thus the full scale of potential threats and benefits can not be entirely quantified these changes pose both new challenges and opportunities. The Trump Administration is committed to policymaking that leverages technological change as an asset rather than a liability to advancing economic gains for American workers and to promoting best practices for our digital infrastructure so that America can remain the most prosperous and competitive country during the emerging technological transformation. | Chapter x Chapter Markets versus Socialism When the Council of Economic Advisers was founded in our Nation was at a crucial crossroads. There was bipartisan concern that the transition away from a war economy would lead to another depression and there was much public debate over the best policies to ensure prosperity. As detailed in the first CEA Annual Report to the President there were two distinct schools of thought that Congress implicitly charged the CEA s members to evaluate. One held that individual free enterprise could through automatic processes of the market effect the transition to full-scale peacetime business and ( even with recurrent depressions ) the highest practicable level of prosperity thereafter. The other school held that the economic activities of individuals and groups need under modern industrial conditions more rather than less supplementation and systemizing ( though perhaps less direct regulation ) by central government. The three members of the first CEA contrasted the Roman view that economic prosperity can be handed down by a powerful central government with the Spartan view that much of American history at times carried a cult of individual self-reliance to the point of brutality. The report warned against percenters of both views as each misunderstood the role of government in fostering prosperity and it advised that the great body of American thinking on economic matters runs toward a more balanced middle view. The focus of that first report reminds us that there was a time in American history when grand debates over the merits of competing economic systems were front and center and the terms of the debates and characteristics of the competing views were widely known. It is clear that such a time may be returning. Detailed policy proposals from self-declared socialists are gaining support in Congress and are receiving significant public attention. Yet it is much less clear today than it was in exactly what a typical voter has in mind when he or she thinks of socialism or whether those who today describe themselves as socialists would be considered percenters by the first CEA. There is undoubtedly ample confusion concerning the meaning of the word socialist but economists generally agree about how to define socialism and they have devoted enormous time and resources to studying its costs and benefits. With an eye on this broad body of literature this chapter discusses socialism s historic visions and intents its economic features its impact on economic performance and its relationship with recent policy proposals in the United States. Inevitably this chapter uses evidence to weigh in on the relative empirical merits of capitalism and socialism a topic that can be quite divisive. In his landmark book Capitalism Socialism and Democracy Joseph Schumpeter ( ) predicted that socialism would become the only respectable ideology of the two in part because the scholarship regarding both would be dominated by university professors. At the American university he warned capitalism stands its trial before judges who have the sentence of death in their pockets. Well here we have numbers ; a well-defined group situation of proletarian hue ; and a group interest in shaping a group attitude that will much more realistically account for hostility to the capitalist order than could the theory. As documented in this chapter the scholarship has not become as one-sided as Schumpeter envisioned. The chapter first briefly reviews the historical and modern socialist interpretations of market economies and the challenges socialist policy proposals face in terms of distorting incentives. Thereafter we review the evidence from the highly socialist countries showing that they experienced sharp declines in output especially in the industries that were taken over by the state. We review the experiences of economies with less extreme socialism and show that they also generate less output although the shortfall is not as drastic as with the highly socialist countries. Finally we assess the economic impact of the current American proposal for socialized medicine | Chapter Medicare for All and we find that the taxes needed to finance it would reduce the size of the U.S. economy. T o economists socialism is not a zero-one designation. Whether a country or industry is socialist is a question of the degree to which ( ) the means of production distribution and exchange are owned or regulated by the state ; and ( ) the state uses its control to distribute the country s economic output without regard for final consumers willingness to pay or exchange ( i.e. giving resources away for free ) As explained below this definition conforms with both statements and policy proposals from leading socialists ranging from Karl Marx to Vladimir Lenin to Mao Zedong to modern self-described socialists.2 In modern models of capitalist economies there is of course an ample role for government. In particular there are public goods and goods with externalities that will be inefficiently supplied by the free market. Public goods are undersupplied in a completely free market because there is a free-rider problem. For example if national defense a public good enjoyed by the whole country were sold at local supermarkets few would contribute because they would feel their individual purchase would not matter and they would prefer others to contribute while still being defended. Consequently the market would not provide sufficient defense. However socialist regimes go well beyond government intervention into markets with public goods or externalities. This chapter is an empirical analysis of socialism that takes as its benchmark current U.S. public policies. This benchmark has the advantage of being measureable but it necessarily differs from theoretical concepts of capitalism or free markets because the U.S. government may not limit its activity to theoretically defined public goods. Relative to the U.S. benchmark we find that socialist public policies though ostensibly well-intentioned have clear Criterion is from the Oxford English Dictionary which defines socialism as public policy based on a political and economic theory of social organization which advocates that the means of production distribution and exchange should be owned or regulated by the community as a whole. Criterion further focuses the discussion to rule out state ownership or regulation for other purposes such as fighting a war. See Sunstein ( ) ; and see Samuelson and Nordhaus ( ) who describe democratic socialist governments [ that ] expanded the welfare state nationalized industries and planned the economy. For classical socialists communism is a purely theoretical concept that has never yet been put into practice which is why the second S in USSR stands for Socialist. Communism is in their view a social arrangement where there is neither a state nor private property ; the abolition of property is not sufficient for communism. As Lenin explained The goal of socialism is communism. The supposed purpose of the Great Leap Forward was for China to transition from socialism to communism before the USSR did ( Dik tter ) The classical definition therefore stands in contrast to vernacular usage of communism to refer to historical instances of socialism where the degree of state control was the highest such as the USSR Cuba North Korea or Maoist China. This chapter therefore avoids the term communism. Markets versus Socialism | opportunity costs that are directly related to the degree to which they tax and regulate. We begin our investigation by looking closely at the most extreme socialist cases which are Maoist China the USSR under Lenin and Stalin Castro s Cuba and other primarily agricultural countries ( Pipes ) Referring to these same countries Janos Kornai ( xxi ) explained that the development and the break-up and decline of the socialist system amount to the most important political and economic phenomena of the twentieth century. At the height of this system s power and extent a third of humanity lived under it. Not long ago distinguished economists in the U.S. and Europe offered favorable assessments of highly socialist economies and many contemporary commentators appear to have forgotten or overlooked this record. Moreover as one analyzes the impact of moving away from a purely socialist model as many modern proposals envision it may be helpful to understand the history of extreme examples. Socialists in the highly socialist countries accused the agriculture sector of being unfair and unproductive ( equivalently food was too expensive in terms of the labor required to produce it ) because farmers who had been working on their land for generations were too unsophisticated and because the market failed to achieve economies of scale. Government takeovers of agriculture which forcibly converted private farms into state-owned farms directed by government employees and party apparatchiks were advertised as the way for socialist countries to produce more food with fewer workers so resources could be shifted into other industries. In practice however socialist takeovers of agriculture delivered the opposite of what was promised.3 Food production plummeted and tens of millions of people died from starvation in the USSR China and other agricultural economies where the state took command. Planning the nonagricultural parts of those economies also proved impossible. Present-day socialists do not want the dictatorship or state brutality that often coincided with the most extreme cases of socialism. However peaceful democratic implementation of socialist policies does not eliminate the fundamental incentive and information problems created by high tax rates large state organizations and the centralized control of resources. Venezuela is a modern industrialized country that elected Hugo Ch vez as its leader to implement socialist policies and the result was less output in oil and other industries that were nationalized. In other words the lessons from socialized agriculture carry over to government takeovers of oil health insurance and other modern industries : They produce less rather than more even in today s information age where central planning is possibly easier. Many socialist scholars concur on this point ( Nolan ; Roemer ; Nove ) | Chapter Proponents of socialism acknowledge that the experiences of the USSR and other highly socialist countries are not worth repeating but they continue to advocate increased taxation and state control. Such policies would also have negative output effects albeit of a lesser magnitude as are seen in crosscountry studies of the effect of greater economic freedom on real gross domestic product ( GDP ) A broad body of academic literature quantifies the extent of economic freedom in several dimensions including taxation and spending the extent of state-owned enterprises economic regulation and other factors. This literature finds a strong association between greater economic freedom and better economic performance suggesting that replacing U.S. policies with highly socialist policies such as Venezuela s would reduce real GDP more than percent in the long run or about $ a year for the average person. Participants in the American policy discourse sometimes cite the Nordic countries as socialist success stories. However in many respects the Nordic countries policies now differ significantly from policies that economists view as characteristic of socialism. Indeed Nordic representatives have vehemently objected to the characterization that they are socialist ( Rasmussen ) Nordic healthcare is not free but rather requires substantial cost sharing. As compared with the U.S. rates at present including implicit taxes marginal labor income tax rates in the Nordic countries today are only somewhat greater. Nordic taxation overall is greater and is surprisingly less progressive than U.S. taxes. The Nordic countries also tax capital income less and regulate product markets less than the United States does but they regulate labor markets more. Living standards in the Nordic countries as measured by per capita GDP and consumption are at least percent lower than those in the United States. With an eye toward the inaccurate description of Nordic practices some in the U.S. have proposed nationalizing payments for healthcare which makes up more than a sixth of the U.S. economy through the recent Medicare for All proposal. This proposal would create a monopoly government health insurer to provide healthcare for free ( i.e. without cost sharing ) and to centrally set all prices paid to suppliers such as doctors and hospitals. We find that if this policy were financed through higher taxes GDP would fall by percent or about $ per person in As shown in chapter of this Report evidence on the productivity and effectiveness of single-payer systems suggests that Medicare for All would reduce longevity and health particularly among seniors even though it would only slightly increase the fraction of the population with health insurance.4 To the extent that policy proposals mimic the percent experience the burden is on advocates to explain how their latest policy agenda would This Report refers to the specific Medicare for All bills in Congress ( S. ; H.R. ) The economic effects of other healthcare reform proposals or aspirations are not necessarily the same even if they share the same name. Markets versus Socialism | overcome the undeniable problems observed when socialist policies were tried in the past. As the sociology professor Paul Starr ( ) put it Much of [ modern American socialists ] platform ignores the economic realities that European socialists long ago accepted. Marx s 200th birthday is a good time to gather and review the overwhelming evidence.6 The Economics of Socialism section of this chapter begins by briefly reviewing the historical and modern socialist interpretations of market economies and some of the challenges with socialist policy proposals. The subsequent section reviews the evidence from the highly socialist countries by which we mean countries that were implementing the most state control of production and incomes. Highly socialist countries experienced sharp declines in output especially in the industries that were taken over by the state. Economies with less extreme forms of socialism also generate less output although the shortfall is not as drastic as with the highly socialist countries as shown in the section titled Socialism and Living Standards in a Broad Cross Section of Countries. A section on the Nordic-countries provides a more detailed examination of them. The final section assesses the economic impact of the headline American proposal Medicare for All. The Economics of Socialism Historically philosophers and even some well-regarded economists have offered socialist theories of the causes of income and wealth inequality and they have advocated for state solutions that are commonly echoed by modern socialists. They both argue that there is exploitation in the market sector and there are virtually unlimited economies of scale in the public sector. Profits are undeserved and unnecessarily add to the costs of goods and services. The solutions include single-payer systems prohibitions of for-profit business state-determined prices to replace the anarchy of the market high tax rates ( from each according to his ability ) and public policies that hand out much of the Nation s goods and services free of charge ( to each according to his needs ) ( Gregory ; Marx ) The Socialist Economic Narrative : Exploitation Corrected by Central Planning When Marx was writing over years ago obviously exploitive practices were still familiar. The modern socialist view is that exploitation remains real but is somewhat hidden in the market for labor ( Gurley 1976a ) Much inequality See also Boettke ( ) See also Acemoglu and Robinson ( ) who review Marx s key predictions about trends for wages and profits and find them to be falsified by the evidence. The CEA previously released research on topics covered in this chapter. The text that follows builds on The Opportunity Costs of Socialism ( CEA 2018a ) a research paper produced by the CEA. | Chapter arises it is said because market activity is a zero-sum game with owners and workers paid according to the power they possess ( or lack ) rather than their marginal products. From the workers perspective profits are an unwarranted cost in the production process and are reflected in an unnecessarily low level of wages. The contest over the fraction of output paid in wages known among socialists as the class struggle can take place in the political arena in the private sector with union activity and the like or violently with riots or revolution ( Przeworksi and Sprague ) As Karl Marx put it Modern bourgeois private property is the final and most complete expression of the system of producing and appropriating products that is based on class antagonisms on the exploitation of the many by the few ( Marx and Engels ) The Chinese leader Mao Zedong who cited Marxism as the model for his country described the ruthless economic exploitation and political oppression of the peasants by the landlord class ( Cotterell chap. ) The Democratic Socialists of America and elected officials who are affiliated with and endorsed by them today express similar concerns that workers are harmed when the profit motive is allowed to be an important part of the economic system.8 The French economist Thomas Piketty whose book Capital in the 21st Century recalls Marx s Das Kapital asserts that inequality today is terrifying and that public policy can and must reduce it ; wealth holders must be heavily taxed.9 Piketty ( ) concludes that the Soviet approach and other attempts to abolish private ownership should at least be admired for being more logically consistent. Historical and contemporary socialists argue that heavy taxation need not reduce national output because a public enterprise uses its efficiency and bargaining power to achieve better outcomes. Mao touted the superiority of large cooperatives. He decreed that the Chinese government would be the single payer for grain prohibiting farmers from selling their grain to any other person or business ( Dik tter ) In describing China the British economists Joan Robinson and Solomon Adler ( ) celebrated that the agricultural producers cooperatives have finally put an end to the minute fragmentation of the land. Lenin stressed transforming agriculture from small backward individual farming to large-scale advanced collective agriculture to joint cultivation of the land. Proponents of socialism in America today See Stone and Gong ( ) and Day ( 2018a ) See also Bernhardt et al. ( ) Sanders ( ) and Section of the House Medicare for All bill ( H.R. ) which prohibits health providers from participating unless they are a public or not-for-profit institution. Piketty ( ) writes that the right solution is a progressive annual tax on capital and that the primary purpose of the capital tax is not to finance the social state but to regulate capitalism ( p. ) Lenin ( ) also enforced a grain monopoly in the USSR. Markets versus Socialism | argue that the Federal government can run healthcare more efficiently than many competing private enterprises.11 State ownership of the means of production is an often-repeated Marxist proposal for ending worker exploitation by leveraging scale economies. This aspect of socialism is less visible in modern American socialism because in most instances socialists would allow individuals to be the legal owners of capital and their own labor.12 However the economic significance of ownership is control over the use of an asset and of the income it generates rather than the legal title by itself. In other words the economic value of ownership is sharply diminished if the legal owner has little control and little of the income.13 Full ownership in the economic sense is rejected by socialists ; they maintain that private owners left to themselves would not achieve full economies of scale and would continue exploiting workers. Public monopolies public options profit prohibitions and the regulatory apparatus allow the socialist state to control asset use and high tax rates allow the state to determine how much income everyone receives without necessarily abolishing ownership in the narrow legal sense. Historical socialists such as Lenin Mao and Castro ran their countries without democracy and civil liberties. Modern democratic socialists are different in these important ways. Nevertheless even when socialist policies are peacefully implemented under the auspices of democracy economics has much to say about their effects. The Role of Incentives in Raising and Spending Money Any productive economic system needs incentives : means of motivating effort useful application of knowledge and the creation and maintenance of productive assets. The higher an economy s tax rates the more its industries are monopolized by a public enterprise and the more its goods and services are distributed free of charge then the more disincentives reduce the value created in the economy. Mancur Olson s famous book The Logic of Collective Action showed how large groups have trouble achieving common goals without individual incentives. As an important example Olson disputed Marx s claim that business The CEA notes that it is directed by the Employment Act to formulate and recommend national economic policy to promote employment production and purchasing power under free competitive enterprise ( sec. 4a ) Even the USSR and other highly socialist countries had elements of private property ( Dolot ; see also Pryor chap. ) The CEA also notes that American socialists may not only intend to prohibit private health insurance but also for example intend to nationalize energy companies ( Day 2018b ) Epstein ( ) and Fischel ( ) See also Samuelson and Nordhaus ( ) who define a socialist economy as one in which the major economic decisions are made administratively without profits as a central motive force for production and Roemer ( ) who defines socialism independent of legal property rights. | Chapter  $ "    *     / *   )    * )  )  # * (  ( * )  $  ) /  #   #   # *  ( * )  $  ) /  * ( * )  '.  #   #    * ) * ( $   )   &  # $ " # ./   '0   * ) * ( $   0/   * ) /  &  # $ " # ./   '0  * ( * )  '.  * ) /   * ) * ( $   0/  &  # $ " # ./   '0  * ) /   * ) * ( $   )    * ) /  &  # $ " # ./   '0 owners were working together to reduce wages even though Olson acknowledged that business owners would have greater profits if wages were lower. The paradox Olson said is that the market wage is the result of a great many employers individual actions. Any specific employer decides the wage and working conditions to offer based on its own profits without valuing the effects of its decision on the profits of competing employers. The result of competition among employers is that wages are in line with worker productivity even though wages below that would enhance the profits of employers as a group. The kinds of free-rider problems analyzed by Olson are also a challenge for socialist planning because the persons deciding on resource allocations that is how much to spend on a product and how that product should be manufactured and delivered to the final consumer are different from those providing the resources and different from the final consumer who is ultimately using them. As the Nobel Prize winning economist Milton Friedman demonstrated with his illustration of four ways to spend money ( see figure ) consumers in the market system spend their own money and are therefore more careful how much to spend and on what the money is spent ( Friedman and Friedman ) To the extent that they also use what they purchased the upper left corner in figure they are also more discerning so that the items purchased are of good value. They will gather and consider information that helps compare the values of different options. The upper right hand corner of figure gives the case of spending one s own money on someone else which introduces inefficiencies because the recipient may place a lower value on the spending. The inefficiency of the lower left corner is exemplified by the larger spending that takes place when spending on oneself using other people s money as with fully reimbursed corporate travel or entertainment. The lower right category is the one applicable to government employees who spend tax revenue on government program beneficiaries ; not only is there a tendency to overspend using other people s Markets versus Socialism | money but that spending may have little value from the perspective of program beneficiaries.14 Many presentations of socialist policy options even those by expert economists ignore the distinction between individual and group action stressed by Olson. The Medicare for All bills currently in Congress for example supposedly just swap household expenditures on health insurance that occur under a private system for household expenditures on taxes earmarked for the public program.15 But this swap fundamentally changes the types of healthcare that are ultimately received by consumers the size of the healthcare budget and the size of the overall economy. In a private system a consumer has some control over his or her spending on health insurance by for example selecting a plan with different benefits or switching to a more efficient provider. Insurers in a private system must be responsive to consumer demands if they want to attract and retain customers and thus stay in business.16 Individuals also have little reason to economize on anything that they can obtain without payment ( Arrow ; Pauly ) In a socialist system the state decides the amount to be spent how it is spent and when and where the services are received by the consumer. A consumer who is unhappy with the state s choices has little recourse especially if private businesses are prohibited from competing with the state ( as they are under Medicare for All ) It may be argued that giant private corporations also limit consumer choice but this comparison ignores how corporations are subject to competition. For example a consumer can purchase goods from Walmart rather than Amazon not to mention a whole host of other retailers. Amazon is legally permitted to entice Walmart customers and vice versa with low prices better products free shipping and so on. Whereas retail customers are not forced to open their wallets giant state enterprises are guaranteed revenue through taxation and are often legally protected from competition.17 Those who maintain that Amazon and Walmart are too large might note that The gap between program spending and value to beneficiaries has been measured by Gallen ( ) Finkelstein and McKnight ( ) and Olsen ( ) among others. Cooper ( ) refers to it as the taxes-for-premiums swap. Krugman ( ) writes that most people would gain more from the elimination of insurance premiums than they would lose from the tax hike without mentioning any of the economic problems with spending someone else s money on someone else. As Von Mises ( chap. ) observed long ago advocates of socialist policies invariably explain how roast pigeons will in some way fly into the mouths of the comrades but they omit to show how this miracle is to take place. See also Shleifer ( ) Interestingly socialist policies could simultaneously reduce the size of private enterprises with antitrust and other policies and enlarge government enterprises with legal protections from competition. | Chapter the single-payer revenues proposed in Medicare for All will be about eight times the revenue for either of these corporations.18 Another problem with the socialist system is that other people s money starts to disappear when the other people realize that they have little incentive to earn and innovate because what they receive has little to do with how much they make.19 An important reason that people work and put forth effort is to obtain goods and services that they want. Under socialism the things they want may be unavailable because the market no longer exists or are made available without the need for working. Noneconomists sometimes claim that high taxes do not prevent anyone from working as long as the tax rate is less than percent because everyone strives to have more income rather than less. This income maximization hypothesis is contradicted by the most basic labor market observations not to mention decades of research.20 Earning additional income requires sacrifices ( a loss of free time relocating to an area with better-paying jobs training taking an inconvenient schedule etc. ) and people evaluate whether the net income earned is enough to justify the sacrifices. Socialism s high tax rates fundamentally tilt this trade-off in favor of less income. The Economic Consequences of Free Goods and Services Because market prices reveal economically important information about costs and consumer wants regulations and spending programs that distribute goods or services at below-market prices such as those that are free have a number of unintended consequences ( Hayek ) Fewer goods and services will be produced and what is produced may be misallocated to consumers with comparatively little need. We explain in this section why the very idea that a single-payer government program will use its market power to obtain lower prices is an acknowledgment that the program will be purchasing less quantity or quality. On the demand side of a market people vary in their willingness to pay for the product or service and their willingness varies over time. The market system allocates the available goods to consumers who are willing to pay more than the market price while those not willing to pay the price go without. Willingness to pay is related to income but it is also related to need at least as consumers perceive need. Consumers are for example willing to pay more for food when they are hungry and to buy health insurance when they are Chapter of this Report estimates that Medicare for All would be financed with about $ trillion in In Walmart s U.S. revenues were about $ trillion while Amazon s U.S. revenues were less than $ trillion. The final section of this chapter also explains why Medicare for All would sharply reduce consumer spending which suggests that revenues would be an optimistic projection for what retail corporations would earn with Medicare for All in place. For an analysis of the private sector s innovation advantage see Winston ( ) E.g. Prescott ( ) Rogerson ( ) Chetty et al. ( ) and Mulligan ( ) Markets versus Socialism | older. In this way the market has a tendency to allocate goods and services when and to whom they are needed. If the government decrees that a product shall be free then something other than a willingness to pay the market price will determine who receives the available supply. It may be a willingness to wait in line or political connections or membership in a privileged demographic group or a government eligibility formula ( Shleifer and Vishny ; Barzel ; Glaeser and Luttmer ) By comparison with the market giving a product away for free may sometimes have the effect of taking the good away from consumers when they need it most and transferring it to consumers when they need it least. As we show in chapter of this Report single-payer healthcare programs tend to reallocate healthcare from the old to the young. Centrally planned agricultural systems have in effect taken food products away from starving people in rural areas and transferred the products to urban consumers or sold them on the international market. Prices that are below their competitive levels also affect supply. Although a single government payer has market power that it can use to reduce the incomes of suppliers the price reduction is accomplished by reducing the quantity or quality of what it purchases in order to squeeze its suppliers.21 This may be one reason why single-payer healthcare systems have longer appointment waiting times than in the U.S. system ( see chapter of this Report ) and why free Nordic colleges yield lower financial returns than higher education in the United States even though the Nordic returns include no tuition expense ( see the Nordic section below ) Von Mises ( ) and Hayek ( ) emphasized the value of market prices for coordinating and executing decisions in complex economies and went so far as to assert that central planning is impossible because it eschews markets. Perhaps contrary to their expectations centrally planned economies did survive for decades although these economies performed poorly and survived so long only because of their deviations from the socialist program ( Gregory ) Socialism s Track Record Socialism is a continuum. No country has zero state ownership zero regulation and zero taxes. Even the most highly socialist countries have retained elements of private property with consumers sometimes spending their own money on themselves ( Pryor ) This chapter therefore begins with the This effect is the monopsony mirror image of monopoly pricing. Sellers with market power typically exercise it by constraining the quantity or quality of what they produce and thereby squeeze the buyers in the market ( Williamson ; Farrell and Shapiro ; Whinston ) Buyers with market power typically exercise it by constraining the quantity or quality of what they purchase. | Chapter historically common highly socialist regimes by which we mean countries that implemented the most state control of production and incomes for at least a decade.22 Highly socialist policies continue to have considerable emotional appeal throughout the world to those who believe that it offers economic progress and fairness free of chaotic market forces ( Gregory x ) Of more than a dozen countries meeting these criteria this section emphasizes Maoist China Castro s Cuba and the USSR under Lenin and Stalin which are the subject of much scholarship and Venezuela which has been unusual as an industrialized economy with elements of democracy that nonetheless pursued highly socialist policies.23 Many of the highly socialist economies were agricultural with state and collective farming systems implemented by socialist governments to achieve purported economies of scale and pursuant to socialist ideology to punish private landowners. Agricultural output dropped sharply when socialism was implemented causing food shortages. Between China and the USSR tens of millions of people starved. It took quite some time for sympathetic scholars outside the socialist countries to acknowledge that large state-owned farms were less productive than small private ones. The economic failures of highly socialist policies have been described at length by both survivors and scholars who have reviewed the evidence in state archives. Not only did highly socialist countries discourage the supply of effort and capital with poor incentives but they also allocated these resources perversely because central planning made production decisions react to output and input prices in the opposite direction from those of a market economy. Although agriculture is not a large part of the U.S. economy present-day socialists echo the historical socialists by arguing that healthcare education and other sectors are unfair and unproductive and they promise that large state organizations will deliver fairness and economies of scale. It is therefore worth acknowledging that socialist takeovers of agriculture have delivered the opposite of what was promised. Present-day socialists do not want the dictatorship or state brutality that often coincided with the most extreme cases of socialism and they do not propose to nationalize agriculture. However the peaceful democratic implementation of socialist policies does not eliminate the fundamental incentive and information problems created by high tax rates large state organizations and the centralized control of resources. As we report at the end of this section The highly socialist countries are sometimes called communist or centrally planned although as noted above communism has a different meaning in the theory of socialism. We presume that in contrast to the Nordic countries central government spending far exceeds private spending in highly socialist countries although with pervasive state ownership and centralized control it is difficult to construct accurate measures of the components of spending that would be comparable between highly socialist countries and the rest of the world. Also recall from the Economics of Socialism section above the parallels between modern socialist rhetoric and the statements attributed to Mao Castro and Lenin. Markets versus Socialism | Venezuela is a modern industrialized country that elected Hugo Ch vez as its leader to implement socialist policies and the result was less output in oil and other industries that were nationalized.24 When evaluating the misalignment between the promises of highly socialist regimes to eliminate the misery and exploitation of the poor and the actual effects of their policies it is instructive to look at a major guide that economists use to determine value : the revealed preference of the population in other words people voting with their feet. The implementation of highly socialist policies such as in Venezuela has been associated with high emigration rates. Perhaps more telling is that historically socialist regimes such as the USSR China North Korea and Cuba have forcibly prevented people from leaving. State and Collective Farming State and collective farming ( hereafter state farming ) is a historically common practice in highly socialist countries.25 The state acquires private farmland and often much livestock by force. The land is organized in large parcels typically about one per village as compared with the multitude of parcels in a typical village before collectivization. Villagers are required to work on the land with the output belonging to the state. Decisions are made by government employees and party apparatchiks who may have had little or no experience or specialized knowledge in comparison with the original landowners ( Pryor ) These decisions include devising and implementing complex systems of production targets and quality requirements ( Nolan ) The socialist narrative emphasizes exploitation and class struggle which in an agricultural economy refers to the power dynamic that determines the division of agricultural income between landlords and farm workers. State farms purport to end the exploitation by eliminating the landlords known as kulaks in the USSR.26 Another advantage of state farms from the socialist perspective was economies of scale ( Pryor ) In principle the knowledge and See also the sections of this chapter on socialism in the Nordic countries and on Medicare for All and chapter of this Report which include analyses of single-payer healthcare. Further evidence about the effects of socialism on nonagricultural industries are reported by Conquest ( ) Gregory ( ) Horowitz and Suchlicki ( ) and Kornai ( ) Johnson and Brooks ( ) describe how the Soviet rural road system can only be described as a disgrace the result of decades of socialist neglect. Among the highly socialist countries state or collective farms were formed e.g. in the USSR ; elsewhere in the Soviet Bloc ; and in Vietnam North Korea China Cuba South Yemen Congo Ethiopia Cambodia and Laos ( Pryor chap. ) In principle participation in collective farms was voluntary and operations were collectively managed by villagers whereas state farms were owned and managed by government with the farm workers as government employees. In practice even the collective farms may come under the control of the Communist Party and the government as they did in the USSR ( Dolot chap. ) See also Johnson and Brooks ( ) Conquest ( ) and Pryor ( ) With landlords resisting the seizure of their property the state often imprisoned or murdered landlords ( Conquest ; Rummel ) | Chapter techniques of the best farmer could be applied to all the land rather than the comparatively small plot that the best farmer owned.27 Capital may be easier to obtain for a larger organization. Writing about the USSR in Joseph Stalin stressed transforming agriculture from small backward individual farming to large-scale advanced collective agriculture to joint cultivation of the land. Writing about China in the British economist Joan Robinson asserted that the minute fragmentation of the land that prevailed before collective farming was a major source of inefficiency. The family itself was sometimes criticized as operating on too small a scale ; in China household utensils were confiscated and villagers were assigned to communal kitchens for eating and food preparation ( Jisheng ) Eyewitnesses tell a different story concerning the operation of state farms and central planning more generally. In Cuba and the USSR for example the managers of state farms were chosen from the ranks of the Communist Party rather than because of management skill or agricultural knowledge ( Dolot ) The state monopoly stifled incentives for increasing production describes a Chinese eyewitness ( Jisheng ) Production units sometimes had an incentive to produce less and to hoard inputs in order to obtain more favorable allocations the next year ( Gregory ) Unintended Consequences State farms reduced agricultural productivity rather than increasing it. The unwarranted faith in state farms had a doubly negative effect on agricultural output. Not only was less produced per worker but workers were removed from agriculture on the mistaken understanding that farming was becoming more productive ( Conquest ) and would produce surpluses that would finance the growth of industry ( Gregory ) For China and the USSR both the lack of food and reliance on central planning rather than market mechanisms resulted in millions of deaths by starvation. Statistics from highly socialist regimes are informative but necessarily imprecise. Gregory ( ) Kornai ( ) and others explain how officials in these regimes deceive their superiors and the public. Refugees from the regimes may be free to talk after their escape but they may not constitute a The CEA is not aware of socialist explanations of why the best farmer owned comparatively little land or did not contribute his or her talents to a larger but purely voluntary collective. A neoclassical explanation might involve credit constraints and the like or simply that it would not be efficient for the best farmer to control more land than he or she chose to purchase in the marketplace ( i.e. the market reflects genuine limitations on scale economies ; see also Conquest ) See also Lenin ( ) See also O Connor s ( ) description of Cuban state farms with [ inefficiencies ] arising from overcentralized decisionmaking together with a shortage of qualified personnel which was aggravated by a tendency to place politically reliable people in top administrative posts even when they lacked technical skills. Markets versus Socialism | random sample of the populations they left and may have imperfect memories. Readers are advised that the estimates in this section are necessarily inexact. In Cuba the disincentives inherent in the socialist system sharply reduced agricultural production. As O Connor ( ) explains Because wage rates bore little or no relationship to labor productivity and [ state farm ] income there were few incentives for workers to engage wholeheartedly in a collective effort. Table shows the change in agricultural production in Cuba spanning the agrarian reform period of when about percent of farmland was nationalized ( Zimbalist and Eckstein ) Production of livestock fell between percent ( fish ) and percent ( pork ) Among the major crops production fell between percent ( rice ) and percent ( malanga ) The biggest crop sugar fell percent. There was not a major Cuban famine however because of Soviet assistance and emigration.30 The CEA also notes that though Cuba had a gross national income similar to that of Puerto Rico before the Cuban Revolution in the late 1950s by the Cuban gross national income had fallen almost two-thirds relative to Puerto Rico s.31 In the USSR the collectivization of agriculture occurred with the First Five-Year Plan from to Horses were important for doing farm work but their numbers fell by percent in part because nobody had much incentive to care for them when they became collective property ( Conquest ) In the Central Asian parts of the USSR the number of cattle fell more than percent and the number of sheep more than percent ( Conquest ) Looking at official Soviet data for about Johnson and Brooks ( ) concluded that the entire program of socialist policies excessive centralization of the planning control and management of agriculture inappropriate price policies and defective incentive systems for farm managers and workers and for enterprises that supply inputs to agriculture was reducing Soviet agricultural productivity about percent.32 A famine ensued in and and about million people died from starvation ( Courtois et al. ) The death rates were high in Ukraine a nor- On Soviet economic aid to Cuba see Walters ( ) This is per Collins Bosworth and Soto-Class ( ) and the Barro-Lee data set using GDP for Cuba in The result is more extreme if the comparison is based on GDP because people and businesses outside Puerto Rico have substantial claims on the production occurring there. This is likely an underestimate because as Johnson and Brooks acknowledge their research project was made possible through cooperation with the Soviet government. Conquest ( ) cites million. | Chapter    '    " $  0'/0-  '   *   / $ * )  $ )       ! /  / #    / $ * )  ' $  / $ * )  * !    ( $ ./ *  &  ! Change from to  ) /  * Change from to  ) /  "   * -&  * )  * 0'/-4  $   $ #   '  ) "   " "      $ '&  * /  / *  *     '     $ ' ' *   )    *   * )  mally fertile region from which the Soviet planners had been exporting food.34 Figure shows the time series for Ukrainian deaths by sex along with births. This time series also appears to show that millions more people were not born because of the famine. Mao s government implemented the so-called Great Leap Forward for China from to including a policy of mass collectivization of agriculture that provided no wages or cash rewards for effort on farms.35 The per capita output of grain fell percent from to ; for aquatic products the drop was percent ; and for cotton edible oil and meat it was about percent ( Lin ; Nolan ) During the Great Chinese Famine from to an estimated million people died ( Dik tter ) Figure shows the time series for deaths and births which form a pattern similar to Ukraine s except that the absolute number of deaths was an order of magnitude greater. Failed agricultural policies are not the only way that civilians died at the hands of their highly socialist state. Rummel ( ) Courtois and others ( ) Pipes ( ) and Holmes ( ) document noncombatant deaths in the Soviet Bloc Yugoslavia Cuba China Cambodia Vietnam Laos North Korea and Ethiopia. These deaths exclude deaths in military combat but include deaths in purges massacres concentration camps forced migration and both escape attempts and famines. The death rate in famines was particularly high in North Korea where about people died from starvation in the late 1990s out In fact the USSR as a whole was exporting grain at that time ( Dalrymple ; Courtois et al. ) Note that there were also starvation deaths elsewhere in the USSR ( Conquest ) In contrast to the famines associated with highly socialist regimes Gr da ( ) and Goodspeed ( ) find that one important margin of adjustment during the Irish Famine of was substantially increased net imports of relatively cheap corn and other grains and similarly dramatically increased exports of higher-value agricultural output such as eggs dairy products and cattle. See Meng Qian and Yared ( ) summarizing Walker ( ) For aggregate productivity time series see Cheremukhin et al. ( ) Markets versus Socialism |  $ "    ) )  '   )  * !   $ -/ #   )     / #  $ )  &-  $ )     )   Births or deaths ( thousands )   '    / #  $ -/ #  (  '   / #  *    '   )     ' ' $ )   $ "    $ -/ #  /   )     / #    /  $ )   # $ )  Births or deaths ( rate per people )  $ -/ #  /   / #   /  *    # $ )     / $ * )  '     * !   /  / $ ./ $  | Chapter of a population of about million ( Goodkind West and Johnson ) Cambodia s Communist period was especially violent. The total noncombatant civilian deaths in the highly socialist countries were a combination of the effects of government takeovers of important industries and brutal political systems. Modern American socialists are against state brutality. But it is a mistake to ignore the highly socialist tragedies altogether because it was high taxes large state organizations and centralized control that delivered the opposite of what was promised and forced consumers to endure intolerably small supplies of food and other consumer goods. In other words the low output of state farms and centralized planning were results of economic failures that can not be rectified with more peaceful implementation. Venezuela discussed below is a case in point. Though the nationalization of agriculture depressed output the privatization of the same land brought it surging back. Johan Norberg explains how when Chinese villagers began to ( secretly ) privatize their land the farmers did not start the workday when the village whistle blew any longer they went out much earlier and worked much harder. Grain output in was six times higher than the year before. Although socialist policies are ostensibly implemented to reduce poverty and inequality it was the end of highly socialist policies in China that brought these results on a worldwide scale. China s major reforms began in which is about the time that the poverty rate in China and therefore world poverty rates and world inequality began a remarkable decline ( Sala-i-Martin ) Policy changes in India also coincided with reduced poverty in that country although it is debated whether the early Indian policies were socialist ( Basu ) The end of socialism in the USSR increased poverty there but this was not enough to offset by worldwide measures the progress elsewhere in the world ( Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin ) Lessons Learned Before the First Five-Year Plan the USSR s economists had observed the productivity losses that came with attempts to collectivize farming. Conquest ( ) describes how they still defended small scale agriculture in but soon had to repudiate that position. The political leadership then prohibited the types of economic analysis that might show the opportunity costs of state farms ( Conquest ) The CEA did not find comparable data on deaths for highly socialist regimes in Afghanistan Angola Benin Congo Mozambique Somalia and South Yemen. Such data may be lacking because their implementations may have been comparably peaceful from a civilian perspective. Of course state brutality is not limited to highly-socialist countries. See Norberg ( chap. ) citing Zhou ( ) See also the official rural poverty measure ( State Council of the People s Republic of China ) which fell from percent in to percent in Markets versus Socialism | Although the eyewitnesses saw in real time the economic problems with large state organizations some distinguished economists outside the socialist countries dismissed evidence that might suggest socialism to be a failure in the USSR or China. For instance Paul Samuelson ( ) the first American to win the Nobel Prize in economics expressed surprise that the Soviet collective farms were not more productive than private land allotments. As recently as Samuelson and William Nordhaus ( ) were still writing that the Soviet economy is proof that contrary to what many skeptics had earlier believed a socialist command economy can function and even thrive. John Gurley ( ) one of the economists during the history of the American Economic Review who have served as its managing editor wrote that the basic overriding economic fact about China is that for twenty years it has fed clothed and housed everyone has kept them healthy and has educated most. Millions have not starved. As recently as John Kenneth Galbraith asserted that the Russian system succeeds because in contrast with the Western industrial economies it makes full use of its manpower. The infamous journalist Walter Duranty privately estimated that million people died from the Soviet famine but instead he published Soviet-censored descriptions in the New York Times during those years.42 Meanwhile the highly socialist governments themselves eventually acknowledged the value of private enterprises. As a means of increasing national output Cuba China the USSR and other highly socialist countries eventually permitted private enterprises both in and outside the agriculture sector to coexist with state-owned enterprises.43 Central Planning in Practice The Soviet leadership promised that scientific planning would replace the chaos of the market whereas in practice central planning proved primitive unreliable and incapable of adjusting to change ( Lazarev and Gregory ) Centralized deliveries were notoriously unreliable ; managers relied on informal markets to exchange materials outside the official plan. Adding to managerial Gurley republished these ideas later ( e.g. Gurley 1976b ) Today it must be acknowledged that the Great Chinese Famine was in the middle of Gurley s twenty years period when everyone in China was supposedly fed. According to Schumpeter ( chap. XIII ) these attitudes are to be expected. He says that intellectuals benefit from criticizing the social system in which they live and that it is the abundance of the market system that allows intellectuals to be a large share of the population. He won a Pulitzer Prize for some of his publications about the USSR ( Conquest ) Though he personally visited the famine regions in his New York Times publications that year denied that there was a famine and mocked a journalist who reported otherwise ( Conquest ; Applebaum ) Conquest explains how Duranty was further honored in New York City for telling people what they wished to hear. The New York Times publicly acknowledg [ ed ] his failures in the 1980s ( New York Times Company ) See Johnson and Brooks ( ) Zimbalist and Eckstein ( ) Pipes ( ) and Dik tter ( xxii ) | Chapter confusion and uncertainty was the fact that plans were constantly being changed based on interventions by ministry and party officials ( Gregory ) Consumer goods were allocated based on coupon rationing or standing in line ; illegal markets also proved to be more reliable for obtaining consumer goods. Ludwig Von Mises ( ) and F. A. Hayek ( ) warned that planning an economy without prices profit motives and incentives is impossible. Managers in planned economies were government employees who lack incentives and even guidance to run their factories. On a more practical level planning complexity meant that only a few commodities could be planned from the center and then only in the form of crude aggregates like square meters of cloth or tons of steel ( Zaleski ) The first two five-year plans were grossly underfulfilled ( Zaleski ) Soviet plan fulfillment improved over time but this was not a sign of better planning. Rather Soviet planners institutionalized planning from the achieved level which meant that the current operational plan was almost entirely last year s plan plus marginal adjustments ( Birman ) Planning from the achieved level froze Soviet resource allocation in place and curiously created opposition to technological change as a disruptive threat to the plan. Central planning ultimately proved to be a rather complex and unplanned mixture of political intervention petty tutelage and illegal markets ( Zaleski ; Lazarev and Gregory ; Gregory ) The Case of Venezuela Today : An Industrialized Country with Socialist Policies Venezuela is not an agricultural economy but in pursuing socialist policies it nationalized important parts of its economy implemented effectively high marginal tax rates and centrally controlled prices of consumer and other goods. As with the other highly socialist countries its state-owned enterprises have proven to be unproductive. Millions of people have already fled the country. The economies of the highly socialist countries described above are agricultural and labor intensive. An oil-rich country such as Venezuela that managed its oil assets well and paid cash royalties to its citizens independent of how much they earn could in principle be providing income for its citizens with zero marginal tax rates.44 The economy could also be unregulated and without state-owned enterprises ( with oil assets rented to private businesses to operate ) and therefore not be socialist in any aspect of the definition introduced in the Economics of Socialism section above. However this is not the path taken by Venezuela over the past years when it nationalized most oil assets and many other businesses implemented effectively high marginal tax rates and centrally controlled prices of consumer and other goods. For example the oil-rich State of Alaska has no sales or state income taxes. Oil-rich Norway conversely has marginal tax rates that are similar to those of the other Nordic countries. Markets versus Socialism | In Hugo Ch vez convinced the people of Venezuela they were being robbed by the greedy oil companies dramatically raised taxes and royalties on new and existing projects. The state-owned oil entity no longer possessed the know-how to develop its resources and production began declining ( Oil Sands Magazine ) Oil revenues were spent on generous social programs rather than on investing in the country s oil production capacity or cutting taxes ( Economist ; Monaldi ) As shown in figure Venezuela s oil production has been declining while production in Canada which has petroleum resources similar to Venezuela s has been increasing.46 Venezuela nationalized several other businesses ranging from cell phones to medicines. According to Transparency International ( ) From to the Venezuelan state went from owning public enterprises to four times more than Brazil ( ) and ten times more than Argentina and by state enterprise employment reached percent of the entire workforce. Earning and spending are heavily taxed in Venezuela. The top rate on personal income is percent plus percent for payroll. The value-added tax rate is percent. Inflation is a tax implicitly paid while a worker or consumer holds currency ; even during normal times inflation was percent a month. Import restrictions are relevant because in a well-functioning economy based on natural resources many consumer goods would be imported. Currency transactions and international financial transactions generally are tightly controlled which means that an importer would in effect pay a tax when obtaining the foreign currency required to purchase foreign goods. As of the import tariff rate was percent on nonagricultural goods. Imports are also at risk of theft by the border patrol. If we take the foreign exchange and import theft rates to each be percent this puts the overall tax rate on earning for the purpose of obtaining consumption goods at over percent ( this applies a percent import share to consumption ) The Venezuelan economy does not benefit from price signals in the way that less-regulated economies do. High inflation which is expected to reach million percent a year in makes it difficult to discern relative prices ( Fischer Hall and Taylor ) Even without inflation many prices are not determined by the market. In Venezuela the Law of Fair Costs and Prices gives the Superintendency of Fair Costs and Prices ( known as SUNDECOP ) broad authority to regulate the prices of almost all goods and services sold to the public deciding whether prices are fair and to identify businesses that make excessive profits through speculation ( USTR ) Basic goods like Under Hugo Ch vez the Venezuelan government constructed a free healthcare program for people living in poor and marginalized areas largely by importing about medical personnel from Cuba ( Brading chap. ; Westhoff et al. ; Wilson ) 46The success of Canada s oil industry over the same time frame is one reason why the CEA believes that the economic disaster in Venezuela can not be blamed on world oil markets. | Chapter  $ "    * /  '   *   / $ * ) * !   /- * ' (   )    / #  $ $    '.  Barrels per day ( thousands ) )   )      ) '   *   ) "  ) ! * (  / $ * )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * ) flour and aspirin had fixed prices and were so cheap that companies had no incentive to make them ( Kurmanaev ) Emigration has proven to be an important way in which Venezuelan policies have reduced the supply of goods and services. Talented workers have emigrated from the oil industry and from medical practices ( Dube ) Overall about million people have emigrated from the country in recent years ( Alhadeff ) Economic Freedom and Living Standards in a Broad Cross Section of Countries Of course not all countries have pushed socialist policies to the extremes discussed in the previous section. To the extent that socialist policies would involve lesser increases in tax rates the extensive literature on the effects of taxation could be used to assess some of the consequences of more moderate socialism which is an approach pursued in the Medicare for All section of this chapter.47 But the tax literature does not address state-owned enterprises and centralized price setting or how these practices interact with high tax rates. An extensive economic growth literature is helpful in this regard because it documents a relationship between real GDP and the degree of socialism measured in a large sample of countries as the opposite of economic freedom. An extensive review is provided by the CEA ( 2018b chap. ) Markets versus Socialism | The studies suggest that moving U.S. policies to highly socialist policies would reduce real GDP at least percent in the long run. Alternatively adopting a Nordic level of socialism which is about halfway toward our highly socialist benchmark of Venezuela would reduce real GDP by at least percent in the long run.48 These effects are similar to those obtained with alternative methods in the final two sections of this chapter. The growth studies mainly rely on the Fraser Institute which in in conjunction with other economic institutes published the book Economic Freedom of the World Fraser has subsequently provided annual updates of its Economic Freedom of the World ( EFW ) Index which measures the degree to which the policies and institutions of countries are supportive of economic freedom. Forty-two indicators are used to construct a summary index for each country and year that ranges between for the least free and for the most free. The indicators are aggregated to five main categories which are then given equal weight in the overall index. The first category is the size of the government in terms of spending taxation and the size of governmentcontrolled enterprises. The second is the legal system and property rights in terms of the protection of persons having such rights. The third category is referred to as sound money which measures policies related to inflation. The fourth is free international trade which means that citizens are free to trade with other countries. And the fifth category is limited regulation which addresses the freedom to exchange and trade domestically. Note that each category is an indicator of economic freedom rather than political freedom or civil liberties. Of particular interest in this chapter are the recent EFW Index values for the U.S. ( ) the Nordic countries ( averaging ) and Venezuela ( ) Venezuela in was one of the least free in the entire country panel.50 Also of interest is the Nordic average in ( ) which was about when socialism peaked in those countries. In other words the Nordic countries were once about halfway between where the U.S. and Venezuela have been recently but now have economic freedoms that are much closer to those of the U.S. The EFW Index is related to our discussion of more socialist policies that involve increased public financing public production and regulations that In and percent of annual U.S. per capita GDP were respectively about $ and $ The year is the most recent one with comprehensive coverage. Alesina and Angeletos ( ) explain why fundamentally similar countries can nonetheless take quite different approaches to socialism and conversely that small political changes could result in a dramatic increase in a country s socialism. We also note that the highly socialist countries tend to be excluded from the data in part because it is difficult to construct accurate measures of the components of spending that would be comparable between highly socialist countries and the rest of the world. Among the countries with EFW indices the Marxist governments of Nicaragua and Congo have EFW values below although so too do a few repressive anti-Marxist governments. | Chapter replace each citizen s ability to spend his or her own money on himself or herself with the government s spending other people s money on others. As reviewed by Hall and Lawson ( ) the EFW Index has been cited and utilized in hundreds of academic articles. Their review discusses articles of which used the EFW Index as an independent variable in an empirical study. They report that over two-thirds of these studies found economic freedom to correspond to improved types of economic performance such as faster growth better living standards and more happiness as well as other measures. In particular a large subliterature focuses on the correlation between the EFW Index and economic investment and growth as reviewed by De Haan Lundstr m and Sturm ( ) One major study by Gwartney Holcombe and Lawson ( ) found that a 1-unit increase in the EFW Index from to was associated with a 2.6-percentage-point increase in private investment as a share of GDP and thereby with a 1.2-percentage-point increase in annualized economic growth over years.51 This suggests that going from the U.S. EFW level to Venezuela s would reduce GDP by about two-thirds after years.52 Going back to Nordic values of the EFW Index would reduce GDP more than percent. Another study by Easton and Walker ( ) found effects that are smaller although still economically significant. They estimate the elasticity of the steady state level of GDP per worker with respect to the EFW Index as so that going to Venezuela s EFW would reduce real GDP per worker by about percent in the long run.53 With the Nordic value of EFW long-run GDP per worker would be reduced at least percent. To the extent that socialism reduces the fraction of the population that works the reductions in GDP per capita are even greater. This evidence is suggestive as to the opportunity costs of socialism but of course cross-country correlations are not necessarily causal. Moreover the EFW Index is not exactly the inverse of socialism and the various ingredients of the index can be difficult to measure. This evidence therefore needs to be The other independent variables in the model are tropical location coastal population and human capital growth. The CEA notes that at very low levels of economic freedom and therefore tax rates near percent it is difficult to predict GDP. The effects of say a percent tax rate should be quite different from the effects of a percent tax rate because in the latter case workers keep twice as much as they do in the former. As noted above the data for the least-free countries are often lacking or are of especially poor quality. The other independent variables in the model are a transformation of the population growth rate the physical investment rate and schooling. Also recall this chapter s estimates of the output effects of highly socialist policies : reductions of at least two-thirds ( all of Cuba as of the 21st century ) about half ( Soviet agriculture c. ) and about three-fourths ( Venezuelan oil production ) Also of interest is the comparison of North Korea with South Korea ; highly socialist North Korea appears to have about a percent shortfall in GDP per capita ( Rice et al. ) The CEA therefore refers to the output effect of highly socialist policies as at least percent ( negative ) Markets versus Socialism | considered together with the case studies in the high-socialism and Nordic sections as well as the tax-impact analysis in the Medicare for All section. The Nordic Countries Policies and Incomes Compared with Those of the United States The Nordic countries include Denmark Finland Iceland Norway and Sweden. This section looks at these countries in more detail because they are often singled out as supposedly having socialist policies and admirable economic outcomes. Combining state local and central governments public spending is about half of GDP in the Nordic countries as compared with percent of GDP in the United States ( OECD 2018b ) However the Nordic countries today are hardly socialist because they have internationally low corporate taxes have low regulation of business allow the private sector to participate in the provision of primary and secondary schooling link full social benefits to having a work history and require cost sharing for healthcare at the time of service.54 Though these countries have universal-coverage health insurance they do not impose a single payer on the entire nation despite being more homogeneous countries than the United States ( Anell Glenng rd and Merkur ; Vuorenkoski Mladovsky and Mossialos ; Olejaz et al. ; Ringard et al. ; Sigurgeirsd ttir Waagfj r and Maresso ) We find that today the Nordic countries marginal tax rates on labor income are not in fact far above those in the U.S. once implicit employment and income taxes are considered. The Nordic countries living standards are still at least percent lower than those of the U.S. in large part because people work less. The private and social returns to a college education are higher in the U.S. even though college education is at least as common here. These results are consistent with the basic economic idea that redistribution and single-payer systems have significant costs in terms of reducing national incomes. The Nordic countries themselves recognized the economic harm of high tax rates vis- -vis creating and retaining businesses and motivating work effort which is why their marginal tax rates on personal and corporate income have fallen or points or more from their peaks in the 1970s and 1980s ( Stenkula Johansson and Du Rietz ) Measuring Tax Policies in the Nordic Countries The Nordic countries are reputed to have taxes that are higher but fairer than those in the United States. However the Nordic-country average tax rate on capital income is lower than in the United States even since the Tax Cuts and Also see the Medicare for All section of this chapter. The exception is Iceland which is a nation of less than people and therefore smaller than even the least-populous U.S. State Wyoming. | Chapter Jobs Act lowered the top U.S. statutory corporate tax rate by percentage points.56 Nordic taxes on labor are only somewhat higher than in the United States especially once implicit taxes are acknowledged. A key difference between Nordic and U.S. taxation is that the former is broader based and the latter is considerably more progressive. With lower thresholds for their income tax brackets the Nordic economies apply their highest marginal tax rate to taxpayers earning only a marginally above-average income meaning that low- and middle-income tax filers face substantially higher average rates in the Nordic countries than in the United States. Moreover the Nordic countries rely more heavily on value-added or consumption taxes which are not progressive. The higher tax revenue share of GDP in the Nordic economies is thus predominantly accounted for by a broader base rather than by taxing the rich. As shown below Senator Bernie Sanders is currently proposing tax rates that are above the Nordic-country average in six of seven tax categories with the exception being sales / value-added taxes.57 As shown in table the corporate income tax rate in the Nordic countries ranges from to percent which was about half the U.S. Federal and State statutory rate until Other tax rates vary significantly among the Nordic countries. The top personal rate on dividend income is percent in the U.S. compared with percent in Iceland percent in Finland percent in Sweden percent in Norway and percent in Denmark. Sweden and Norway have no estate tax while the top estate tax rates range from to percent in the other three Nordic countries as compared with percent in the U.S.58 Senator Sanders has made specific proposals for the taxation of capital in the United States. He voted against cutting the corporate income tax which in had the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development s ( OECD s ) highest combined statutory rate of about percent for Federal and State taxes combined and he now supports repealing the cut ( Bollier ) This rate is well above where the U.S. and the Nordic countries are now. The senator has proposed a percent rate on dividends and capital gains which is more than double or about points above where the U.S. is now.59 He has Low corporate tax rates raise wages by encouraging capital accumulation. Senator Sanders who is the leading socialist in Federal politics today proposes to repeal the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act which reduced the combined Federal-State statutory corporate rate by percentage points ( Bollier ) The other rate proposals are reported on Senator Sander s website ( http : //sanders.senate.gov ) and by Cole and Greenberg ( ) All the countries have a zero rate for comparatively small estates. U.S. rates include the population-weighted average of State estate and inheritance tax rates. The percent rate includes percentage points for State and local taxes ( Potosky ) the top Sanders bracket inclusive of percentage points for his additional personal income surtax ( ) and Sanders s percent Affordable Care Act tax on investment income. See also Sammartino et al. ( ) The percent does not include any phase-out of the rebate of Senator Sanders s proposed carbon tax. Markets versus Socialism | Table Tax Policies in the United States and the Nordic Countries Tax Rate Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden U.S. Senator Sanders 's Nordic average proposal minus minus U.S. U.S. Taxes on capital Statutory corporate income tax rate Top personal rate on dividend income Top personal rate on capital gains Top estate or inheritance tax rate Taxes on labor or consumption Payroll tax rate ( on a base of employer cost ) Top individual income tax rate Sales or value-added tax Excise and nonrecurrent tax Progressivity of household taxes ( mid-2000s ) Sources : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) ; PricewaterhouseCoopers ; Tax Foundation ; Tax Policy Center ; CEA calculations. Note : The OECD progressivity measure is the top decile s tax share divided by its income share and would be for a proportional income tax. Corporate dividend and sales tax rates are for All other rates are for Excise and nonrecurrent tax rates are calculated as the ratio of revenues to GDP and include taxes on emissions and environmental discharges. also proposed adding points to the top estate tax rate even though the U.S. rate is already well above Nordic rates. The Nordic countries are similar to the U.S. in terms of their payroll tax rates ( combined for employer and employee ) and the top personal income tax rate.60 Even excluding implicit taxes the overall top marginal tax rate on personal income in the United States in percent ( as calculated by the OECD ) was only percentage points below the Nordic average of about Some of the Nordic countries have privatized much of their old-age social security programs ( Turner ) | Chapter percent.61 Senator Sanders also proposes increasing both payroll and personal income tax rates above the Nordic average especially as regards the top personal rate. None of the entries in table incorporate implicit taxes which refer to the loss or gain of transfer income that occurs when a household works or earns more. In the Nordic countries implicit tax rates can be negative because working or earning more entitles a person to additional transfer income that helps offset some of the extra payroll income or sales tax that he or she will pay. In other words a Nordic citizen with a history of working or earning more will receive a greater benefit when he or she has earned more in the past. For example work is required in order to be eligible for full paid family leave unemployment or retirement benefits.62 As a result the disincentive to work in a Nordic country may be somewhat less than what is shown in table In the U.S. working and earning does cause a program beneficiary to lose benefits which is not the case for Nordic-country health and other benefits. In other words U.S. programs tend to have positive implicit taxes on work because the people who work and earn more are paid fewer benefits.63 Table shows a gap between Nordic and U.S. marginal tax rates on labor income but the true gap would likely be smaller if implicit taxes were fully considered. Margaret Thatcher ( ) observed that socialism started by saying it was going to tax the rich very rapidly it was taxing the middle income groups. Now it s taxing people quite highly with incomes way below. Obtaining large amounts of tax revenue ultimately involves resorting to high tax rates on the poor and middle class because these groups in the aggregate generate much of the Nation s income what economists call widening the tax base ( Becker and Mulligan ) Another way that the Nordic countries broadly levy high rates is with a value-added tax ( VAT ) which is essentially a national sales tax. Regardless of whether they are rich poor or in between Nordic consumers are required to pay an additional VAT of or percent on their purchases The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act temporarily reduces the Federal rate and therefore the combined State-Federal rate by less than points. See Anderson et al. ( ) Rogerson ( ) and Kleven ( ) who describes the strong subsidization of goods that are complementary to working. See also Gruber and Wise ( ) on retirement benefits. U.S. unemployment and retirement benefits can be tied to work history too ( Feldstein and Samwick ) but by comparison with the Nordic countries these negative implicit taxes are smaller because the full benefit amounts are smaller. U.S. welfare programs have sometimes required work from able-bodied adults ( Mulligan ; chapter of this Report ) The CEA also notes that Senator Sanders proposes to increase implicit marginal income tax rates by phasing out the rebate of a proposed carbon tax ( Mermin Burman and Sammartino ) The collection of such a tax also shares some economic features with sales taxes. Health premium tax credits and Medicaid eligibility are two important examples in the health area ( Mulligan ) Food stamps and public housing are two more U.S. assistance programs that have positive implicit tax rates on employment and income. Markets versus Socialism | on top of all the other taxes that they pay.64 By comparison in the U.S. sales are taxed by States rather than the Federal government but no State has a rate much above percent and the national average sales tax rate is about percent. Excise taxes and nonrecurrent taxes which include carbon taxes and sales taxes on specific products such as gasoline tobacco products alcoholic beverages and automobiles are also higher in the Nordic countries ( see the second-to-last row of table ) Even without the VAT the high Nordic rates apply to everyone not just high-income households. The OECD prepares a measure of progressivity that is the share of nationwide household taxes paid by the top percent of citizens ( ranked by their income ) expressed as a ratio of the share of national aggregate income.65 The ratio would be if the household taxes were a fixed proportion of income. A regressive tax would have a ratio less than ; a progressive tax would have a ratio greater than As shown in table s last row four of the Nordic countries have essentially proportional household taxes.66 The average progressivity of all five countries is which is less progressive than in the U.S. Another indication of the progressivity of U.S. income taxation relative to the Nordic countries is the threshold expressed as a multiple of the average wage at which the top marginal income tax rate comes into effect.67 As shown in figure in the United States the top marginal rate only applies to income above times the average wage. In contrast on average in the Nordic countries the top marginal income tax rate applies to income that is only times the average wage. Indeed in Denmark earnings that are just times the average are already subject to the top tax rate. To put this in perspective if the U.S. tax code were as flat as that of Denmark a filer earning just $ a year ( about in the middle of the household income distribution ) would already face the top marginal personal income tax rate of percent whereas the U.S. code allows a filer to earn as much as times that or $ before paying the top rate. Lower personal income tax progressivity in the Nordic countries combined with lower taxation on capital and on average only modestly higher marginal personal income tax rates on the right tail of the income distribution means that a core feature of the Nordic tax model is higher tax rates on average and near-average income workers and their families. That is contrary to the assertions of American proponents of Nordic-style democratic socialism The sales price of retail items is usually quoted inclusive of the VAT. Note that a sales tax rate can not be added to income tax rates to get a meaningful overall rate because the sales tax is levied on a smaller base. For example a percent sales tax is like a percent income tax. The OECD ( 2018c ) refers to income and payroll the employee part only taxes as household taxes. Household taxes which include personal income taxes can be essentially proportional even while personal income tax rates rise with income because payroll tax rates fall with income and/or high-income taxpayers have disproportionate deductions from income for tax purposes. The term average refers to the mean. | Chapter  $ "   The  * " $ $ /4  * !   * )  '  )  * (     /-0  /0- $ )  / #   *  $    * ) /- $   )   / #   ) $ /    /  /  Top tax rate threshold as a multiple of the average wage  *    )  ) (  -&  $ ) '  )   '  )   ) $ /    /  /  *    "  ) $  / $ * )  ! *    * ) * ( $    * *  / $ * )   )    ' * ( ) / Note : If the U.S. threshold as a multiple of the average wage were lowered to Denmark s the top (  " $ )  '  /    /  * '    ++'4  / *  ! $ '   ) $ ) "  only  the Nordic model of taxation does not heavily rely on punitive rates on highincome households but rather on imposing high rates on households in the middle of the income distribution. This is illustrated in table which reports that even after accounting for transfers a one-income couple earning the average wage with two children faces an all-in average personal income tax rate of percent in the Nordic countries ( counting government transfers as a negative tax ) as compared with a rate of percent in the United States. This comparison for the various family types suggests that American families earning the average wage would be taxed $ to $ more a year net of transfers if the United States had current Nordic policies. Measuring Regulation in the Nordic Countries According to the Fraser Institute s Economic Freedom of the World Index the Nordic economies and particularly Denmark and Sweden are above the OECD mean with respect to regulatory freedom while the Heritage Foundation ranks all the Nordic economies higher than the United States for business freedom ( Gwartney Lawson and Hall ; Miller Kim and Roberts ) OECD data show that the Nordic countries have less regulation in their product markets and more regulation in their labor markets in comparison with the United States. The Nordic countries are fairly similar to the average OECD member country on the regulation measures. Markets versus Socialism | Table All-In Average Personal Income Tax Rate Less Transfers at the Average Wage Single individual with two children less transfers ( percent ) One-income-earner couple with two children less transfers ( percent ) Finland Iceland Norway Sweden United States Country Denmark Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The top rows of table show how the OECD ranks all five Nordic countries as having less product market regulation than the United States largely due to Nordic deregulation actions over the past years. In comparison with the Nordic countries the study finds the United States to be especially high on price controls and command-and-control regulation of business operations.68 As shown in chapter of this Report the Trump Administration has taken steps to reduce the costs of Federal regulations and to prevent the regulatory state from growing as it had in the past. Unlike the United States the Nordic countries do not have minimum wage laws although the vast majority of jobs have wages limited by collective bargaining agreements. The Nordic countries have more employment protection legislation which can make labor markets more rigid although the Nordic economies obtain labor market flexibility with intensive use of temporary employees.69 Income and Work Comparisons with the United States. The average real GDP per capita in the United States is about percent above the averages in Denmark Finland Iceland and Sweden. The comparison with Norway is also similar if we adjust for Norway s large oil income. Indeed See also McCloskey ( ) and the regulation components of the Fraser Economic Freedom of the World Index. The OECD product market survey was limited to the State of New York and therefore may not be representative of the rest of the country. The data show the U.S. suffering from relatively high regulatory protection of incumbents due to exemptions from antitrust laws for publicly controlled firms ( OECD 2018c ) In addition the OECD notes that U.S. product market regulation is more restrictive than other OECD economies due to the prevalence of State-level ownership of certain enterprises particularly in the energy and transportation sectors. To the extent that the Nordic countries have lower product market regulation this may somewhat offset their higher marginal tax rates on labor income ( Fang and Rogerson ) U.S. temporary employment is about percent of overall employment ( per the Saint Louis Federal Reserve Bank s series TEMPHELPS and PAYEMS ) whereas it ranges from to percent in the Nordic countries ( Svalund ) | Chapter    '    " '  / $ * )   * ' $  $  $ )  / #   ) $ /    /  /   )   / #   *  $    * ) /- $   " '  / $ * )  $ )   " '  / $ * )  * ' $   *  $    ) (  -&  $ ) '  )   '  )   *    )   "        "    *   /  (  -& /.     ' $     * ) # $    $    * ) /- * '.      * ( (  )   )        * ) /- * '    " '  / $ * )  ( ' * ( ) /  * /  / $ * )    )  (   ( *   ( ' * ( ) /     ) /  * !  / * /  '  *    "  ) $  / $ * )  ! *    * ) * ( $    * *  / $ * )   )    ' * ( ) /   *  )   * ( ( $ $ * )  * /   #  $ )   $    (   * !  " '  / *  ./- $  / )       *   / (  -& /  (   ! *  / #     !  only / *     * -&   /  /      #  /   '  ) /-4  $    " '  / $ * )  $ )   and    # $ " #   '0  indicates  ( *  " '  / $ * ) Alaska and North Dakota U.S. States that like Norway have high energy production per person enjoy per capita GDP that is and percent higher respectively than Norway s. Adults in Denmark and Norway work about percent less and in Sweden and Finland about percent less than American adults do while work hours are similar in Iceland and the United States. Arguably the citizens of these countries are partly compensated for lower incomes in terms of having additional free time but note that all the countries have significant taxes on labor so that the national value of free time is less than the private value.70 To begin understanding the financial consequences of living in a Nordic country rather than the U.S. consider the cost of owning and operating a Honda Civic sedan which is one of the more popular personal vehicles in the U.S. We take the case of a standard four-door Civic which is available in all the Nordic countries ( see figure ) The car s base price in the U.S. is $ ( including a percent average vehicle sales tax ) as compared with $ in Denmark ( including the VAT and vehicle taxes ) Fuel taxes which are higher in the Nordic countries than in the U.S. also add to the cost of ownership in the Nordic countries. In Denmark for example personal vehicles are excise taxed at percent of the sticker price for the first $ and an additional In other words labor taxes have a deadweight cost that is revealed in part as additional free time ( Feldstein ) Markets versus Socialism |  $ "     "   ) )  '   * ./  * !    * )     $ $   $ )  / #   ) $ /    /  /    ) (  -&  Dollars  ) $ /    /  /  ) (  -&  *   * )     * / *   * (  )  Wall Street Journal   ' * * (  "        '  '  / $ * )  * /   ./ $ (  /        * )  / #  base  $   * !    ! *  * *  * )     $ $  sedan percent tax is added for more than $ As a result owning and operating the automobile costs Danish consumers substantially more than it costs American consumers. In the U.S. the average annual cost of owning a Honda Civic accounting for the purchase price and fuel costs is $ The average consumer in Denmark for example must pay $ each year to afford a Civic. The greater ownership costs in the Nordic countries reflect a combination of higher retail prices ( including the VAT ) higher fuel costs and other combinations of registration and owner taxes. Figure extends the automobile results to all goods and services in the economy by using real income and production statistics. The blue bars show real GDP per capita in the home country relative to the average for the entire U.S.71 Four of the bars are negative meaning that those countries have less GDP per capita. Despite being an oil-rich country Norway s average GDP per capita is only somewhat above the U.S. average and is percent below the average GDP per capita in the oil-rich State of Alaska ( not shown in the figure ) Furthermore it has been noted that the true U.S./Nordic output gap is likely even greater because the U.S. has more nonmarket household production such as at-home child care or home schooling than the Nordic countries do. Nordic countries tend to do more of their child care in the marketplace Note that GDP includes both private and public sectors and therefore resources received by households from the public sector. The U.S./Nordic gap for disposable income would be even more dramatic. | Chapter  $ "     '  )  * (   )          $ /   * !   * '  * !   *  $   Ancestry   '    * !   $  )   $ $ ) "  $ )  # * (   * ) /-4   '         $ /  $ $ ) "  $ )  / #   ) $ /    /  /   '  $ )  * (     $ /  Percent relative to U.S.   ) $ #  $ ) ) $ #  '  )  $   * " $  )   $ #  *   )      "  ) $  / $ * )  ! *    * ) * ( $    * *  / $ * )   )    ' * ( ) /        '  '  / $ * )  * /  ) / )  / $ * )  '   * (  $ * )    ! *   '      * )     #  $ ) " *    $ because child care is a government job. As Sherwin Rosen ( ) described Sweden a large fraction of women work in the public sector to take care of the children of other women who work in the public sector to care for the parents of the women who are looking after their children. If Swedish women take care of each other s parents in exchange for taking care of each other s children how much additional real output comes of it ? Figure s red bars show the per capita income of people with Nordic ancestry living in the U.S. and who therefore are not subject to Nordic tax rates and regulations.72 They have incomes of about percent more than the average American and based also on the red bars about percent more income than the average in their home country. This suggests that the incomes of Nordic people are not lower because apart from public policy low incomes are somehow cultural. However the difference between the incomes of Nordic people in the U.S. and Nordic people living in the Nordic countries is too large to be entirely due to policy differences between the two sets of countries. One contributing factor may be that ancestry is self-reported and that holding actual ancestry constant the propensity to identify with Nordic ancestry may be correlated with income. Another factor may be that there was positive self-selection bias among Nordic emigrants to the United States. That is those who emigrated Most of them were born in the U.S. See also Sanandaji ( ) Markets versus Socialism |    '     /0  '  )  $ $   '   * ) ( +/ $ * )       /   ) /   $    )     #  $ ) "   *    $ /4   * ) /-4  * ) ( +/ $ * )   ) $ /    /  /    ) (  -&  $ ) '  )   '  )    *    )  ) $ /    /  /   *    "  ) $  / $ * )  ! *    * ) * ( $    * *  / $ * )   )    ' * ( ) /       * /    /0  '  $ )  $ $   '   * ) ( +/ $ * )      * ) $ ./.  * !  / #   * ) ( +/ $ * )  " * *    )   $     $     individual households. According to the OECD AIC is the sum of three components : ( ) The value of households expenditures on consumption goods or services including expenditures on nonmarket goods or services sold at prices that are not economically significant ; ( ) The value of the )  $ /0-  $ )      " * ) ( ) /  ) $ /.  * )  $ )  $ $   '   * ) ( +/ $ * )  " * *   *  $   * $    / *  households as social transfers in kind ; and ( ) The value of the expenditures incurred by NPISHs ) * ) * ! $ /  $ ) ./ $ /0/ $ * )  $ ) "  # * # * '   * )  $ )  $ $   '   * ) ( +/ $ * )  " * *   *  $   * $    / *  households as social transfers in kind. from the Nordic countries to the United States would be earning more than the home country average if they and their families had not emigrated.73 Another indicator of differences in material well-being in the Nordic economies and the United States is average individual consumption per head.74 Table reports average individual consumption per head at current prices and exchange rates adjusted for purchasing power parity with the United States indexed to In the most recent year for which data are available average individual consumption per head was percent lower in Denmark than in the United States and percent lower in Sweden than in the United States. The only Nordic economy in which average consumption is within percent of the U.S. level is Norway where average consumption per head is percent of the U.S. level. Though the Nordic economies exhibit lower output and consumption per capita they also exhibit lower levels of relative income inequality as conventionally measured. Table reports Gini coefficients a standard way of measuring inequality for disposable income after taxes and transfers in the Nordic economies and the United States in On average the U.S. Gini coefficient is about percentage point higher than the Nordic economies However recent research suggests the sign of selection bias for Nordic emigrants is ambiguous. Specifically Abramitzky Boustan and Eriksson ( ) study Norwegian emigration to the United States during the Age of Mass Migration from to exploiting within-household variation in emigration status to compare outcomes for Norwegian brothers who emigrated versus those who did not. They find negative selection bias among migrants from urban areas and mixed results for those from rural areas. These results are also consistent with those of Borjas ( ) Economists often prefer consumption to income as a measurement of living standards because it is less sensitive to transitory shocks. Also see chapter of this Report. | Chapter    '    '  / $  )  * (  )  ' $ /4   * ) /-4  $ ) $   * ! ! $  $ ) /   ' (    / $ *  ) (  -&  $ ) '  )   '  )   *    )  ) $ /    /  /   *    "  ) $  / $ * )  ! *    * ) * ( $    * *  / $ * )   )    ' * ( ) /  * /    /   ! *   '  )     ! *    $ ) $   * ! ! $  $ ) /   '0        * )   $ *   '  $ )  * (  * ./  /    )   /-  ) !    ' (    / $ *   '0        * )  / #      $ *   '  $ )  * (    $ '   / $ * indicating higher relative income inequality. The Palma ratio the ratio of disposable income at the 90th percentile to disposable income at the 50th percentile is also higher in the United States than in the Nordic countries as reported in table However by some measures even low-income American households have better living standards than the average person living in a Nordic country. Using data Fredrik Bergstr m and Robert Gidehag ( ) found that all the States of the United States had a smaller percentage of households with incomes below $ than Sweden did. As a country the percentage was less than for the United States as compared with more than for Sweden. Robert Rector and Kirk Johnson ( ) reviewed evidence from a sample of European countries and found that homes were smaller for the average in all three of the sample s Nordic countries ( Denmark Finland and Sweden ) than they were for poor households in the United States. Conversely though the OECD Gini database shows median incomes to be greater in the United States than in Denmark Finland Iceland and Sweden it shows the opposite at the 10th percentile of the income distribution.75 Returns to Free Higher Education in the Nordic Countries An OECD ( 2018a ) study of education systems reports that college tuitions are zero in Denmark Finland and Norway.76 Given that modern American socialists advocate free college tuition and stipends paid for by the Federal government ( i.e. taxpayers ) it is worth looking at the Nordic experience in this area to see whether consistent with the economics of socialism offering college for free ( to the student ) affects its quality.77 More work is needed to properly account for in-kind transfers and other government programs. For an analysis of the U.S. data see chapter of this Report. No data were reported for Iceland or Sweden. See the College for All Act of introduced in the U.S. Senate as S. Markets versus Socialism | The same OECD study estimates that though many American students pay tuition Americans are somewhat more likely to attain tertiary ( post high school ) education on average.78 In comparison with the tertiary schooling returns in the Nordic countries American college graduates earn their tuition investment back with interest and also a lot more. To put it another way the rates of return to a college education in the Nordic countries are low and propensities to invest in it are not high despite the fact that such an investment requires no tuition payments out of pocket. Figure s bars measured in U.S. dollars adjusted for purchasing power parity show the OECD s estimates of the possibly negative net present financial value of a college education in the four countries for men discounted with an percent interest rate.79 The OECD s estimates of the financial payoff to a U.S. college education are far greater despite the fact that tuition payments count as negatives in the calculations. The calculations are comparing two lifetime cash-flow profiles : ( ) beginning work after high school and getting the earnings ( after taxes ) associated with that level of education ; and ( ) earning nothing during the college years and paying tuition ( if any ) but then earning ( after taxes ) associated with a college education. Note that high school profile has positive cash flows during the college ages whereas college profile has negative or zero cash flows according to the amount of tuition. A positive value means that investing the positive college age cash flows from the high school profile at percent yields less than the borrowing to pay tuition if any and then enjoying the extra earnings associated with college. A negative value as for Norway means that a student who could invest his or her high school earnings at percent a year ( real ) would be financially ahead by working rather than going to college. The U.S. value of $ means that the present value ( discounted at percent ) of the college profile exceeds the present value of the high school profile by $ Taxes and tuition subsidies are among the reasons that the financial value of a college education varies across countries. Their effects on the results can be removed by looking at earnings before taxes and by including public tuition subsidies as a cost. Even from this social ( private plus public ) perspective the U.S. financial return is more than double the Nordic returns.81 This Also note that the Nordic governments also pay living stipends to college students. The country pattern is similar with the lesser discount rates also shown by the OECD and similar for women ( although female returns are not shown with the percent rate ) Among the various discount rates used by the OECD ( 2018a ) the CEA uses the one closest to the net marginal product of physical capital. The net present value is even greater if smaller discount rates are used ( OECD 2018a ) The data provided by OECD ( 2018a ) only permit adding private and social returns when both are discounted at percent per year. | Chapter  $ "     /  $ ! / $ (   $  /   $ )  )  $  '   /0- )  ! * (   //  $ ) $ ) "   -/ $       / $ * )  Dollars t Lifetime Financial Returns for a Man iary Education Using PPP for GDP  *   ) (  -&  $ ) '  )   ) $ /    /  /  *    "  ) $  / $ * )  ! *    * ) * ( $    * *  / $ * )   )    ' * ( ) /       * /    /     $  ' ) /   * ' '    * ) -/   $ ) "   #  $ ) "  *   $ /4  ! *       )     discounted   /   )    ) /   ) )  '   /   #        ' $ #   ' '  / #    ( / used in the CEA s analysis for males but not for females. is consistent with the economic hypothesis advanced in the Economics of Socialism section above that making a good free reduces its quality.82 Socialized Medicine : The Case of Medicare for All Over the next few decades the health sector is projected to grow to a fourth or even a third of the U.S. economy ( CMS 2018a ) which demonstrates the great importance of health to Americans and why the Trump Administration is pursuing market reforms to reduce prices and enhance quality. At the same time a free single-payer healthcare system continues to be the cornerstone of current socialist policy proposals in the United States. The Senate and House Medicare for All ( M4A ) plans sponsored or cosponsored by members of the 115th Congress are designed to use the scale economies of a public On the returns to postsecondary education in Norway see Kirkeboen Leuven and Mogstad ( ) ; and on the effects of free college in England on education expenditures per student see Murphy Scott-Clayton and Wyness ( ) Note that the returns pattern in figure can not be explained by a higher propensity to attain college in the Nordic countries because the tertiary education attainment rates among persons age range from to percent in the Nordic countries whereas the U.S. rate is percent ( OECD 2018a table A1.1 ) ; these percentages do not include short-cycle tertiary degrees although the conclusions would be similar if they were included. In the United Kingdom the free college program was ended because it was reducing quality. Markets versus Socialism | monopoly to sharply cut costs ( S. ; H.R. ) These plans make it unlawful for a private business to sell health insurance or for a private employer to offer health insurance to its employees. Although at the time of passing the Affordable Care Act it was promised that consumers could keep their doctor or their plan M4A takes the opposite approach : All private health insurance plans will be prohibited after a four-year transition period ( box ) This section relates Medicare for All to the economic issues raised above. According to the Senate and House bills M4A would be a Federal program having a nationwide monopoly on health insurance. The price paid to the government monopoly the analogue to revenue received by private health insurance plans would be determined through tax policy. Echoing historic claims about state-run enterprises it is claimed that the government monopoly would be more productive by avoiding waste on administrative costs advertising costs and profits and would use its bargaining power to obtain better deals from healthcare providers. It is routinely claimed that single-payer programs are more efficient.85 Socialized medicine is an important example of the issues raised by Milton Freidman s four spending categories portrayed in figure above. It has individuals ( government employees ) spending other people s money ( tax revenue ) on other people than themselves ( program participants ) The quality or productivity of health insurance would be determined through centrally planned rules and regulations. As opposed to a market with competition if a patient did not like the tax charged or the quality of the care provided by the government monopoly he or she would have no recourse. In addition price competition in healthcare itself as opposed to health insurance would be eliminated because all the prices paid to providers and suppliers of healthcare would be set centrally by the single payer. Chapter of this Report shows how in fact single-payer healthcare systems have delivered lower quality healthcare in terms of wait times patient survival rates and rates of healthcare innovation. A smaller economy is another adverse effect due to M4A s disincentives to work and earn. If financed solely through higher taxes we find that the program would reduce long-run GDP by percent and household incomes after taxes and health expenditures by percent. Medicare for All from an International Perspective Medicare for All bears little resemblance to the U.S. Federal program long known as Medicare. M4A so completely eliminates private insurance profit See also Sanders ( ) This also echoes back to the socialization of agriculture. For example the Chinese Communist Party s collectivization agenda was initially discouraged by the deep attachment of the peasants to their land ( Walker ) See Kliff ( ) Frank ( ) and Konrad ( ) See also Weisbart ( ) The China scholar Peter Nolan ( ) warns that none [ of socialism s errors ] has been so important as the misplaced belief in the virtues of large-scale units of production. | Chapter Box What Is Medicare for All ? Medicare for All ( M4A ) bills introduced in the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives propose a free single-payer universal coverage healthcare system ( S. ; H.R. ) All private health insurance plans including those now serving more than million Americans who have employer-provided insurance and more than million Medicare enrollees would be prohibited after a four-year transition period. As a free program all financing would come from Federal revenues rather than premiums from members or cost sharing at the time of service. As a single-payer system the proposal makes it unlawful for a private business to sell health insurance or for a private employer to offer health insurance to its employees where health insurance refers to any insurance that covers medically necessary or appropriate hospital services ambulatory patient services primary and preventive services prescription drugs medical devices biological products mental health services substance abuse treatment laboratory/diagnostic services reproductive care maternity care newborn care pediatrics oral health services audiology services vision services or short-term rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices ( sections and of the Medicare for All Act of and section of the House bill ) The House bill ( section ) goes further with dietary and nutritional therapies long-term care palliative care chiropractic services and podiatric care all prohibited from coverage by private or employer plans. As a universal coverage system all U.S. residents would be automatically enrolled. It has been noted that M4A does not turn health providers into government employees ( although section of the House bill requires all participating providers to surrender their for-profit status ) Nevertheless because the bill makes private health insurance unlawful health providers have no choice but to receive their income and instructions from the nationwide health insurance monopoly ( the Federal government ) or from the relatively few people who want to purchase their services without insurance. Medicare for All bears little resemblance to the U.S. Federal program long known as Medicare. M4A so completely eliminates private insurance profit motives and consumer choice and incentives that programs like it are unusual elsewhere in the world. The current Medicare program is neither a single-payer system nor a public provider of healthcare because healthcare providers under the program are often for-profit institutions and are receiving much of their reimbursement from private for-profit insurers among others. motives and consumer choice and consumer incentives that programs like it are unusual elsewhere in the world. The economics of socialism section of this chapter helps explain this state of affairs ; health system performance has been Markets versus Socialism | shown to be poor without making important uses of the price system profit motives and competition among private businesses. According to the Senate and House bills M4A is a universal coverage program a single-payer system and a free healthcare system. These are three distinct policy stances and the latter two are what set it apart from the current Medicare program and from most government healthcare systems in other nations. Universal coverage programs automatically cover all citizens but they do so in a variety of ways in terms of numbers of payers and patient cost sharing at the point of use. A single-payer system has a single monopoly payer of healthcare providers. Because one or more private businesses might take an interest in selling health insurance or providing it to their employees a truly single-payer system is an unlikely market outcome unless the government explicitly prohibits private health insurance as the Senate and House M4A bills do.86 A free healthcare system does not aside from the normal tax obligations charge patients for health insurance premiums or at the point of use. The current Medicare program is not a single-payer system because health providers under the program are receiving much of their reimbursement from private for-profit insurers among others. Using documents provided on the website of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services the CEA counted more than private Medicare plans coming from hundreds of parent companies.87 Moreover Medicare covers services from among others for-profit healthcare providers. The current Medicare program is not free healthcare either ; beneficiaries must pay both premiums and at the point of use cost sharing. According to the economics of socialism cited in the first section of this chapter Medicare for All would have little similarity to the current Medicare program because M4A would be free ; would prohibit all payers other than the Federal government ; and according to the House bill would prohibit the profit motive among both healthcare providers and health insurers.88 Universal coverage systems are common internationally but they are different from free health care and from single-payer systems. All the Nordic countries health systems have user fees or out-of-pocket payments whose share of overall health spending is similar to what it is currently the case in the United States although Denmark is the Nordic outlier in that its patient cost sharing is essentially limited to prescription drugs.89 The Nordic systems The term single payer is sometimes used more broadly to refer to a health insurance market that has many payers but with just one of them making most of the payments. This Report uses single payer to refer to one rather than many. This combines Medicare Part C and Part D. Moreover even if M4A made no changes to Medicare operations it still would have the problem of taking a program that functions well for about a sixth of the population and making it work on a vastly larger scale. The problem of scale is examined more closely at the end of this chapter. See Rice et al. ( ) ; Globerman ( ) ; Anell Glenng rd and Merkur ( ) ; Olejaz et al. ( ) ; Ringard et al. ( ) ; Sigurgeirsd ttir Waagfj r and Maresso ( ) ; and Vuorenkoski Mladovsky and Mossialos ( ) | Chapter are sometimes described as single payer but in reality these systems are geographically decentralized and have elements of private insurance. Private and for-profit health providers and health insurers exist in these countries and are accounting for a growing share of the market. Private health insurance is important in a number of other universal-coverage countries such as Switzerland where all residents are required to purchase health insurance.90 Effects on Overall Economic Activity Here we use an extension of the neoclassical growth model to estimate ( ) the tax rate increase required to finance M4A entirely with taxes on labor income and ( ) the long-run equilibrium GDP associated with the higher tax rate.91 The model is extended to have three goods and calibrated to fit the GDP private health spending and all other spending in the baseline situation of no M4A. The baseline economy has a percent average marginal tax rate on labor income which reflects the combination of various payroll income and sales taxes that are currently in place in the U.S. including implicit taxes on employment and income. Private health spending is assumed to be exempt from labor income taxation which is an approximation of the current situation in which employersponsored insurance premiums are exempt. This model is then used to simulate the effect of raising the tax rate across the board enough so that government revenue is sufficient to pay for all healthcare ( as noted in chapter of this Report about $ in additional taxation per household in ) without cutting any other government programs.92 Although a significant amount of tax revenue and a significant reduction in disposable income are obtained by broadening the tax base ( private health spending may be legally deductible under M4A but its amount is assumed to be zero ) the rate must still increase by percentage points across See Sturny ( ) The Netherlands achieves universal coverage by mandating the purchase of health insurance from private insurers ( Wammes et al. ) Private health insurance is also required in Japan ( Matsuda ) The long-run GDP effects would be of greater magnitude if partially financed with capital-income taxes. Note that the $ exceeds what households would be paying privately under the current system. Even if those two amounts were equal swapping household expenditures on private health insurance for household expenditures on taxes earmarked for the public program fundamentally changes the types of healthcare that are ultimately received by consumers and the size of the overall economy. Markets versus Socialism | the board in order for the Federal government to have enough revenue to pay for the Nation s health expenditures.93 As a measure of the average incentive to work the average after-tax share kept by households at the margin is reduced by percent due to the higher tax rate. National income and GDP are thereby reduced by percent in the long run as illustrated in table where national income falls from to In for example percent of GDP is expected to be about $ per person or $ per household. Although private health expenditures are eliminated the amount of income that the private sector has after taxes and health expenditures still falls by percent ( about $ per household in ) because the tax rate is higher and M4A removes a major tax exclusion. In other words M4A is not just a swap of taxes for private health spending. Moving health spending onto the Federal budget reduces private sector economic activity so much that households are spending percent less on nonhealth items than they would be without M4A. From a national perspective healthcare is much more expensive with M4A than it is without it not only because households need to pay for healthcare through taxes but also because the economy is smaller. The Mercatus Center at George Mason University calculated the cost of M4A from a Federal accounting perspective as $ trillion over years ( Blahous ) This is its version of the CEA s addition ( percent increase or about $ per household in ) to the tax payments shown in table s second row. Proponents of M4A point out that there is a benefit helping to offset the $ trillion which is true but incomplete. In the CEA s framework the offsetting benefit is the reduction in private health spending of shown in table s third row measured on a scale with baseline national income equal to But the economics of socialism point to additional effects one of which is also shown in table s first row : There is less national income and therefore substantially less to spend on nonhealth goods and services.95 The national income opportunity cost is similar in magnitude to but not included in Mercatus s Federal accounting cost estimate or the CEA s A more detailed macroeconomic model could recognize that ( ) the health insurance tax exclusion is in effect a negative tax on employment because it is tied to employment ; ( ) the Affordable Care Act is a positive tax on employment ( Mulligan ) ; and ( ) government health spending is of a different quality than private spending. Both aspects and are eliminated by M4A. In order to be conservative about the economic harm of M4A the model used in this chapter assumes that M4A financing includes substantial broadening of the tax base. Without base broadening it is unclear whether the economy would be capable of generating the tax revenue needed by M4A. As a comparison with the percent consider this chapter s cross-country finding that changing the U.S. policies to those of the Nordic countries when they were at peak socialism would reduce long-run GDP by at least percent. In other words the percent effect of M4A is about half the effect of peak Nordic socialism. The other cost is the loss of quality of the health spending when it is shifted from private to public as discussed above in the main text. | Chapter Table National Accounts with and without Medicare for All National Accounts   / $ * )  '  $ )  * (    $  /  #  '/ #  )  $ ) "     )   #  '/ #  )  $ ) " National income less taxes and less private health spending  $ *   '  )  / $ * )  '  $ )  * (  $ / # * 0/    $    ! *   ' ' $ )   $ / #    $    ! *   ' ' $ )  (   /   ) /  *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /    $    ! *   ' '  $  ! $ )  )    ) / $ '4  $ / #  /    #  $ )    '.   ! *  )  / $ * )  '  $ )  * (  $ / # * 0/  Medicare for All. tax increase estimate. The Mercatus study did not consider any reduction in national income which we estimate to be about $ trillion over years as a result of M4A.96 Conclusion This chapter has examined socialism s historic and current visions and intents its economic features its impact on economic performance and its relationship with recent policy proposals in the United States. A large body of evidence shows how high tax rates state monopolies and centralized control disincentivize effort and innovation and substantially reduce the quantity and quality of a nation s output. This evidence includes before/after estimates of the consequences of nationalizing agriculture and later privatizing it ; analysis of highly socialist policies ; before/after estimates of the effects of a government takeover of the oil industry ; cross-country relationships between economic freedom GDP per worker and other macroeconomic variables ; comparisons of the rates of return between free and tuition-paid colleges ; comparisons of conditional mortality between the U.S. and single-payer countries ( see chapter of this Report ) ; and application of a broad body of economic literature on the effects of raising tax rates. The China scholar Peter Nolan ( ) once advocated socialism until he observed the results. He explains that errors of all kinds have been made in the socialist countries rural policies but none has been so important as the misplaced belief in the virtues of large-scale units of production. He adds that stimulating the productive forces and consequently the possibilities for The loss of national income is not fully a cost because of the offsetting savings on using less labor and capital in the economy. At the same time the factor savings are not a full offset because factor incomes are subject to large tax rates thereby generating a large gap between the social and private values of factor supplies. Markets versus Socialism | human self-fulfillment in a poor peasant economy ( indeed in any economy ) requires harnessing market competition. The CEA does not expect that socialist policies would cause food shortages in the United States because modern socialists are not proposing to nationalize food production. The historical evidence suggests that the proposed socialist program for the U.S. would make shortages or otherwise degrade quality of whatever product or service is put under a public monopoly. The pace of innovation would slow and living standards generally would be lower. These are the opportunity costs of socialism from a modern American perspective. | Chapter x Chapter Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America Despite strong economic growth and a tight labor market millions of nondisabled working-age Americans remain on the sidelines of the labor market struggling to make ends meet. President Lyndon B. Johnson facing a similar situation in the 1960s declared a War on Poverty. In this chapter we show that though President Johnson s War on Poverty is largely over and has been a success based on standards of material hardship it was not won by helping low-income Americans become self-sufficient as President Johnson envisioned. We then describe how to wage a new war on poverty based on contemporary standards of material hardship but with a renewed focus on work and how the Trump Administration s actions have already made important initial progress along these lines. Bringing workers off the sidelines in this way will not only help maintain the current pace of strong economic growth but just as important will also ensure that all nondisabled working-age Americans can share in the dignity of work. In the chapter s first section we show that President Johnson s War on Poverty based on standards of material hardship is largely over and has been a success. Limitations in both the Official Poverty Measure ( OPM ) and the Supplemental Poverty Measure ( SPM ) that the Census Bureau produces each year make them incapable of fully capturing this success. When we use a new Full-Income Poverty Measure ( FPM ) that is anchored to standards and which thus includes the full impact of government taxes and transfers ( both cash and in-kind including the market value of health insurance ) ; which better accounts for inflation by using the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index ; and which uses the household instead of the family as the sharing unit we find that the poverty rate declined from percent in to percent in This is far more than the decline from to percent that the OPM reports for the same period. Of course the FPM would count a larger share of Americans as poor if it increased the standards of material hardship to reflect economic growth since However the task of establishing these new poverty thresholds is the responsibility of elected policymakers rather than researchers. In the second section we show that contrary to President Johnson s vision it was substantial increases in the availability and generosity of government transfers to households in the bottom part of the income distribution rather than increases in their self-sufficiency that lifted nondisabled working-age people out of poverty. The proportion of nondisabled working-age adults ( age ) living in a household that receives welfare benefits ( AFDC/TANF food stamps / SNAP housing assistance and Medicaid ) increased from percent in to percent in whereas growth in their work rates began to reverse after This decline in self-sufficiency has resulted in the situation today where millions of nondisabled working-age adults receive these welfare benefits while not working. In the third section we argue that a new war on poverty should focus on reducing material hardship ( based on modern standards that are explicitly determined by policymakers ) through work for nondisabled working-age people whenever possible. We discuss how the highly successful welfare reforms during the 1990s that required supported and rewarded work can serve as a model for current efforts. The Trump Administration has taken important actions along these lines strengthening work requirements in noncash welfare programs ; increasing child care assistance for low-income families ; and increasing the reward for full-time full-year work as part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of by increasing the Child Tax Credit. Additional progress could be achieved by further expanding work requirements in noncash welfare | Chapter programs such as food stamps / SNAP and Medicaid including to nondisabled working-age adults with children. U nder the Trump Administration strong economic growth and a tight labor market have brought millions of Americans off the sidelines and into the workforce. Nonetheless millions of Americans remain out of the labor force and many of them rely on welfare programs and struggle to make ends meet. Alleviating material hardship among low-income Americans is essential ; but in the long run it is important to achieve this goal through work and increased earnings. Bringing more nondisabled working-age ( years ) welfare recipients off the sidelines will not only help maintain the country s pace of strong economic growth but also ensure that all Americans can share in the dignity of work. In the early 1960s the United States faced a similar situation. The country was experiencing strong economic growth. But as President Lyndon B. Johnson recognized not all Americans were participating in the growing economy and many people faced severe material hardship. In response President Johnson declared a War on Poverty in In a March address to Congress he stated ( Johnson ) : I have called for a national war on poverty. Our objective : total victory. There are millions of Americans one fifth of our people who have not shared in the abundance which has been granted to most of us and on whom the gates of opportunity have been closed. In the first section of the chapter we show that President Johnson s War on Poverty based on standards of material hardship is largely over and has been a success. When we use the new Full-Income Poverty Measure ( FPM ) anchored in which includes the full impact of government taxes and transfers ( both cash and in-kind including the market value of health insurance ) ; which better accounts for inflation by using the Personal Consumption ( PCE ) Price Index ; and which uses the household instead of the family as the sharing unit we find that the poverty rate declined from percent in to percent in This is far more than the decline from to percent the Official Poverty Measure ( OPM ) reports over the same period. Even the 17.1-percentage-point reduction we find based on the FPM likely understates the actual reduction in poverty. The FPM is based on the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement ( CPS-ASEC ) the same survey used by the Census Bureau to determine the OPM. Meyer Mok and Sullivan ( ) show that this survey substantially underreports government transfers and that this underreporting has increased over time which would tend to artificially dampen the reduction of poverty under the FPM. Of course more Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Americans would today be counted as poor if standards of material hardship were updated to reflect the decades of economic growth since in which the entire income distribution shifted far to the right. However the task of defining poverty thresholds is the responsibility of policymakers rather than researchers. Although President Johnson s War on Poverty has largely been won based on the FPM victory was not achieved by making more Americans selfsufficient as he envisioned ( Johnson ) : The War on Poverty is not a struggle simply to support people to make them dependent on the generosity of others. It is a struggle to give people a chance. It is an effort to allow them to develop and use their capacities as we have been allowed to develop and use ours so that they can share as others share in the promise of this Nation. In the second section we show that contrary to President Johnson s vision it was substantial increases in the availability and generosity of government transfers to the bottom part of the income distribution rather than increases in work that lifted nondisabled working-age people out of poverty. We show that the share of nondisabled working-age adults living in a household that receives welfare benefits Medicaid food stamps / the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) housing assistance or Aid to Families with Dependent Children ( AFDC ) / Temporary Assistance for Needy Families ( TANF ) increased from percent in to percent in while growth in their work rates has reversed since This decline in selfsufficiency has culminated in a situation where large numbers of nondisabled working-age adults receive welfare benefits while not working. We find that in December the majority of adults receiving SNAP and Medicaid the two largest welfare programs in the United States were nondisabled and of working age. However a majority of these nondisabled working-age adults receiving benefits from these programs in December did not work during that month. Unless welfare programs are improved to more effectively promote work many of these nondisabled working-age adults will be unable to share in the dignity of consistent work and of achieving their own success. A new war on poverty should focus on reducing material hardship ( based on modern standards determined by policymakers ) through work and increased earnings as President Trump said in his State of the Union Address on January : We can lift our citizens from welfare to work from dependence to independence and from poverty to prosperity. In the third section we discuss how welfare reform during the 1990s serves as a model for success and how this model has been reflected in the | Chapter Trump Administration s actions to promote work among nondisabled working-age welfare recipients. Welfare reform in the 1990s ( ) required work by expanding work requirements in the cash-based TANF program ; ( ) supported work by consolidating and improving child care programs ; and ( ) rewarded work through expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) We show how these efforts successfully boosted work for the groups of nondisabled working-age welfare recipients who were most affected and led to improvements in child outcomes. However using the Survey of Income and Program Participation ( SIPP ) we estimate that as of December there were over times more nondisabled working-age adults receiving assistance from noncash welfare programs than TANF cash assistance. Given that these noncash welfare programs generally lack strong work requirements further efforts to promote work are needed. The Trump Administration has taken important actions that are aligned with the successful welfare reform model. President Trump signed Executive Order directing agencies to strengthen and expand work requirements under existing laws whenever possible. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ( CMS ) has granted waivers to several States to implement community engagement requirements among certain nondisabled working-age adults who receive Medicaid coverage. In addition the U.S. Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) has proposed a new rule that would limit the use of waivers for existing work requirements among childless adults receiving SNAP benefits. The President also increased work supports by signing into law a bill that substantially increases child care assistance available for low-income families. Furthermore the Administration substantially bolstered the reward for fulltime full-year work as part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of by increasing both the Child Tax Credit ( CTC ) and the refundable component of the CTC for those with earnings but no Federal income tax liability. Additional progress could be achieved by further expanding work requirements in noncash welfare programs including to nondisabled working-age adults with children as described in the recent Council of Economic Advisers report Expanding Work Requirements in Non-Cash Welfare Programs ( CEA ) These efforts will help ensure that progress in reducing poverty based on modern standards will increasingly be achieved by assisting nondisabled working-age adults secure and maintain employment. The timing for these reforms is ideal in the light of the Nation s current strong economic growth and a tight labor market. The unemployment rate was percent in December and the strong economy has helped reduce the SNAP caseload by million people ( through October ) since President Trump was elected ( USDA 2018d ) a decline of more than percent. At the same time indicators of material hardship have declined. For example the share of Americans experiencing food insecurity sometime during the year declined from percent in to percent in and has fallen by Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | percentage points since ( Coleman-Jensen et al. ) Work-focused welfare reforms can ensure further progress so that as many nondisabled working-age Americans as possible can share in the benefits of a growing economy escape material hardship and enjoy the dignity of work.1 The Success of the War on Poverty I have called for a national war on poverty. Our objective : total victory. There are millions of Americans one-fifth of our people who have not shared in the abundance which has been granted to most of us and on whom the gates of opportunity have been closed.  President Lyndon B. Johnson March in an address to Congress ( Johnson ) In President Lyndon B. Johnson declared a War on Poverty. As part of this war he advanced major new Federal programs that provided assistance to low-income Americans and were intended to reduce the poverty rate below the percent rate recorded in This section assesses the progress that has been made in President Johnson s War on Poverty based on those standards. ( For an in-depth analysis of the creation of the Full-Income Poverty Measure and its value in measuring the success of President s Johnson War on Poverty see Burkhauser et al. from which this section is adapted. ) We begin by discussing the basic elements of any poverty measure. We then demonstrate why current poverty measures including the Official Poverty Measure and the Supplemental Poverty Measure ( SPM ) each published annually by the Census Bureau are incapable of assessing progress on the War on Poverty that President Johnson declared. Specifically existing poverty measures fail to satisfy these three necessary conditions for assessing progress : Define poverty based on the standards. Properly adjust for inflation over time. Capture the posttax value of all sources of income including access to health insurance. Next we describe the Full-Income Poverty Measure which satisfies each of these three conditions as developed by Burkhauser and others ( ) When anchoring the FPM to the official poverty rate of percent in we find that the poverty rate fell to percent in This is far more than the decline from to percent that the OPM reports over this period. However even The CEA previously released research on topics covered in this chapter. The text that follows builds on the following research paper produced by the CEA : Expanding Work Requirements in Non-Cash Welfare Programs ( CEA ) In addition the first section of this chapter is adapted from the paper by Burkhauser et al. ( ) | Chapter the percent poverty rate in under the FPM likely understates progress in reducing poverty because of the substantial and increasing extent of underreporting of transfer income in the CPS-ASEC ( Meyer Mok and Sullivan ) The Elements of a Poverty Measure The unit of analysis in all official poverty studies is the individual. However because most individuals live in families or households official poverty studies collect information on the resources of all members of the person s sharing unit and assume that this sharing unit s members share these resources equally. Effectively this means that the poverty status of each member of the sharing unit is the same. The poverty threshold will depend on the number of persons in the sharing unit ; and for the most part official poverty studies assume that economies of scale lead to poverty thresholds that increase less than proportionately as additional persons are included. The appropriate economies of scale to assume in determining thresholds as well as what constitutes a sharing unit are subjects of debate. However there is far more debate about the sources of income ( or consumption ) that should be considered as resources when determining the thresholds the share of the population that should fall below the initial thresholds and how these thresholds should vary over time. Any changes to the way resources are measured however should also be incorporated when setting the poverty thresholds so that the share of people living in poverty in the anchor year is the same as that found by the poverty measure with which it is being compared. Failing to do so can lead to an inaccurate picture of poverty trends across measures. In the next paragraphs we briefly summarize the key elements of the major poverty measures used in the United States. ( For a more detailed discussion of poverty measure fundamentals as well as how the concepts behind them differ in the United States and the European Union see Besharov and Couch ; Burkhauser ; and Besharov and Couch For a discussion of the Council of Economic Advisers role in establishing the elements of President Johnson s War on Poverty see Lampman ) Defining resources. Resources can be defined on the basis of consumption or income. A conceptual advantage of consumption-based poverty measures is that the consumption of goods and services not the money that allows access to them is what satisfies our desires. Individuals with little or no income in a given year could nonetheless have assets from which to draw to purchase consumption goods. Income-based poverty measures would misidentify such people as poor. Furthermore as a practical matter consumption-based measures may suffer less from an underreporting of resources ( Meyer and Sullivan 2012a ) Meyer and Sullivan ( ) show that differences in income and spending can be substantial especially for families with low reported incomes. Despite the advantages of consumption-based poverty measures incomebased measures are more common which in part reflects the relatively greater Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | ease in collecting income data and thus the greater availability of published data on income that can be used to track poverty trends ( Burkhauser ) Among income-based poverty measures various sources of income are used. For example the OPM includes wage salary self-employment property and other private sources of cash income as well as government cash social insurance transfers like Social Security ( including Old-Age Survivors and Disability Insurance benefits ) and cash welfare transfers like TANF. Other measures like the SPM also include the value of some noncash government transfers such as SNAP benefits and housing assistance and focus on disposable income by subtracting income and payroll taxes paid and adding tax credits received. However even these additions fall short of fully incorporating all the available income sources. The importance of including the market value of health insurance ( calculated as the average cost for an employer or government of providing health insurance based on an individual s State of residence and risk class ) is demonstrated in studies of income distribution trends by Burkhauser Larrimore and Simon ( ) ; Armour Burkhauser and Larrimore ( ) ; and Larrimore Burkhauser and Armour ( ) Beginning in the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) adopted the same definition of the value of health insurance in its reports on trends in the distribution of income and Federal taxes. Poverty measures that entirely exclude the value of health insurance as a source of income effectively place a zero value on such insurance and hence do not capture all the resources people receive that can help lift them above poverty thresholds. Kaestner and Lubotsky ( ) review the literature on the inclusion of the value of health insurance in measures of income inequality and confirm its importance : While there is some debate about how to value Medicare and Medicaid benefits for the purpose of assessing how those programs influence inequality our estimates and those in Burkhauser et al. ( ) indicate that measured inequality is about to percent smaller if the average cost of these programs are added to recipients incomes. However primarily on the basis of a working version of a paper by Finkelstein Hendren and Luttmer ( forthcoming ) which finds that the availability of uncompensated care reduces the value of formal health insurance to some low-income individuals Kaestner and Lubotsky ( ) consider the alternative approach of valuing health insurance at a positive amount but less than its full market value. They show that doing so will result in a smaller effect on inequality. Burkhauser Larrimore and Lyons ( ) also report their results sensitivity to values based on the findings of Finkelstein Hendren and Luttmer ( forthcoming ) Sharing units and economies of scale. A poverty measure must also define the unit that shares these resources. Although the OPM uses the family as the sharing unit ( all members of a household who are related by blood or marriage ) the household is more common in survey-based analyses of income | Chapter trends. The increase in the share of adults unrelated by blood or marriage who are nonetheless living in a household together and are sharing household resources is one of the major arguments for the use of the household rather than the family as the sharing unit. There are also differences in the equivalence scales that researchers use. Burkhauser Smeeding and Merz ( ) show that using a scale based on the square root of the number of members in the sharing unit approximates the OPM poverty thresholds. Importantly they also show that though the choice of scale will have substantial effects on the characteristics of the kind of sharing units that they classify as consisting of people who are living in poverty ( e.g. larger sharing units headed by a working-age person with children vs. older persons without children ) this choice has little effect on trends in overall poverty rates in a country. For examples of the use of the square root of the number of members of the sharing unit to determine equivalence scales see Gottschalk and Smeeding ( ) ; Canberra Group ( ) ; and Forster and d Ercole ( ) Absolute versus relative standards. Once poverty thresholds are set a decision must be made with respect to how they are updated over time. This is the case regardless of how the original thresholds were established to identify the share of the population that is poor. Thresholds under relative poverty measures change each year relative to how living standards change for the rest of the population. For example the European Union not only set the original poverty thresholds for each of its member countries at percent of the median income of that country it then increased the country s poverty thresholds each year based on increases in the country s median income ( technically the European Union calls this the at-risk-of-poverty threshold ) Doing so maintains the same relative distance between poverty thresholds and median income over time. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development uses a similar method setting its original country thresholds at percent of median income and increasing country poverty thresholds each year by increases in the country s median income. Importantly the decision on where in the income distribution to set the original poverty thresholds and the justification for doing so are independent of how these thresholds change over time. Although a relative poverty measure can be informative about the material hardship of individuals at the lower end of the distribution relative to those in the middle it is not a good measure of changes in their absolute material hardship over time. For example if the real income available to everyone in the country doubled a relative poverty measure would show no change in the poverty rate despite substantial increases in the real income of the poor. Likewise if real median income fell by a greater percentage than did the income of those in the bottom part of the distribution the share of the population living in poverty would fall. In contrast to relative poverty measures absolute measures update thresholds over time based only on inflation ensuring that changes Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | in the poverty rate only occur when real income for those at the lower end of the resource distribution increases or decreases. Again the decision to use an absolute standard for changing thresholds over time is independent of how one chooses the original thresholds. Where to set the initial poverty thresholds and whether to use a relative or absolute poverty standard to adjust them each year are important policy decisions. These decisions will not only determine the initial share of the population that is living in poverty when a war on poverty is declared but also how the future success of that war will be determined. Success based on an absolute measure is determined by improvements according to a constant level of material hardship whereas success based on a relative measure is determined by larger improvements by the poor than for the country as a whole or in other words by continually surpassing a shifting goalpost in real terms. In his War on Poverty President Johnson chose a set of poverty thresholds such that about one-fifth of the U.S. population was poor and he made a policy decision that reducing the share of poor Americans was an important priority for American policy. On the basis of advice from the CEA and others these thresholds which were set in nominal dollars were adjusted each year to hold them constant in real terms over time reflecting an absolute measure of poverty ( see box ) President Johnson left it for future policymakers to decide if and when these real poverty thresholds should increase rather than be tied to increases in the real income of the rest of the population. Because both the initial level of the poverty thresholds and the way they increase each year are value judgments policymakers should ultimately make these critical policy decisions because they are the elected representatives of the people. The role of policy advisers and of the general academic community is to provide policymakers with the best information to make these value judgments. This information includes the most accurate way to measure the initial set of resources reflected in poverty thresholds the unit of analysis the sharing unit and the equivalence scale. For absolute standards it includes the proper measure of inflation ; and for relative standards it includes the implications of tying poverty thresholds to different points in the income distribution. Although the choice of an absolute or a relative poverty standard for changing thresholds over time remains controversial ( and should remain the decision of policymakers ) what should not be controversial is the method used to determine the success or failure of President Johnson s War on Poverty. To assess the success or failure of this War on Poverty it is important to anchor technically superior alternative measures of poverty to the original percent share of Americans based on the OPM in whose poverty the President was committed to reducing. Then the nominal dollar values of these thresholds must be adjusted each year by the most appropriate measure of inflation in order to hold them constant in real terms. Doing so accurately establishes the terms of engagement for the War on Poverty and will produce | Chapter Box The CEA s Role at the Beginning of the War on Poverty On January President Johnson declared a War on Poverty in his State of the Union Address to Congress. Less than two weeks later on January the White House published its annual Economic Report of the President by the Council of Economic Advisers featuring a chapter titled The Problem of Poverty in America. This chapter helped define the terms of engagement for President Johnson s War on Poverty with respect to its initial poverty thresholds and how they would change over time. The CEA set a poverty threshold of $ per family ( regardless of family size ) and a poverty threshold of $ for all single individuals so that about percent of Americans would have incomes below these thresholds in This is a poverty rate roughly equal to the percent poverty rate later determined using the OPM for that we use in this chapter as the baseline for assessing progress. ( Note also that using the square root of the number of members in the sharing unit to determine equivalent income for each member of a four person family whose total family income was $ would make each member of that family as well off as a single person with $ in income. The FPM uses this equivalence scale. ) In a March address to Congress President Johnson also referred to the percent baseline stating : There are millions of Americans one-fifth of our people who have not shared in the abundance which has been granted to most of us and on whom the gates of opportunity have been closed ( Johnson ) In another speech in February President Johnson explicitly linked his percent baseline to the CEA s thresholds referencing the percent that earns less than $ per year ( Johnson ) The CEA focused on an absolute standard for how these thresholds would change over time. This is the case because in their calculations ( CEA ) showing how the poverty rate had declined from percent of families in to percent of families in they maintained the same real thresholds in each year by adjusting their dollar value only for inflation. In addition the CEA noted that though its income definition included only money income a full-income definition that also included noncash sources would have been desirable stating that if it were possible to obtain estimates of total income including nonmoney elements for various types of families those data would be preferable for the analysis which follows ( CEA ) As the CEA s chairman Walter Heller was the preeminent advocate for a major antipoverty initiative under President John F. Kennedy. On the day after President Kennedy s assassination Heller proposed this antipoverty initiative to President Johnson and according to an oral history of this period Lyndon Johnson instantly embraced the proposal and within weeks declared unconditional war on poverty ( Gillette ) In addition the CEA led an interagency taskforce beginning in that focused on defining and alleviating poverty. Robert Lampman the CEA s Senior Staff Economist Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | at the time and later the primary author of the poverty chapter in the Economic Report of the President was described as the intellectual architect of the War on Poverty by former CEA Member James Tobin in Lampman s New York Times obituary ( Passell ) Lampman later wrote in his seminal book on the origins and nature of poverty Ends and Means of Reducing Income Poverty : While income poverty is a relative matter I do not think we should engage in frequent changes of the poverty line other than to adjust for price changes. As I see it the elimination of income poverty is usefully thought of as a one-time operation in pursuit of a goal unique to this generation. That goal should be achieved before at which time the next generation will have set new economic and social goals perhaps including a new distributional goal for themselves ( Lampman ) This view is consistent with using an absolute poverty measure to assess progress in President Johnson s War on Poverty based on poverty standards set at the time. the most accurate measure of its success in reducing poverty as the President defined it. The Inability of Existing Poverty Measures to Assess the War on Poverty To answer the question What progress has been made in President Johnson s War on Poverty ? a poverty measure must satisfy three basic conditions : The poverty measure should set poverty thresholds such that the poverty rate was percent in President Johnson declared the War on Poverty in with the goal of reducing the poverty rate below a baseline of about percent. The President referred to this baseline when stating in that one-fifth of our people are living in poverty. The CEA ( ) also estimated a poverty rate of about percent in The poverty rate calculated later under the OPM in was percent. A poverty measure that sets thresholds such that the poverty rate was higher or lower than about percent in is inconsistent with the value judgments made by policymakers with respect to the share of Americans facing material hardship at the time. The poverty measure should be based on an absolute standard and should properly adjust for inflation over time. The outcome of President Johnson s War on Poverty should be decided based on standards at the time he declared it not based on shifting goalposts as the economy grows. Moreover his objective of total victory as well as the activities of his economic advisers at the time and the reflections of Robert Lampman ( ) as discussed in box suggests that he | Chapter was focused on alleviating poverty based on an absolute measure of hardship over time rather than a relative one. The posttax value of all resources available to a person should be included. President Johnson s War on Poverty focused on new Federal programs that would provide assistance to low-income Americans including the Food Stamp Act of which expanded and made permanent the existing pilot food stamp program ; and the Social Security Amendments of which created Medicaid and Medicare. Later reforms directed a large amount of assistance to those living in poverty including the EITC ( enacted in ) and the CTC ( enacted in ) Thus it is important to use a posttax measure of income that incorporates the value of noncash benefits. No existing poverty measure from the Census Bureau or academic researchers satisfies all these criteria. The OPM by definition meets the first criterion in that the poverty rate under the OPM was percent in ; but it does not fully satisfy the second or third criteria. The SPM meets none of these criteria fully. An academic research measure the absolute SPM ( Wimer et al. ) also meets none of these criteria fully. A consumption-based poverty measure ( CPM ) developed by Bruce Meyer and James Sullivan ( 2012a 2012b 2017a ) may satisfy the second criterion but not the first or third ones. We next summarize these existing poverty measures and explain how each one fails to fully satisfy these criteria. Table compares the basic elements of these existing poverty measures with the elements of the FPM discussed later in the chapter. The Official Poverty Measure. The OPM was developed in response to President Johnson s War on Poverty and was similar in design to the one developed by the CEA. Mollie Orshansky ( ) a statistician and economist at the Social Security Administration developed a poverty measure with a threshold that varied based on family size ; but its threshold value for a family of four turned out to be very close to the $ level proposed by the CEA and the percent poverty population that the OPM captured in was very similar to the roughly one-fifth of Americans whom the CEA and President Johnson had targeted as poor at the outset of the War on Poverty in Orshansky set a family s poverty threshold as three times the budget needed to afford a lowcost food plan as determined by the USDA given that food expenses typically represented about one-third of total family expenditures at the time. In the Census Bureau published estimates of trends for poverty based on Orshansky s poverty measure updating poverty thresholds each year based on changes in the USDA food plan cost estimates ( U.S. Census Bureau ) Then in the Census Bureau released its first official poverty estimates in which poverty thresholds were adjusted annually based on inflation using the Consumer Price Index produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) which at the time was the measure that is now referred to as Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Table Basic Elements of Poverty Measures Element Official Poverty Measure Supplemental Poverty Measure Absolute Supplemental Poverty Measure Source Census Bureau Census Bureau Wimer et al. ( ) Meyer and Sullivan ( 2012b ) Burkhauser et al. ( ) CPI-U Quasi-relative * CPI-U-RS Meyer-Sullivan Adjusted CPI-URS PCE Spending excluded NA NA NA None with exceptions * * NA Income excluded In-kind transfers tax credits health insurance capital gains Health insurance capital gains Health insurance capital gains NA Capital gains No Yes Yes NA Yes NA No No No How thresholds are updated Deduct income and payroll taxes from income Expenses deducted No Regional cost of living adjustment No Sharing unit Sharing unit size adjustment Family Based on cost of food plan for family of given size Health Health childcare work childcare work expenses expenses Yes No Consumption- Full-Income Based Poverty Poverty Measure Measure Family Family unmarried unmarried Household partners & their partners & their members who children children Household share resources unrelated unrelated and expenses children under children under or adults no children : A0.5 adult with children : [ A+0.8+0.5 ( C-1 ) ] All others : [ A+0.5C ] where A is number of adults C is number of children N0.5 where N is number of people Sources : Census Bureau ; Wimer et al. ( ) ; Meyer and Sullivan ( 2012b ) ; Meyer and Sullivan ( ) ; Burkhauser et al. ( ) Note : CPI-U = Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers ; RS = Research Series. See Burkhauser et al. ( ) for further details. * Equal to 5-year average of spending on necessities by moderate income households multiplied by * * Except spending on home and vehicle purchases ( replaced by flow value of ownership ) health and education the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers ( CPIW ) as directed by the then Bureau of the Budget ( U.S. Census Bureau ; HHS ) Later in May the Office of Management and Budget issued the | Chapter directive defining poverty for statistical purposes. Also it was in when the BLS also started publishing the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers ( CPI-U ) The OPM is based on pretax postcash transfer income excluding important in-kind benefits such as food stamps ( or SNAP ) ; Medicaid and rental housing assistance ; and tax credits that were implemented later including the EITC the CTC and the Additional CTC ( ACTC ) which is the refundable portion of the CTC. These sources of income were either relatively minor or were nonexistent when the OPM was first implemented ; thus they were not initially important to capture in the data used to estimate poverty rates. However it is widely recognized that the rising importance of these sources of income renders the OPM incapable of assessing progress in the War on Poverty. The final report of the most influential external panel of experts on the effectiveness of the OPM as a measure of trends for poverty found that the current U.S. measure of poverty is demonstrably flawed judged by today s knowledge ; it needs to be replaced ( Citro and Michael xvii ) More recently on the 50th anniversary of the War on Poverty the Economic Report of the President in a chapter on progress in poverty reduction stated that the official poverty measure ( OPM ) has several flaws that distort our understanding of both the level of poverty and how it has changed over time ( CEA ) Both these sources considered the OPM s inability to capture the growth of in-kind transfers as a major flaw. Because in-kind programs have grown dramatically since the War on Poverty began and when the CTC and EITC did not exist the downward trend in poverty when omitting them is flatter than it would otherwise be. Figure shows the percentage of the population enrolled in the three main noncash welfare programs between and based on administrative records. The share of the population receiving Medicaid increased from ( before the program s inception in ) to percent ; the share receiving SNAP increased from percent ( in when the program had not yet been implemented nationally ) to percent ; and the share of households receiving rental housing assistance increased from to percent excluding those benefiting from the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit. In the U.S. spent $ billion on these three noncash welfare programs alone ( CEA ) By not including them as resources going to family members the OPM will in effect put a zero value on all these program benefits and miss their importance in reducing material hardship to the degree that they are taken up by the bottom part of the income distribution ( and reflecting them in setting the poverty thresholds to the extent that they existed in ) The OPM also does not account for other in-kind programs like the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women Infants and Children ; the school meal programs ; the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program ; and child care subsidies. In addition in tax year the U.S. spent $ billion on Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Figure Percentage of the Population Enrolled in Noncash Welfare Programs Share of population ( percent ) Medicaid SNAP Housing Sources : Truffer et al. ( ) ; CMS ( 2018a ) ; USDA ( 2018c ) ; Collinson et al. ( ) ; HUD ( ) ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations. Note : For rental housing assistance shares are the number of assisted households divided by the total number of U.S. households because the CEA is unaware of administrative data tracking individual recipients of housing assistance throughout this entire period. Shading denotes a recession for at least four months of a given year. the EITC and $ billion on the ACTC which are mainly targeted to families with children that have low to moderate earnings and which did not exist in at the outset of the War on Poverty ( IRS ) The OPM by looking at pretax income rather than posttax income will miss the value of these tax changes to the after-tax resources of families. Another criticism of the OPM that prevents it from tracking changes in absolute standards of economic hardship since the War on Poverty began is that it adjusts thresholds each year using the BLS s CPI-U which has historically overstated inflation ( Boskin et al. ) The BLS has improved the CPI-U over time by accounting for how consumers respond to increasing prices by substituting to different goods but historical CPI-U index values have not been changed to reflect this form of substitution. Although the BLS has created the CPI-U Research-Series ( CPI-U-RS ) to make these adjustments since it did not do so in earlier years. In addition the CPI-U-RS does not account for the ability of consumers to substitute between broader categories of products when prices increase which leads it to overstate inflation even during years when it is available. Another BLS measure called the Chained CPI-U ( C-CPI-U ) | Chapter accounts for this form of substitution across broader product categories but it has only been available since Although the CPI-U CPI-U-RS and C-CPI-U are unable to hold real poverty thresholds constant throughout the period an alternative inflation measure produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis called the Personal Consumption Expenditures ( PCE ) Price Index can better do so. The PCE Price Index accounts for consumer substitution and is available throughout the period we consider. It is the measure emphasized by the Federal Reserve Board and it is the inflation measure used by the CBO in its reports on the distribution of household income over time. ( For a fuller discussion of why the PCE Price Index is a preferred inflation index see Winship ) As alternatives to the official government inflation measures noted above researchers have created measures that attempt to correct for substitution bias and also bias from the failure to account for the introduction of new or higher-quality goods. Meyer and Sullivan ( 2012b ) have created an alternate series that shows slower inflation than the PCE Price Index. Their series which we refer to as the Meyer-Sullivan adjusted CPI-U-RS adjusts for biases in the CPI-U-RS based on estimates from the Boskin Commission ( Boskin et al. ) a panel of experts convened by the Senate Finance Committee to better measure inflation rates as well as follow-up work by Hausman ( ) Berndt ( ) and Gordon ( ) Figure shows the importance of using the different inflation measures outlined above in determining how much the nominal dollar value of poverty thresholds must increase each year to hold their real dollar values at levels. Compared with thresholds in the CPI-U would generate a threshold that is times as high in nominal dollars to hold the real value of the thresholds constant. To the degree that this is an overstatement of inflation it will effectively raise the real level of these poverty thresholds and exaggerate the share of people living in poverty in relative to In contrast all the other measures of inflation shown result in smaller changes in nominal thresholds. The CPI-U-RS is times as high relative to the C-CPI-U is times as high the PCE Price Index is times as high and the Meyer-Sullivan adjusted CPI-U-RS is times as high. Using the PCE Price Index would generate nominal thresholds in that are percent ( 6.2/8.0 ) as high as thresholds using the CPI-U which is used in the OPM. Using the Meyer-Sullivan adjusted CPI-U-RS would generate thresholds that are percent ( 4.5/8.0 ) as high. The Supplemental Poverty Measure. The SPM is a more recent poverty measure published by the Census Bureau alongside the OPM ; but like the OPM Because the Chained CPI and CPI-U-RS were not available in for the period we use CPI-U inflation growth for all three series ; and from to we use CPI-U-RS inflation growth for both the Chained CPI and CPI-U-RS. This likely increases the observed inflation growth in each series relative to a scenario in which the adjustments were available for the entire period. Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Figure Price Indices of Various Inflation Measures CPI-U PCE Meyer-Sullivan adjusted CPI-U-RS CPI-U-RS Chained CPI Price index ( = ) Sources : Meyer and Sullivan ( 2012b ) ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations. Note : CPI-U = Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers. CPI-U-RS = CPI-U Research Series. PCE = Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index. The Meyer-Sullivan adjusted CPI-U-RS is calculated by subtracting percentage points from the growth rate in the CPI-U-RS for and subtracting percentage points from the growth rate for Shading denotes a recession for at least four months of a given year. its characteristics do not allow it to assess progress in President Johnson s War on Poverty. Building on concepts outlined in in a Congressionally commissioned National Academy of Sciences committee report titled Measuring Poverty : A New Approach the SPM represents a fundamental shift away from an absolute poverty standard and toward a relative one for purposes of changing the thresholds over time ( Citro and Michael ) A key feature of the SPM is the adoption of so-called quasi-relative thresholds which are based on expenditures by moderate-income households ( those at the 30th to 36th percentiles of the expenditure distribution ) on basic necessities including housing food clothing and utilities. Spending on these necessities is then multiplied by to generate poverty thresholds that reflect expenditures on necessities not reflected in these categories. Of course like the original OPM the initial SPM thresholds are arbitrary. However the OPM thresholds are politically relevant for establishing public policy goals because they produce a poverty rate ( percent in ) that is consistent with President Johnson s declaration of the War on Poverty when he stated that one-fifth of Americans were living in poverty. Unless the SPM thresholds were set so that in the poverty rate under the SPM was similarly percent the SPM would redefine the original standards determined by policymakers at the beginning of the War on Poverty. In addition these | Chapter SPM thresholds would need to be updated each year based on inflation to hold them constant in real terms over time. Instead the SPM thresholds are not anchored to the scientifically arbitrary but politically relevant percent poverty rate in and they are updated over time based on a quasi-relative method. Because real expenditures by moderate-income households have in fact increased since the SPM thresholds have increased in real terms redefining the poverty standards set by President Johnson at the beginning of the War on Poverty. Nonetheless from a conceptual perspective the SPM greatly improves on the OPM by including more sources of income. The SPM includes noncash transfers such as SNAP and housing benefits although it excludes the market value of health insurance. The CEA ( ) notes that the SPM does not provide an accurate picture of the benefits of health care because while the SPM includes resources freed up from reduced out-of-pocket expenses as people obtain insurance it excludes the value of healthcare that people receive ; and as a result the measured trend in SPM poverty may understate progress in decreasing economic hardship since the War on Poverty began by ignoring these benefits of increased access to insurance. The SPM is also a posttax measure of income and so it includes the EITC and CTC while subtracting taxes paid. The SPM also makes several other adjustments to income by deducting child care and out-of-pocket medical expenses and its thresholds can vary across geographical areas based on housing costs and differences in expenses. Although deducting expenses provides a measure of the resources left available for other types of consumption doing so can also lead to perverse results. For example the Affordable Care Act increased the number of people covered by health insurance and it heavily subsidized this coverage for lowerincome families. However in many cases those who use medical services must pay some out-of-pocket expenses and the SPM would subtract these expenses from income but not count the value of the subsidized insurance in its measure of poverty. In fact Meyer and Sullivan ( 2012a ) find that the deduction of outof-pocket medical expenses leads the SPM to include as poor more people with higher levels of consumption higher levels of educational attainment larger homes and higher likelihoods of health insurance coverage relative to the OPM. In addition the need to make geographical adjustments for the cost of living are less compelling when people have freedom of movement to other areas in the country with different costs of living ( Burkhauser ) The fact that over time they do not move may be explained by the fact that higher costs of living generally reflect an area s higher levels of amenities. Though the Census Bureau has estimated poverty rates under the SPM only for and later Fox and others ( ) create an SPM with poverty rates for each year between and However the SPM is not comparable to the OPM for two key conceptual reasons. First it is not anchored to the OPM Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | in Second it does not maintain an absolute standard because thresholds are adjusted each year based on changed spending by moderate-income households. The absolute SPM. Wimer and others ( ) created a variation of the SPM which they called an anchored SPM. Despite its name the anchored SPM can not be compared with the OPM because it is not actually anchored to the OPM in or any other year. Rather it is anchored to itself in a given year. That is the initial SPM thresholds are arbitrarily defined in a given year based on expenditures by moderate-income households in that period and then thresholds are updated each year before or after based on inflation. Hence like any vessel not anchored to its mooring in this case President Johnson s initial percent share of the population living in poverty it will drift out to sea. Though it is not anchored to the OPM this alternative version of the SPM is ( at least conceptually ) an absolute poverty measure because its thresholds are updated each year based on inflation. Thus we refer to it as the absolute SPM to distinguish it from poverty measures that are in fact anchored to the OPM. And though the absolute SPM is conceptually an absolute poverty measure it uses the CPI-U-RS to adjust thresholds each year. Because the CPIU-RS tends to overstate inflation declines in poverty under the absolute SPM over time will be shallower than trends based on a less biased measure of inflation. In addition the absolute SPM omits the market value of health insurance as a source of income. The consumption-based poverty measure. A final poverty measure is the CPM which was developed by Bruce Meyer and James Sullivan in a series of academic papers ( Meyer and Sullivan 2012a 2012b 2017a ) They base their CPM on how much households spend rather than on their income in a given year. As noted above consumption-based measures have a conceptual advantage over income-based measures in that households with low incomes but high capacities to consume in a given year ( e.g. because they have higher asset levels or higher capacities to borrow ) are not counted as poor. In addition a practical advantage of consumption-based measures is that they are not affected by the increasing underreporting of income and especially of welfare benefits in the CPS-ASEC although they are still subject to biases in reporting of spending patterns. Although the CPM deviates from the OPM by incorporating a broader set of resources available for consumption it is like the OPM ( and unlike the SPM ) an absolute poverty measure. The CPM holds the real dollar value of its thresholds constant over time based on the Meyer-Sullivan adjusted CPI-U-RS as its measure of inflation. Moreover unlike both the SPM and the absolute SPM the CPM is anchored to the OPM. However the underlying consumption data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey are unavailable in and are available only intermittently before so the earliest year in which Meyer and Sullivan anchor the CPM to the OPM is As a result the CPM is unable to | Chapter directly assess progress in President Johnson s War on Poverty. Another issue with the CPM is that it does not include the market value of health insurance and thus does not capture all the power of the government s in-kind transfers to increase the resources going to the bottom part of the distribution measured by income or consumption.3 Figure shows each of the poverty measures we discuss above the OPM SPM absolute SPM and CPM. The OPM fell from percent in to percent in based on historical poverty rates produced by the Census Bureau. The SPM was first available in based on the analysis of Fox and others ( ) It fell from percent in to percent in The absolute SPM in used the SPM thresholds and it updates these annually based on inflation using the CPI-U-RS ( Wimer et al. ) It fell from percent in to percent in the latest year available ( for details of calculating various anchored SPM poverty trends see Burkhauser et al. ) However note that in the absolute SPM was percentage points higher than the poverty rate under the OPM and it undoubtedly would have been considerably lower in if it had been anchored to the OPM in or Unlike the absolute SPM the CPM was anchored to the OPM in CPM thresholds are defined such that the poverty rate under the CPM was equal to the poverty rate under the OPM in The CPM fell from percent in to percent in That is in the CPM began at a poverty rate percentage points higher than the OPM and thus was likely also exceeding the OPM poverty rate in The CPM also omits the market value of health insurance which was expanded substantially after Medicaid and Medicare were enacted in Yet it still reaches a poverty rate of under percent by If it had been possible to do so anchoring the CPM to the OPM in and including the market value of health insurance almost surely would have led to an even lower poverty rate in The trend in the CPM strongly suggests that President Johnson s War on Poverty based on standards is largely over and has been a success. Given the steep downward trend in the CPM it is noteworthy that the absolute SPM does not follow the same trend. The poverty rates under the absolute SPM ( percent ) and the CPM ( percent ) were relatively similar as of but then the CPM fell by percentage points by while the absolute SPM fell by only percentage points. This was despite the fact that both the absolute SPM and CPM are intended to only increase the nominal value of their thresholds by the inflation rate to hold them constant in real Meyer and Sullivan ( 2012b ) show poverty rates under a consumption-based poverty measure that includes a value of health insurance. However as described by Meyer and Sullivan ( ) the market value of health insurance is included only for families when the market value is equal to at most one-third of total expenditures. For other families health insurance is valued at onethird of total expenditures which can be much less than the market value for families with low expenditures. Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Figure Percentage of the Population Living in Poverty Based on Various Measures OPM SPM Share of population ( percent ) Absolute-SPM CPM ( anchored to ) Sources : Fox et al. ( ) ; Wimer et al. ( ) ; Meyer and Sullivan ( ) ; Burkhauser et al. ( ) ; Census Bureau ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations. Note : OPM = Official Poverty Measure. SPM = Supplemental Poverty Measure. CPM = Consumptionbased Poverty Measure. Absolute-SPM applies the cost of living adjustment ( see Burkhauser et al. ) Shading denotes a recession for at least four months of a given year. terms ( absolute standard ) and both include a broad set of resources excluding the market value of health insurance. One possible reason for this difference is the fact that the CPM uses a consumption-based measure instead of an income-based measure and thus is less subject to increasing underreporting of welfare benefits over time. However another key difference driving this result is the use of the Meyer-Sullivan CPI-U-RS inflation adjustment for the CPM versus the use by Wimer and others ( ) of the unadjusted CPI-U-RS for their absolute SPM. The Full-Income Poverty Measure None of the existing poverty measures discussed above are capable of measuring the full extent of progress in President Johnson s War on Poverty. Therefore we use a poverty measure developed by Burkhauser and others ( ) called the Full-Income Poverty Measure that allows us to do so although even this trend will likely understate progress due to increasing underreporting of transfer income in the CPS-ASEC ( Meyer Mok and Sullivan ) The FPM uses an absolute poverty standard to adjust thresholds each year and it is anchored to the OPM in That is its poverty thresholds are scaled such that the proportion of people living in poverty in is equal to percent which was the poverty rate under the OPM in Its poverty thresholds are updated over | Chapter time using the PCE Price Index the measure of inflation that Burkhauser and others ( ) prefer. The FPM s sharing unit is the household ; this is broader than the sharing unit used by the OPM and closer but not identical to the sharing unit used by the CPM and SPM which do not necessarily include all household members in the sharing unit. Using the household as the sharing unit reflects the increasing prevalence of cohabitation in the United States and thus the sharing of resources across families within the same household and is standard practice in studies of income distributions ( Canberra Group ; Fry and Cohn ) Its poverty thresholds are adjusted proportionally based on the square root of the number of people in the household. For example relative to the poverty threshold for a one-person household the poverty threshold for a two-person household is times as high the threshold for a three-person household is times as high and the threshold for a four-person household is twice as high. The FPM estimates the share of people living in poverty using a posttax ( comprehensive or full ) posttransfer definition of income that Elwell and Burkhauser ( ) developed back to and that was also developed by others back to most recently by Burkhauser Larrimore and Lyons ( ) It subtracts Federal income and payroll taxes but adds tax credits including the EITC and CTC as well as cash transfers. In addition it includes the market value of noncash transfers including SNAP ; subsidized school lunches ; rental housing assistance ; and public health insurance ( Medicare and Medicaid ) The market value of public health insurance is calculated based on the cost of its provision to different risk classes of individuals based on their age disability status and State of residence ( for additional details see Elwell and Burkhauser ) The market value of employer-provided health insurance is included as well. This method of valuing health insurance for determining income has been used since by the CBO in its reports on the distribution of income.4 Although the FPM includes a comprehensive set of income sources it will nonetheless understate income due to underreporting of transfers in the survey data it uses which are from the CPS-ASEC ( see box ) Meyer Mok and Sullivan ( ) show that respondents to the CPS-ASEC and other major surveys underreport transfers and that this underreporting has increased over time. For example in the average year between and CPS-ASEC For discussions of the importance of using the market value of health insurance in measures of income that are used to capture the real costs of government programs see Burkhauser Larrimore and Simon ( ) ; Armour Burkhauser and Larrimore ( ) ; Larrimore Burkhauser and Armour ( ) ; and Burkhauser Larrimore and Lyons ( ) These researchers argue that it is more reasonable to do so in such cases than for behavioral analysis where the value that beneficiaries put on this in-kind transfer is the primary reason for its inclusion or for studies of the incidence of a tax change to determine its ultimate distributional consequences. For studies that focus on the value beneficiaries place on government health insurance see Gallen ( ) ; and Finkelstein Hendren and Luttmer ( forthcoming ) Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Box Obtaining Better Evidence through Better Data Research that evaluates social and economic trends and the effects of government policies on them is useful for designing effective policy. Understanding how people s circumstances vary over time and from place to place can help ensure that policies properly target problems. And understanding the impact that policies have on different types of people across an array of outcomes can help ensure that policies have their intended effects while minimizing unintended ones. Such research is only as good as the underlying data. For example surveys are a valuable tool for assessing trends and conducting policy evaluation. Surveys can be designed to capture consistent information on a nationally representative sample of people over time. However surveys also have important limitations including sampling and nonsampling errors. Some common nonsampling errors are caused by randomly selected survey respondents who do not submit responses ( i.e. nonresponse errors ) and also by respondents who misreport ( response errors ) Administrative records are one means of improving the quality of survey data. See Burkhauser and others ( ) for a recent example of the use of individual tax record data to capture the income of top income groups reported in survey data whose credibility depends on the underreporting of top income in the survey data being caused by response errors rather than nonresponse errors. Recent efforts have made important strides in advancing the capability of research to inform policy development through improvements in data quality. In January President Trump signed into law the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of This law builds the capacity of Federal agencies to evaluate policy makes data more accessible and shareable across agencies and provides for strong protection of confidential data. It builds on the September final report of the bipartisan U.S. Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking which outlined ways to better leverage and combine government data to improve the quality of this evidence for public policy making while at the same time improving the privacy protection of individuals ( Abraham and Haskins ) The emerging work by Bruce Meyer James Sullivan and other researchers in their creation of the Comprehensive Income Dataset ( Meyer and Sullivan 2017b ) provides an example of the potential benefits of improvements in data quality along these lines in the United States. This data set may help overcome many of the issues related to relying on surveys alone to measure income because it will directly link the rich self-reported information that individuals provide in survey data to the generally more accurate information on their earnings and transfer program receipt from administrative data. This data set may improve our understanding of the distribution of a comprehensive measure of income and poverty as well as provide new insights into which Americans fall through the cracks of the social safety net. | Chapter respondents reported percent fewer dollars in SNAP benefits than they actually received according to administrative data. This underreporting has tended to increase by about percentage point each year. Meyer Mittag and Goerge ( ) link individual survey data to individual-level administrative data in Illinois and Maryland and find that half of true SNAP recipients in these two states do not report SNAP receipt in the CPS-ASEC. In addition to transfers Larrimore and Splinter ( ) find that employer-provided health insurance is also underreported in the CPS-ASEC. However households that receive employer-provided health insurance but fail to report it are unlikely to fall below the poverty threshold when accounting for other sources of income and thus this will have less effect in overstating poverty. Burtless and Pulliam ( ) note that underreporting of money income may be emerging since as well. Figure shows the poverty rate under the FPM between and in comparison with the poverty rate under the OPM. The poverty rate under the FPM fell from percent in to percent in In fact the rate under the FPM fell to percent by suggesting dramatic progress in the War on Poverty in its first years along the lines that the Economic Report of the President envisioned and that Robert Lampman expected as late as ( see box ) However the FPM then rose rapidly to percent by in large part because of the double-dip recession between and and the failure of transfer program benefits to keep up with the double-digit inflation during much of this period. However the poverty rate then fell almost continuously until when it reached percent. The poverty rate under the FPM never again exceeded percent even during the Great Recession and it fell to percent in We next illustrate the characteristics of the FPM that drive the dramatic reduction in poverty relative to the OPM. Figure shows the OPM modified only based on the equivalence scale change as a baseline which has little effect on the poverty trend. For example in the poverty rate under the OPM was percent compared with percent under the OPM with the adjusted equivalence scale ( for further details see Burkhauser et al. ) Relative to this baseline of the OPM with an adjusted equivalence scale figure shows how other iterative changes made under the FPM affect the poverty rate trend. Note that all iterations of this crosswalk from the OPM are anchored so as to match the percent share of the population that President Johnson s War on Poverty determined were poor in Using the household instead of the family as the sharing unit reduces the poverty rate years later in to percent lower than the percent using the OPM with the adjusted equivalence scale. Using a posttax measure of income reduces the poverty rate further to percent. Incorporating the market value of noncash transfers except for health insurance reduces the poverty rate to percent. Incorporating the market value of health insurance reduces the poverty rate to Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Figure Percentage of the Population Living in Poverty Based on the Official Poverty Measure ( OPM ) and the Full-Income Poverty Measure ( FPM ) Share of population ( percent ) OPM FPM Sources : Burkhauser et al. ( ) ; Census Bureau ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations. Note : Shading denotes a recession for at least four months of a given year. percent. Moving from the CPI-U to the CPI-U-RS reduces the poverty rate to percent. Using the PCE Price Index reduces the poverty rate to percent the estimate under the preferred FPM specification of Burkhauser and others ( ) If we were instead to use Meyer-Sullivan s adjusted CPI-U-RS the poverty rate under the FPM falls to percent in Though the order in which one adds these FPM elements will affect the difference they make in reducing the poverty rate it is clear that the sharing unit used the use of a posttax measure of income the inclusion of noncash transfers ( except health insurance ) the inclusion of the market value of health insurance and the measure of inflation used are all important drivers of the poverty trend under the FPM.5 The inclusion of the market value of health insurance is especially important. Note that the debate over the importance of including the market value of health insurance was a topic of disagreement among members of the original National Academy of Sciences Panel in and the research papers that informed their deliberations. Blinder ( ) one of the researchers whose work is discussed in the panel s report showed that excluding the value of government- and employer-subsidized health insurance distorts who will be included in the poverty population. In his dissent from the panel s recommendations Burkhauser et al. ( ) provide additional analysis of the sensitivity of assumptions in the FPM and the sources of differences in its trends from those of the absolute SPM and CPM. | Chapter Figure Percentage of the Population Living in Poverty Crosswalk from the Official Poverty Measure ( OPM ) to the FullIncome Poverty Measure ( FPM ) : Adjusted equivalence scale : ( ) household as sharing unit : ( ) posttax income : ( ) noncash transfers except health insurance : ( ) health insurance : ( ) CPI U RS : ( ) PCE : ( ) Meyer Sullivan adjusted CPI U RS Share of population ( percent ) Sources : Burkhauser et al. ( ) ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations. Note : CPI-U-RS = Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers Research Series. PCE = Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index. The Meyer-Sullivan adjusted CPI-U-RS is calculated by subtracting percentage points from the growth rate in the CPI-U-RS for and subtracting percentage points from the growth rate for Shading denotes a recession for at least four months of a given year. panel member John Cogan strongly argued against subtracting out-of-pocket expenditures from income rather than including medical care as a necessity like food and shelter in both the thresholds and as a resource. In addition he stated that much of the impetus for changing the way in which resources are counted comes from the fact that the current method ignores the value of billions of dollars in noncash benefits for food housing and medical care that are spent on low-income families ( quoted by Citro and Michael ) Using the FPM which is anchored to the population initially determined to be living in poverty in adjusts its nominal thresholds each year to hold these living standards constant in real terms and uses a full measure of posttax posttransfer real income we show that President Johnson s War on Poverty is largely over and has been a success. Though this conclusion stands in stark contrast to conventional wisdom ( and according to poverty rates based on the OPM or SPM ) it should not be surprising. Figure shows the distribution of full household size-adjusted income ( i.e. the PCE Price Index s inflation-adjusted disposable income including cash and in-kind transfers plus health insurance ) across all Americans in and in The entire distribution has moved far to the right ( exhibiting firstorder stochastic dominance ) reflecting substantial real income gains ( including transfers ) throughout the income distribution over the past five decades. Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Figure Individual-Level Posttax Posttransfer Household Size Adjusted Income Distribution Including In-Kind Transfers and Market Value of Health Insurance Using PCE Inflation distribution distribution Share of population ( percent ) Per-person poverty threshold Dollars ( ) Sources : Burkhauser et al. ( ) ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations. Note : PCE = Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index. The poverty threshold $ in dollars is calculated such that in percent of individuals have a household size adjusted income that falls below it. The red and blue vertical lines represent the median income level for a given year. Median ( full ) income more than doubled ( from $ in to $ in ) In only percent of people remained below the real poverty threshold ( as reported previously under the FPM in figures and ) compared with percent in President Johnson s War on Poverty is largely over and has been a success. Nonetheless continuing to increase the resources of people at the lower end of the income distribution is an important goal and it is appropriate for policymakers to consider raising the poverty thresholds to better reflect today s standard of living. However from a policy perspective the measure that policy advisers create to determine a policy s success must accurately measure the goals that policymakers set. The SPM for example is a case of policy advisers fundamentally changing the goals of policymakers by shifting from an absolute to a quasi-relative measure of poverty. Doing so in this automatic way takes the task of adjusting the absolute poverty thresholds of President Johnson out of the hands of policymakers. In addition doing so means that the SPM does not accurately assess progress over the past years in solving the problem of poverty as envisioned by President Johnson. In Cogan made some of these same fundamental points in his dissenting statement to the National Academy of Sciences Panel : | Chapter I dissent because the report s recommendations to choose three particular commodities upon which to base the calculation of poverty and to exclude other commodities ; to establish a normative range of values within which the poverty line should fall ; to increase the poverty line over time to account for perceived improvements in the standard of living ; and to exclude medical expenses from family resources are the outcome of highly subjective judgements. These are judgements that do not result from scientific inquiry and therefore in my opinion are improperly placed in this report ( quoted by Citro and Michael ) Cogan s criticism of the conclusion of the majority of this distinguished panel of academics is valid in the sense that any initial choice of poverty thresholds is normatively rather than scientifically based. The same is the case for the decision to change these thresholds using an absolute or relative standard. Because both the initial level of the poverty thresholds and the way they increase each year are value judgments policymakers should ultimately make these critical policy decisions because they are the elected representatives of the people. Robert Lampman as noted above the intellectual architect of the War on Poverty made a similar argument in his seminal book : The elimination of income poverty is usefully thought of as a one-time operation in pursuit of a goal unique to this generation. And once this goal has been achieved the next generation will have set new economic and social goals perhaps including a new distributional goal for themselves ( Lampman ) To better inform the policymakers who make these value judgments the National Academy of Sciences Panel should have anchored its proposed poverty measure alternatives to the original percent of Americans that President Johnson had determined to be poor in It could have then shown how their more sophisticated measures of poverty would have more accurately measured poverty trends over time updated only with inflation each year and then using a relative standard.6 Doing so would have first established if President Johnson s War on Poverty had been won based on his terms of engagement. Having done so they could then have proposed changing the poverty thresholds for a new war on poverty based on modern standards for their generation. The Full-Income Poverty Measure fills this gap and shows that President Johnson s War on Poverty is largely over and has been a success suggesting that policymakers should consider setting new higher poverty standards than those defined by President Johnson over years ago. The quasi-relative poverty measure developed by the panel could have for example adjusted the definition of moderate-income households based on a different point in the expenditure distribution or it could have changed the multiplier applied to their purchases of basic goods such that the poverty rate in under the new measure was equal to percent. Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | The Failure to Promote Self-Sufficiency The war on poverty is not a struggle simply to support people to make them dependent on the generosity of others. It is a struggle to give people a chance. It is an effort to allow them to develop and use their capacities as we have been allowed to develop and use ours so that they can share as others share in the promise of this nation.  President Lyndon B. Johnson March in an address to Congress ( Johnson ) Although poverty when more accurately measured has fallen dramatically since success has been achieved more by increases in transfers going to the bottom part of the income distribution rather than by helping all nondisabled working-age Americans become self-sufficient ( i.e. working and not relying on welfare programs ) In this section we first document the rise in the reliance on key welfare programs Medicaid ; food stamps / SNAP housing assistance ; and AFDC/TANF by nondisabled working-age adults ; and at the same time a reversal of growth in their work rates after This decline in self-sufficiency has resulted in a situation where large numbers of nondisabled working-age adults receive these welfare benefits while not working. In December the majority of adults covered by Medicaid insurance and receiving SNAP benefits the two largest U.S. welfare programs were nondisabled and of working age. However a majority of these nondisabled working-age adults receiving benefits from these programs in December did not work during that month. And this lack of work among these individuals is not short-lived. In any given month during a two-year window centering on December ( January through December ) between and percent of December SNAP recipients did not work. Trends in Self-Sufficiency In our trends measuring changes in self-sufficiency we focus only on those people society generally expects to work or be preparing for work as a condition of receiving welfare nondisabled working-age adults although we note that in practice programs generally exempt certain nondisabled working-age adults from work requirements. Before welfare reform in the 1990s nondisabled working-age mothers who received welfare were not in general expected to work. The AFDC program provided cash assistance to families with children without time limits or strong work requirements. This reflected the societal expectations of a previous era when women were not expected to work in the formal sector. However the dramatic rise in labor force participation among women especially married mothers led to calls for a welfare system that also required supported and rewarded work for single mothers. This eventually | Chapter resulted in the Federal overhaul of the AFDC program in creating the TANF program which required States to impose time limits and work requirements on assistance for nondisabled working-age parents. However as we will see these work orientated TANF welfare reforms did not extend to the three other major welfare programs we will discuss in this section. Adults are considered to be disabled according to our definition if they report receiving public disability benefits and are of working age if they are age As we will show the vast majority of adults who fit this nondisabled working-age definition ( about three-fourths ) are working in the labor market in a given month. Figure shows the percentage of nondisabled working-age adults living in a household in which at least one member received welfare benefits during some point in the year for through Due to increased underreporting of benefits in the CPS-ASEC these trends likely understate the rise in household welfare receipt ( Meyer Mok and Sullivan ) Between ( before all States and counties had implemented Medicaid and SNAP ) and the proportion of nondisabled working-age adults living in a household in which at least one member received Medicaid food stamps/SNAP housing assistance or AFDC/TANF increased from to at least percent. Much of this growth occurred between and when the rate increased by percentage points. This was driven by increased demand for Medicaid and SNAP programs ; and perhaps more important increased program generosity during the Great Recession and its aftermath ( for an analysis of how program generosity changed and of its implications for reduced employment during this time see Mulligan ) In terms of specific programs Medicaid insurance coverage in one s household has increased the most among nondisabled working-age adults growing from to percent between and followed by food stamps / SNAP receipt which increased from to percent. The receipt of housing assistance increased less drastically from to percent. AFDC/TANF receipt decreased from to percent between and reflecting welfare reform in the 1990s that replaced the former AFDC program with one that provided temporary benefits but focused on moving its beneficiaries into employment. The growth in welfare receipt shown in figure is partly a function of the expansion of these programs in covering new groups of people. Though such policy changes tend to reduce self-sufficiency they do not necessarily reflect changed behavior by newly eligible nondisabled working-age adults. Figure shows how the work behavior of nondisabled working-age adults has changed over a similar period. In fact between and the share of nondisabled working-age adults who work in a given month increased from percent to percent. As shown in figure the growth in work is completely due to the rise among nondisabled working-age females whose work rate increased from to percent over this period. The rise of Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Figure Percentage of Nondisabled Working-Age Adults Living in a Household that Receives Assistance During the Year Any welfare Housing Share of population ( percent ) Medicaid AFDC/TANF SNAP Sources : Current Population Survey ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations. Note : Working-age adult refers to individuals age Disabled refers to all adult individuals who receive disability benefits ( Supplemental Security Income or Social Security Disability Insurance ) Welfare recipients are identified based on receipt of Medicaid SNAP/food stamps rental housing assistance or AFDC/TANF at any time during the full calendar year by anyone in the household. Shading denotes a recession for at least four months of a given year. nondisabled working-age females in the workforce reflects changing societal expectations as married mothers moved into the workforce as well as welfare reform during the 1990s which later incentivized single mothers to move into the workforce. Meanwhile work rates for nondisabled working-age males fell from percent in to percent in a trend reflective of various potential forces such as expanded welfare programs and rising incarceration ( see Eberstadt ) Since the positive work trend for nondisabled working-age females has reversed and the decline in work among nondisabled working-age males has continued. Overall the work rate among all nondisabled working-age adults fell by percentage points between and from to percent. The reversal of the increase in work rates among nondisabled working-age females and the steady decline in work rates among nondisabled working-age males over the past five decades in combination with dramatic increases in household reliance on welfare programs amount to a general decline in self-sufficiency among nondisabled workingage adults in the United States. | Chapter Figure Percentage of Nondisabled Working-Age Adults Employed by Gender Share of population ( percent ) Males Overall Females Sources : Current Population Survey ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations. Note : Working-age adult refers to individuals age Disabled refers to all adult individuals who receive disability benefits ( Supplemental Security Income or Social Security Disability Insurance ) during the previous year. Employment is based on work during March of each year. Shading denotes a recession for at least four months of a given year. Work among Nondisabled Working-Age Recipients of Key Welfare Programs As shown above an increasing number of nondisabled working-age adults are receiving assistance from major welfare programs. In table using the SIPP for December we estimate the number of nondisabled working-age adults who themselves received benefits ( rather than living in a household in which one individual received benefits ) from each of these four major welfare programs Medicaid SNAP housing assistance and TANF.7 There were million nondisabled working-age adults receiving Medicaid million receiving SNAP million receiving housing assistance and million receiving TANF.8 These nondisabled working-age adults respectively represented and percent of all adults in each program. Although the majority of adults in each of these major welfare programs are nondisabled and of working age many do not work while receiving benefits. Although these data are somewhat dated the SIPP allows us to observe welfare receipt and employment status in the same month. Using December as our reference month allows us to examine work status of welfare recipients in a two-year period beginning with January and ending in December the latest available month of SIPP data. These estimates adjust for underreporting of welfare benefits relative to administrative data caseloads by assuming that each type of individual listed in table is equally likely to fail to report benefits and using administrative data on total caseloads to scale these estimates up. Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Table Number of People by Welfare Receipt Age and Disability Status December Nondisabled working-age adults ( millions ) Total ( millions ) Adult recipients who are nondisabled and of working age ( percent ) Category Children ( millions ) Disabled or aged adults ( millions ) Medicaid SNAP Housing assistance TANF Overall population Sources : Survey of Income and Program Participation Wave ; HHS ( ) ; HUD ( ) ; Truffer at al. ( ) ; USDA ( 2018a ) ; CEA calculations. Note : For each program receipt was identified based on December Children refers to all individuals under the age of Working-age adult refers to individuals age Aged refers to all individuals age and over. Disabled refers to all adult individuals who receive disability benefits ( Supplemental Security Income Social Security Disability Insurance or Veterans disability benefits ) To estimate the number of recipients in each category for each program the share of program recipients identified using the SIPP ( as of December ) was multiplied by the December administrative caseload for SNAP and TANF the number of full-year equivalent recipients for Medicaid and the number of rental housing assistance recipients ( due to lack of monthly administrative data ) Table shows that among nondisabled working-age adults in each program in December percent of the million receiving Medicaid did not work ; percent of the million receiving SNAP did not work ; percent of the million receiving housing assistance did not work ; and percent of the million receiving TANF did not work. The especially high nonwork rate among TANF recipients is in part a result of work-oriented reforms that have pushed many off the rolls and into the workforce leaving behind a relatively small number who are less likely to work. AFDC enrollment peaked at million total recipients in compared with million total TANF recipients in December and so the number of nondisabled working-age recipients presumably fell dramatically as well. In addition many TANF recipients may comply with work requirements by engaging in training or other work-related activities not reported as formal employment. The work rates of nondisabled working-age adults receiving welfare stand in stark contrast to the overall population. In December just percent of all nondisabled working-age adults did not work. In addition percent of all nondisabled working-age adults worked at least hours a week compared with between and percent working at least hours a week among those receiving benefits from each program. | Chapter Table Percentage of Nondisabled Working-Age Adults Working Various Weekly Average Hours by Welfare Receipt December Weekly hours of work ( percentage of row group ) Number ( millions ) to to to Medicaid SNAP Housing TANF Overall population Sources : Survey of Income and Program Participation wave ; HHS ( ) ; HUD ( ) ; Truffer at al. ( ) ; USDA ( 2018a ) ; CEA calculations. Note : For each program receipt was identified based on December Adults refer to all individuals age or over. Working-age refers to individuals age Disabled refers to all adult individuals who receive disability benefits ( Supplemental Security Income Social Security Disability Insurance or veterans disability benefits ) To estimate the number of nondisabled working-age recipients the share of program recipients identified using the SIPP ( as of December ) was multiplied by the December administrative caseload for SNAP and TANF the number of full-year equivalent recipients for Medicaid and the number of rental housing assistance recipients ( due to a lack of monthly administrative data ) Altogether table shows that in a one-month snapshot of individuals receiving welfare benefits a large share do not work and the vast majority do not work full-time. Others have noted that work behavior during a given month of benefit receipt does not necessarily reflect work behavior over longer time horizons. Hartley and others ( ) focus on adults age to who receive disability benefits and do not have a dependent child under and Bauer Schanzenbach and Shambaugh ( ) focus on a similar group of individuals except that they also exclude students. Each of these groups is narrower than our group of nondisabled working-age adults. Using simulated data based on the CPS-ASEC Hartley and others ( ) find that among their specified group of adults who received SNAP at any time during a given year about percent worked at some point during that same year ( based on data from through ) Using the SIPP Bauer Schanzenbach and Shambaugh ( ) find that among their specified group of adults who received SNAP at any time between January and December percent worked in at least one month during this two-year period. However these analyses are not informative about how much the people included in table work over an extended time frame. Instead they focus on a different sample of people those who receive SNAP at any time during a one or two-year period. A limitation of this approach is that an individual who receives SNAP for month during the year is treated no differently from an individual who receives SNAP in all months of a one-year period. This is the case even though the individual receiving SNAP during all months is dependent on the program for times as long and would cost the program times as Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | much holding monthly benefit levels constant. As an extreme example looking at the lifetime work behavior of people who ever received SNAP at some point during their lifetime would provide little information about the work behavior of the SNAP caseload at a point in time. The snapshots of work behavior we provide in table implicitly weight each welfare recipient based on months of welfare receipt because for example an individual receiving SNAP in all months of the year is times as likely to be included in the population as an individual receiving SNAP in only one month during the year. In figure we extend our analysis of the population of welfare recipients in December and show how their work behavior varies over a two-year period between January and December This answers the question for example : Of those people receiving welfare in December how many were working months before this time ( in February ) or months in the future ( in October ) ? Rather than looking at how many of these December welfare recipients worked at all during this two-year period we estimate how many worked in each of the months. If December welfare recipients were mostly working in every month of this 24-month period except for December then the snapshot we provide in table would not be reflective of a major work problem among welfare recipients. In such a case welfare receipt may reflect short-term assistance for short-lived bouts of joblessness. However if December welfare recipients were not only working at low rates in December but also working at low rates in January and December and the months in between then this work problem is a longer-lasting one among this population. In figure we consider the same million nondisabled working-age adults who received SNAP in December but we look at their work behavior in every month between January and December In December percent of the million individuals did not work replicating the snapshot in table According to figure a similar share of these same people failed to work in each month during the two-year window. For example of the million nondisabled working-age adults who received SNAP in December percent did not work in January ( among those in this group who were also nondisabled and of working age in January ) From January to December between and percent of December nondisabled working-age SNAP recipients did not work any hours in a given month. The shares of those working for other ranges of hours are also relatively constant across months in this 24-month period.9 The break in work rates between December and January is likely a result of the way the SIPP is administered. Respondents were surveyed in about their activity between January and December and then again in about their activity between January and December Respondents likely have better recall about their most recent month of employment. Also the lower work rate in January than in December likely reflects the improving economy during this period. | Chapter Figure Hours Worked among December Nondisabled Working-Age SNAP Recipients January to December Share of people ( percent ) Dec. Dec. hours per week hours per week hours per week hours per week or more hours per week Jan. May Sep. Jan. May Sep. Sources : Survey of Income and Program Participation waves and ; CEA calculations. Note : Data represent the weekly work hours distribution of December nondisabled working-age SNAP recipients. The December nondisabled working-age SNAP recipients are excluded during months in which they are not nondisabled or not of working age. Working-age adults refer to individuals age Disabled refers to all individuals who receive disability benefits ( Supplemental Security Income Social Security Disability Insurance or veterans disability benefits ) Hours of work are based on each individual s reported average hours of work per week during each month. Of course figure does not indicate whether certain December nondisabled working-age SNAP recipients work throughout the two-year period while others never do or if individuals switch back and forth from work to nonwork. Based on the SIPP percent of December nondisabled working-age SNAP recipients who were nondisabled and working-age in every month between January and December never worked throughout the 24-month period and percent worked in months or less. Overall figure shows that the snapshot of work behavior among SNAP recipients given in table is representative of the same population s work behavior in other months within a two-year window. In addition close to one-third work in none of the months during a 24-month window and over half work in months or less ( among those who are nondisabled and working-age throughout the entire 24-month window ) Thus the lack of work is an important and sustained problem for nondisabled working-age welfare recipients. Policies that encourage and require work or preparation for work could help address it. As discussed above we use SIPP data rather than more recent CPS data because CPS data do not allow us to identify those who are working and receiving welfare in a given month. However using the more precise but less recent SIPP data raises two important caveats to our results pertaining to December welfare recipients for those interested in what is happening Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | now. First Medicaid eligibility was expanded in States in to all adults with household incomes below percent of the poverty line and an additional States expanded Medicaid eligibility between and the end of ( Kaiser Family Foundation ) Thus Medicaid is likely to both currently cover a larger number of nondisabled working-age adults ; and the proportion who work may have changed. To address potential effects of this policy reform we use the most recent available wave of the SIPP that allows us to document Medicaid receipt and work behavior as of December after out of States that expanded Medicaid eligibility by the end of had already done so. We estimate that the number of nondisabled working-age adults who receive Medicaid increased from million ( percent of all adult recipients ) in December to million ( percent of all adult recipients ) in December The share of nondisabled working-age Medicaid recipients who did not work decreased from percent in December to percent in December Thus policy changes to the Medicaid program do not change our basic conclusion that in any given month the large majority of adult Medicaid recipients are nondisabled and of working age and that about half do not work during that month. In addition though the share of nondisabled working-age adults who do not work modestly decreased the absolute number who do not work increased. A second caveat of our December results is that the labor market has continued to improve since then with the national unemployment rate falling from percent in December to percent in December This is likely to have brought some nondisabled working-age adults off the welfare rolls and increased the work rates of continued recipients. To address such changes brought about by the improving economy we use the USDA s SNAP Quality Control survey which asks a nationally representative sample of SNAP recipients during a specific month of SNAP receipt whether they were working in that month in addition to their age and disability status. On the basis of the USDA data the share of SNAP adult recipients in a given month who were nondisabled and of working age fell from percent in to percent in In addition the portion of these nondisabled working-age adults who do not work in a given month fell from percent in to percent in Although an improving economy has reduced the share of SNAP recipients who are nondisabled and of working age and the share of them who do not work the majority of nondisabled working-age SNAP recipients in a given month continue not to work. Ultimately the general patterns of welfare receipt and work behavior we identify in our December results appear to hold based on data that are more recent as well. | Chapter A New War on Poverty We can lift our citizens from welfare to work from dependence to independence and from poverty to prosperity.  President Donald J. Trump January in his State of the Union Address to Congress When more accurately measured substantial progress has been made in reducing material hardship since President Johnson declared his War on Poverty in However this success has generally been achieved more by transferring resources to low-income nondisabled working-age Americans than by assisting them in becoming self-sufficient. In doing so our past policies have failed to afford all nondisabled working-age Americans the opportunity to share in the dignity of work and of earning their own success. Going forward continuing to focus on reducing poverty based on modern standards of material hardship is an important goal but for nondisabled working-age adults it is important to do so through work and increased earnings. On April President Trump signed Executive Order Reducing Poverty in America by Promoting Opportunity and Economic Mobility. The order s first Principle of Economic Mobility is to improve employment outcomes and economic independence ( including by strengthening work requirements for work-capable people and introducing new work requirements when legally permissible ) Other Principles of Economic Mobility focus on the importance of social networks overcoming barriers to work maintaining accountability and flexibility and targeting assistance to those who need it most. The vision outlined in this Executive Order in combination with other Trump Administration actions can help bring about a new war on poverty that more effectively promotes work as the best route out of poverty for nondisabled working-age adults based on modern standards of material hardship. This section describes how this new war on poverty can be won using as a model welfare reform in the 1990s that required supported and rewarded work. We document how these efforts successfully boosted work for single mothers with children. Then we discuss reforms of noncash welfare programs showing how we can use lessons learned from that experience in the 1990s to benefit different groups of nondisabled working-age adults and their children who receive assistance from major noncash welfare programs which for the most part do not currently reflect strong work expectations. The Trump Administration has already taken a number of important actions that better promote work among nondisabled working-age welfare recipients while other actions such as continued expansion of work requirements in noncash welfare programs could bring about further progress. Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | The timing for these reforms is ideal in light of the current strong period of economic growth and tight labor market. The unemployment rate was percent in December and the strong economy has helped reduce the SNAP caseload by million people ( through October ) since President Trump was elected in November a decline of more than percent ( USDA 2018d ) At the same time indicators of material hardship have declined. For example the share of Americans experiencing food insecurity sometime during the year declined from percent in to percent in and has fallen by percentage points since ( Coleman-Jensen et al. ) Work-oriented welfare reforms can ensure further progress so that as many Americans as possible can partake in the benefits of a growing economy alleviating material hardship and offering them the dignity of work. The Success of Welfare Reform Before welfare reform in the 1990s nondisabled working-age adults who received welfare were not in general expected to work. The Aid to Families with Dependent Children ( AFDC ) program provided cash assistance to families with children without time limits or strong requirements. Those families with sufficiently low incomes received monthly cash benefits determined by States and funded in combination by the Federal and State governments. The reward for work for the mostly single mothers who qualified could be quite low reflecting a high phase-out rate of AFDC and other welfare benefits in addition to taxes paid on work. This structure reflected societal expectations of a previous era in which women were not expected to work in the formal sector. However the dramatic rise in labor force participation among women especially married mothers led to calls for a welfare system that required supported and rewarded work for single mothers as well. States began experimenting with reforms to the AFDC program that reduced phase-out rates for benefits allowing mothers to keep more of their earnings when joining the workforce. States also experimented with work requirements and time limits for mothers as well as providing training and work supports when necessary. The large tide of State experimentation with welfare reform led to the Federal overhaul of the AFDC program in creating the TANF program which required States to impose time limits and work requirements on assistance for nondisabled working-age parents but gave States substantial flexibility in deciding how to do so.10 In addition to efforts to require work new efforts were made to support and reward work by compensating for work-related costs lost welfare benefits and increased taxes as work effort increases. The Child Care and Development Block Grant ( CCDBG ) was created in and as part of welfare reform child care subsidies tied to the AFDC program were consolidated devolved in large part to the States and expanded ( Long et al. ) In addition the relatively For a detailed account of welfare reform during this period see Haskins ( ) | Chapter small Federal EITC was expanded several times in the early 1990s. The expansions were largest for parents with children and especially for those with two or more children. The EITC expansions provided the largest work incentives for single mothers who did not have a spouse already bringing in earnings that would have placed the family in the phase-out or ineligible region of the benefit schedule. Figure reflects the success of these reforms in the 1990s. Though TANF was not made effective until the diamonds in the figure indicate the number of States ( and the District of Columbia ) that had implemented major reforms of their AFDC program through waivers ( ranging from zero in to in and later ) For the groups of nondisabled working-age adults most affected by welfare reform employment rates grew in conjunction with reforms of AFDC and EITC expansions. Single mothers made up the group most heavily affected by welfare reforms. The share of single mothers with a youngest child under who worked in the month of March increased by percentage points between and from to percent. Work rates for single mothers with a youngest child between and years increased by percentage points from to percent between and Welfare reforms were less likely to incentivize married women to enter the workforce. Married women only rarely received AFDC benefits and they were less likely to benefit from the EITC by entering the workforce. Thus the welfare reforms of the 1990s should not have increased their work participation as much as the reforms did for single mothers. Indeed work rates for married women with a youngest child under age and those age each increased by between and percentage points over this period. Finally women without children were unaffected by welfare reforms except for a small expansion of the EITC for childless adults. Consistent with the lack of significant policy reforms affecting them single and married women ( age ) without children saw employment gains of zero and percentage points respectively during this decade. A number of studies have attempted to parse out which elements of welfare reform and a concurrent strong economy produced the employment gains shown in figure They generally find that the strong economy expanded EITC and reform of the AFDC program through State experimentation and the conversion into TANF were the most important factors ( e.g. Meyer and Rosenbaum ; Grogger ; Fang and Keane ) Though instructive quantifying the precise roles of all the various components of welfare reform is difficult. Many changes were enacted simultaneously with potentially interacting effects ; it is difficult to accurately and consistently categorize specific AFDC/ TANF reforms and their effective dates ; and it is difficult if not impossible to measure changes in attitudes by welfare caseworkers and the broader societal messages received by welfare recipients. Still the evidence is clear that welfare reforms that incentivize work at least when pursued as a combination of work Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Figure Female Employment by Marital Status and Youngest Child 's Age and Number of States with Welfare Reform Unmarried ( ) Unmarried ( ) Unmarried ( no child ) Number of States with welfare reform Married ( ) Married ( ) Married ( no child ) Employment rate ( percent ) Number of States Sources : Current Population Survey ; Grogger ( ) ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations. Note : The universe is all females age The ages of the youngest children are shown in parentheses. The number of States with welfare reform refers to any Statewide reform to the State s AFDC program as categorized by Grogger ( ) including the District of Columbia. Employment is based on work during March of each year. Shading denotes a recession for at least four months of a given year. requirements supports and rewards can substantially boost employment and reduce welfare dependency. Lessons from Welfare Reform for Work Requirements in Noncash Programs Welfare reform was a success in reorienting the primary cash assistance program for nondisabled working-age adults around work. However noncash welfare programs have not undergone the same transformation. As seen in figure the share of nondisabled working-age adults living in a household in which one member receives Medicaid increased from percent in to in and for SNAP it increased from to over the same period. These noncash programs have come to serve a much larger number of nondisabled working-age adults than TANF cash-based assistance. In December there were million nondisabled working-age adults receiving TANF cash assistance compared with million receiving Medicaid million receiving SNAP and million receiving housing assistance ( table ) Thus there were at least times more nondisabled working-age adults receiving noncash assistance ( from Medicaid SNAP or housing assistance programs ) than TANF cash assistance in December Table also shows which types of nondisabled working-age adults receive benefits from each of these | Chapter programs. Adults with children in the household make up the large majority of nondisabled working-age adults in each program and adults with children under age make up the majority of those with children. Out of the million nondisabled working-age adults on Medicaid in December million had no children million had a youngest child age to and million had a child under age in the household. Of the million nondisabled working-age adults receiving SNAP in December million had no children in the household million had a youngest child age and million had a child under age Housing assistance follows a similar pattern for its much lower million total nondisabled working-age adults. The large number of nondisabled working-age adults receiving benefits from Medicaid SNAP and housing assistance shown in table largely avoid facing work requirements in these noncash programs especially compared with the extensive TANF work requirements. The work requirements in each program are summarized in the next paragraphs. Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. TANF has strong work requirements that cover a large share of its relatively small population of nondisabled working-age cash recipients. Although specific provisions vary across States all nondisabled working-age adults are potentially subject to work requirements generally with the exception of single parents with infants. For example only California and Vermont exempt single parents with children under age from work requirements States only exempt single parents with children under age States only exempt single parents with a child between the ages of month and months and States have no such exemption ( Urban Institute ) Single parents with a child under age are required to work or engage in work activities for at least hours a week assuming that child care ( not necessarily subsidized ) is available. Single parents with no child under age must work at least hours a week. Two-parent families must work a combined hours a week and those with federally subsidized child care must work a combined hours a week. States retain significant discretion in defining the sanctions for violating requirements and determining which recipients to exempt based on hardship or other factors. States must meet the Federal Work Participation Rate which requires a portion of the caseload to participate in work or allowable work activities for the federally mandated minimum number of hours ( the statute requires a percent work participation rate for overall caseloads and a percent rate for two-parent caseloads but various credits allow States to lower these targets ) Medicaid. The three major noncash welfare programs have much weaker work requirements that cover smaller shares of their nondisabled workingage recipients. Medicaid insurance which covered over times as many nondisabled working-age adults as TANF in ( table ) does not in general impose any work requirements in accordance with Title XIX of the Social Security Act. The Trump Administration has however supported recent Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | Table Number of Nondisabled Working Age Adults by Welfare Program Receipt by Category December Medicaid ( millions ) SNAP ( millions ) Housing ( millions ) TANF ( millions ) No child age No child age Youngest child age Youngest child age Category Total Sources : Survey of Income and Program Participation wave ; HHS ( ) ; HUD ( ) ; Truffer at al. ( ) ; USDA ( 2018a ) ; CEA calculations. Note : For each program receipt was identified based on December Only nondisabled working-age adults were included. Working age refers to individuals age Disabled refers to all adult individuals who receive disability benefits ( Supplemental Security Income Social Security Disability Insurance or Veterans disability benefits ) No child age ( no child age ) refers to nondisabled working-age adults between the ages of and ( ) who have no children in the household. Youngest child age ( youngest child age ) refers to nondisabled working-age adults who have a youngest child age ( ) in the household. To estimate the number of recipients in each category for each program the share of program recipients identified using the SIPP ( as of December ) was multiplied by the December administrative caseload for SNAP and TANF the number of full-year-equivalent recipients of Medicaid and the number of rental housing assistance recipients ( due to a lack of monthly administrative data ) State-level efforts to expand community engagement incentives in their Medicaid programs which are discussed in detail in box Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. SNAP which served over times as many nondisabled working-age adults as TANF in ( table ) does have Federal prescriptions for work requirements albeit ones that cover a smaller share of nondisabled working-age recipients than TANF requirements. Nondisabled adults age with no dependents under age face the strictest work requirements. They may receive SNAP benefits for only three months every three years unless they meet the work test hours of work ( or work activities ) each month. However States can obtain waivers from this requirement based on poor economic conditions. States make extensive use of these waivers to avoid work requirements for SNAP recipients even when job market conditions are favorable ( see box ) A recently proposed rule from the U.S. Department of Agriculture would address this problem and ensure that waivers are obtained only in areas where it is truly difficult to find jobs. Other SNAP recipients face less strict work requirements. Nondisabled SNAP recipients age face a general requirement that they must accept suitable jobs available to them. SNAP recipients age and over and recipients with dependent children under age are completely exempt from work requirements. Though States may choose to impose stronger work requirements than those mandated by Federal law few have chosen to do so. Housing assistance. Housing assistance programs ( including Section housing vouchers Section project-based assistance and public | Chapter Box Medicaid Community Engagement Demonstration Projects In response to State interest on January the CMS ( 2018b ) announced that it would consider approving demonstration projects by States that proposed to implement community engagement requirements for nonpregnant nondisabled working-age adults. A total of States have applied to implement demonstration projects through Section waivers ( Kaiser Family Foundation ) The CMS intends to evaluate whether incentivizing work and other forms of community engagement in these States improves health outcomes and facilitates upward mobility out of poverty and toward independence and whether such incentives help to ensure the long-term fiscal sustainability of the Medicaid program. States can design their own community engagement requirement definitions which can include activities such as paid employment job training community service education and drug treatment. Figure 9-i shows the States that have submitted applications to the CMS in order to implement community engagement requirements in their Medicaid programs ( Kaiser Family Foundation ) Among these States ( Arizona Alabama Kansas Maine Michigan Mississippi North Carolina Ohio South Dakota and Utah ) have waivers pending approval ; States ( Indiana Kentucky Wisconsin and New Hampshire ) had their waivers approved but have not yet implemented their projects ; and State ( Arkansas ) has already begun implementing its project. Arkansas was the first State to implement its demonstration project with its waiver granted in March and community engagement requirements going into effect in June The State currently requires that certain adults receiving health coverage under Arkansas Works the program serving the State s new Medicaid expansion population work volunteer or participate in other work-related activities for at least hours a month in order to retain eligibility for health insurance coverage under the program. Failure to comply ( either through self-reporting or automatic reporting of work status through other means ) for three months during a year results in a termination of coverage until the beginning of the following year. Only adults age were subject to requirements as of October Adults age are subject to requirements as of January ( Rudowitz Musumeci and Hall ) Only a small fraction of Arkansas Medicaid recipients are covered by these community engagement requirements and the large majority of those covered comply with the requirements in a given month. As of October there were just over Medicaid recipients in Arkansas. Just over of those recipients were adults of whom about had coverage through Arkansas Works ( Arkansas Department of Human Services 2018b ) Among the Arkansas Works enrollees just over were covered by community engagement requirements in October About ( percent ) complied with the requirement in October ( mostly through an Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | exemption from the need to report work hours ) while the remaining ( percent ) did not. Of those who did not comply in October recipients lost Medicaid coverage due to three months of noncompliance with the community engagement requirement ( Arkansas Department of Human Services 2018a ) A total of Arkansas Works recipients have had their coverage terminated during the demonstration project due to three months of noncompliance with the work requirement in ( Rudowitz Musumeci and Hall ) These recipients were allowed to reenroll beginning in January Further evidence from Arkansas and other States will help determine whether community engagement requirements are effective in improving overall health and upward mobility toward independence. Figure 9-i. States with Medicaid Waivers Implemented Approved and Pending Source : Kaiser Family Foundation ( ) Waiver program pending Waiver program approved Implemented program Not applicable housing ) which served more than three times as many nondisabled workingage adults as TANF in ( table ) generally lack strong work requirements. Though a requirement exists in the public housing program for nondisabled working-age adults who are not working or enrolled in a self-sufficiency program to participate in hours per month of community engagement or other activities it is not necessarily enforced ( HUD ) Under the Moving to Work demonstration program authorized public housing authorities may | Chapter Box Addressing Problems with SNAP Work Requirement Waivers The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act ( PRWORA ) implemented significant work requirements in SNAP for some nondisabled working-age adults. Specifically so-called able-bodied adults without dependents ( ABAWDs ) who are age could receive SNAP benefits for only months in a 36-month period unless they worked for at least hours each month or participated in a job program. These work requirements can be waved however in places with poor macroeconomic conditions when it is difficult to find work. According to section ( o ) of the Food and Nutrition Act of the USDA Secretary is required to waive work requirements for ABAWDs if ( ) the unemployment rate in an area is percent or higher or ( ) if there are not sufficient jobs in an area. The lack of sufficient jobs criterion has been interpreted in current regulations to be satisfied by several possible conditions including an area average unemployment rate that is percent higher than the national unemployment rate for a recent 24-month period. Regulations also give States substantial flexibility in defining an area where requirements can be waived. For example a State can apply for a Statewide waiver or for waivers that cover any set of contiguous counties ( or other jurisdictions ) Although waivers were intended to exempt ABAWDs from work requirements when finding a job was especially difficult they have frequently been used to waive requirements even in areas with ample job opportunities. In December the U.S. unemployment rate was percent. The criterion that work requirements can be waived when the area s unemployment rate is percent higher than the national unemployment rate allows areas with an unemployment rate of percent to qualify ( assuming a percent higher unemployment rate than the national rate over a 24-month period ) A percent unemployment rate is near the natural rate of unemployment currently about percent which reflects normal churn in the labor market rather than insufficient jobs for those who want them. Another issue with waivers is that States have wide discretion in combining counties cities and other types of jurisdictions into an area that in the aggregate can satisfy the relevant conditions and gain eligibility for a waiver. States can strategically form these areas to maximize the number of ABAWDs that are covered by a waiver. For example they can combine low-unemployment counties with high-unemployment counties so that in combination the area narrowly exceeds the threshold for a sufficiently high unemployment rate relative to the national average. States can then pair remaining high-unemployment counties with other low-unemployment counties in a similar fashion to exempt as many ABAWDs as possible. States can form an unlimited number of such areas as long as the counties or other jurisdictions within any combined area are contiguous to at least one other jurisdiction in the area. Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | As a result of these waiver criteria many ABAWDs are exempted from work requirements even when they live in areas with low unemployment rates. As of the fourth quarter of fiscal year despite a national unemployment rate of percent seven regions received exemptions for their entire State district or territory and States received exemptions for a part of their State ( see figure 9-ii ) Nevada for instance had a statewide exemption despite an unemployment rate of percent in December ( USDA 2018b ) California had a full-State waiver beginning in fiscal year that continued through the third quarter of fiscal year Starting in September California excluded of its counties so that the remaining counties would have a sufficiently high unemployment rate to retain eligibility for a waiver ( USDA 2018a ) California did so by grouping together counties with a combined average unemployment rate of percent over the 24-month period between April and March exactly percent higher than the percent national unemployment rate during the same period. Other States have also sought to waive work requirements in the midst of strong labor markets. During the first quarter of when the national unemployment rate was under percent States and territories had a full-State waiver ( including California Florida New York Pennsylvania Illinois and Georgia ) and had a partial-State waiver ( USDA ) Only States ( Delaware Iowa Indiana Figure 9-ii. States Waiving SNAP Time Limit for Able-Bodied Adults ( ) Without Dependents Fourth Quarter of Fiscal Year Source : U.S. Department of Agriculture. Note : Guam and the U.S. Virgin Islands offer territorywide waivers. | Chapter Partial waivers Statewide waivers No waivers Kansas Maine Nebraska Oklahoma Texas and Wyoming ) had no waiver ( USDA ) On December the USDA published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking in the Federal Register that would address these issues with ABAWD work requirement waivers. For areas seeking a waiver under the criterion that the unemployment rate exceeds percent of the national average the area s unemployment rate would be required to meet or exceed a floor of percent. Also States would no longer be permitted to combine various counties and other jurisdictions in order to maximize waiver eligibility. Instead each area as defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics must qualify on its own merit with few exceptions. experiment with stronger work requirements. However out of close to public housing authorities across the United States only authorities or about percent are designated as Moving to Work agencies and of these just had implemented work requirements for some portion of recipients as of ( Levy Edmonds and Simington ) Thus strong work requirements are not common in housing assistance programs. Evidence supporting the expansion of work requirements. As described in detail in the CEA report Expanding Work Requirements in Non-Cash Welfare Programs ( CEA ) continued efforts to expand work requirements in noncash programs similar to those in TANF would likely boost the work effort among the much greater number of nondisabled working-age recipients currently receiving assistance from noncash programs. There are two sets of evidence for such an effect. First welfare programs that lack work requirements tend to reduce employment. Imposing work requirements in these programs should therefore increase employment because the only way for nonexempt recipients to avoid losing benefits is to work. Second experiments in the 1990s that applied work requirements to States AFDC programs generally increased work effort supporting evidence from statistical studies showing that these interventions tended to increase employment. A number of studies based on randomized experiments or quasiexperimental designs provide empirical support for noncash welfare programs discouraging work. Hoynes and Schanzenbach ( ) utilized the staggered county-wide rollout of the food stamp program in the 1960s and 1970s to estimate that food stamp receipt reduced hours worked among female heads of households by over percent and reduced employment by up to percentage points among recipients in general. More recently East ( ) found that after welfare reform in the receipt of food stamps by unmarried noncitizen immigrant women reduced their hours worked by percent and their employment by percent. Recent studies find significant employment effects Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | of Medicaid on work rates among childless adults : Garthwaite Gross and Notowidigo ( ) find that losing Medicaid coverage increases employment by percentage points ; and Dague DeLeire and Leininger ( ) find that gaining Medicaid coverage reduces employment by percentage points for this population. Meanwhile Dave and others ( ) find that Medicaid receipt substantially reduces employment among pregnant women. However other studies find weaker or no effects of Medicaid on employment. For example Baicker and others ( ) find that employment only fell by a statistically insignificant percentage points based on a randomized controlled trial in Oregon. Regarding housing assistance Jacob and Ludwig ( ) evaluated the impact of receipt of a Section housing voucher on adult employment utilizing a random lottery in Chicago to allocate vouchers. They found that labor force participation fell by percent and earnings fell by percent as a result of receiving these vouchers. Two randomized controlled trials funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development provide additional evidence that housing vouchers reduce employment in the short run among both TANF recipients and homeless families ( Mills et al. ; Gubits et al. ) Taken as a whole the empirical evidence suggests that noncash welfare programs reduce work and thus expanding work requirements in these programs should tend to increase work. This would especially be true if work requirements were applied to all major noncash welfare programs given that many nondisabled working-age recipients receive benefits from multiple programs that can in the aggregate result in strong work disincentives. Experience from 1990s-era welfare reforms which transformed AFDC into TANF can also inform how expanded work requirements in noncash programs would affect work. Before the passage of PRWORA States conducted experiments with a number of specific changes to their cash welfare programs. Bloom and Michalopoulos ( ) analyzed the results of randomized controlled trials conducted in the 1980s and 1990s on the effects of various welfare reforms. The experiments that included work requirements overwhelmingly showed that work requirements increased employment and earnings while reducing welfare spending. Hamilton and others ( ) found that employment-focused programs that prioritized employment over education had larger effects. The results of these experiments complement statistical studies showing that employment among single mothers who were most directly affected by welfare reform saw the largest increases in employment during this reform s early years. Though a number of factors can explain these trends including the growing generosity of the EITC and the growing economy the preponderance of the research suggests that reforms to the AFDC program including time limits and work requirements played an important role as well ( for a review of this literature see Ziliak ) | Chapter Complementing Work Requirements with Work Supports and Rewards Although solely expanding work requirements in noncash welfare programs would bring more nondisabled working-age recipients into the workforce complementary policies that support and reward work can promote work even further. The success of work requirements in increasing work effort among welfare recipients in the 1990s was supported in part by improvements made to child care assistance programs. In the Child Care and Development Block Grant program was created to provide Federal funds to States for child care complementing the child care assistance that was being newly provided in the former AFDC program. In PRWORA consolidated these separate child care programs into one mandatory child care block grant and reauthorized CCDBG ; together these were referred to as the Child Care and Development Fund which provided funding to States through the mandatory child care block grant and the discretionary CCDBG to help low-income families access child care with minimal Federal rules and broad flexibility for States. Supporting work. Although the improvement of child care programs targeted to low-income families supported an increase in work it was not the major factor in employment gains during the 1990s. Meyer and Rosenbaum ( ) find that the expansion of Federal child care assistance played only a minor role in encouraging work among single mothers between and More recent evidence on the impact of child care provision on work among single mothers similarly suggests that the effects may be modest ( Fitzpatrick ; Morrissey ) In addition lower-income mothers commonly use informal types of child care that do not require direct payment or work nonstandard hours during which formal child care is unavailable ( Rachidi ) Although child care subsidies alone may be insufficient to promote work among recipients of noncash welfare programs they can nonetheless play a complimentary role in encouraging work. As discussed in chapter of this Report child care costs can make up a substantial share of wages for many parents of young children. This is particularly true for the large share of nondisabled adults receiving noncash welfare benefits who have children under the age of because child care costs can make up an especially large share of wages for these workers with low wages. Based on State-level data from ChildCare Aware the combined hourly child care cost for two children ( one infant and one four-year-old ) exceeded the minimum wage in States. These child care costs can thus substantially reduce the reward for work for those with low wages and potentially eliminate the reward for work altogether for those with multiple children requiring care. Work requirements may be insufficient in this context for stimulating parents to seek employment. The Trump Administration has mitigated these work disincentives by substantially bolstering child care programs for low-income families. In Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | the CCDBG was increased by $ billion and this increase was sustained in The Child Care and Development Fund which includes CCDBG and other funds distributed a total of $ billion to States to offer child care subsidies to low-income families who require child care in order to work go to school or enroll in training programs. In addition Federal child care assistance is offered through TANF Head Start and other programs. In addition to these direct forms of child care assistance both SNAP and housing assistance programs already provide significant potential child care assistance that is automatically available to all families that are induced to work via any future expanded work requirements in these programs. This is because both programs allow recipients to deduct child care expenses from their income when determining benefit levels. For every $ spent on child care a child care expense deduction provides families with a child care subsidy ( in the form of food or housing benefits ) equal to the rate at which benefits phase out with income as long as their income does not exceed its eligibility limits. The phasing-out rate ranges from $ to $ per $ in income for SNAP and is about $ for the rental housing assistance programs. For families enrolled in both SNAP and a housing program the deduction can be taken for both programs creating a combined subsidy of about $ to $ for every $ spent on child care. Of course one limitation of these child care subsidies is that they can not exceed the total benefit received and families are still subject to gross income tests which can be important given that families may deduct housing and medical expenses in SNAP as well. Rewarding work. In addition to child care policies that support work rewarding work via the EITC was a central component of efforts in the 1990s to make work pay and has been highly successful in increasing work and reducing welfare receipt among single mothers ( Eissa and Liebman ; Ellwood ; Meyer and Rosenbaum ; Grogger ) The EITC was established under the Tax Reduction Act of and it was made permanent in The maximum EITC benefit remained small until several expansions during the late 1980s and early 1990s. In the maximum annual credit was $ for a family with three or more children $ for a family with two children $ for a family with one child and $ for a family without children. About half the States supplement these Federal credits with their own State EITC. The EITC incentivizes work because it is available only to tax units with earnings. Starting with the first $ earned the Federal EITC increases by between $ and $ for families with children and by $ for those without children. EITC benefits are phased in with each $ in earnings until reaching a plateau and eventually the EITC is phased out as earnings increase further. For an unmarried adult with two children the EITC is phased in until earnings reach $ and is phased out starting when earnings reach $ with the EITC fully phased out at earnings of $ As shown in figure the EITC is | Chapter Figure Earned Income Tax Credit Schedule by Number of Children and Filing Type Tax Year Unmarried with no children Married filing jointly with no children Unmarried with two children Married filing jointly with two children Credit ( dollars ) Annual Income ( dollars ) Source : Internal Revenue Service. phased out at a somewhat higher level of earnings for married couples reflecting the fact that both parents may earn income. Despite the success of the EITC in encouraging work among single mothers during welfare reform there are limitations on the effectiveness of further expansions for families. The current maximum EITC is already high for families with children which means that the benefits must be phased out over a substantial range of income. This can result in high implicit tax rates for single mothers moving from part-time to full-time work and can discourage work by second earners in married couples ( see CEA ) Chetty Friedman and Saez ( ) find evidence of decreased work effort in the phase-out region of the EITC and Eissa and Hoynes ( ) find that second earners in married couples work less in the phase-out region as well. Though the overall employment effect of the EITC is still likely positive further expansions of the EITC could exacerbate these issues. The EITC for childless adults is much less generous with a maximum benefit of just over $ so modest expansions would not have the same effect on implicit tax rates faced by families with children whose higher EITC benefits must be phased out over a larger range of earnings. However the ability of EITC expansions to promote work by focusing on childless adults may nonetheless be limited. First as seen in table the majority of nondisabled Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | working-age adults receiving benefits from Medicaid SNAP and housing assistance programs have children so EITC expansions for those without children would affect a smaller segment of the welfare caseload. Second childless adults receive lower maximum benefits from welfare programs due to their smaller family sizes and as a result their benefits fully phase out sooner and so their implicit tax on work is lower. This suggests that additional incentives to join the workforce may have less of an impact. In fact a recent randomized controlled trial that provided an expanded EITC-type benefit of up to an extra $ annually to low-income childless adults found a relatively modest 1.9-percentage-point effect on work participation ( Miller et al. ) Third childless adults in general have high employment rates and so most of the cost of an expanded EITC for childless adults would go toward those who are already working leading some to reduce their number of hours worked. Thus an expanded EITC for childless adults may ultimately not be a cost-effective way to increase the workforce participation of nondisabled adults receiving noncash welfare benefits. However the CTC is not restricted to low- or-moderate income families and thus it avoids some of the issues with further expansions of the EITC. The CTC was first established in and was then expanded in Like the EITC the CTC is only provided to families with earnings although the CTC requires the presence of children under ( who have Social Security numbers ) Through the maximum CTC was $ per child with no limit on the number of children a family could claim. As long as a family s Federal income tax liability exceeded the number of dependent children multiplied by $ it received this full amount for example a family with two children that had a tax liability of at least $ received a $ credit. The CTC also had a refundable portion the Additional Child Tax Credit that provided a refundable credit worth up to percent of earned income above $ up to a maximum of $ per dependent. Unlike the EITC the CTC did not phase out until much higher levels of earnings. In it first began to phase out at $ of income for unmarried filers and at $ for joint filers. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) substantially expanded the CTC. Relative to the TCJA ( ) doubles the per-child nonrefundable credit from $ to $ ; ( ) increases the maximum refundable portion from $ to $ per dependent ; ( ) phases in the refundable portion beginning at $ instead of $ of earned income ; and ( ) increases the income level at which the CTC begins to phase out to $ ( from $ ) for unmarried filers and $ ( from $ ) for joint filers. Figure illustrates how these changes affect the combined ACTC and CTC for a single parent with two children. For any given level of earnings above $ the reward for work from the combined credit is higher. For example in a single mother with two children who earns between $ and $ a year would receive $ more under the TCJA than under the previous law. If she earns $ a year ( or | Chapter Figure Child Tax Credit for a Family With Two Children Unmarried and Married Parents Under the the Previous Law and Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) Credit ( dollars ) Unmarried TCJA Married TCJA Married or unmarried previous law Annual income ( dollars ) Sources : Internal Revenue Service ; Open Source Policy Center ( n.d. ) ; CEA calculations. Note : The combination of the Child Tax Credit and the Additional Child Tax Credit is shown. hours per week for weeks earning $ per hour ) she would receive $ more. At $ in earnings she would receive $ more. With earnings of $ or more she would receive an additional $ ( until entering the phase-out range ) Although other tax provisions also changed under the TCJA the overall reward for work is higher than under the previous law. For example a single mother with two children and $ ( $ ) in earnings received $ ( $ ) more in than in ( Open Source Policy Center n.d. ) The expanded CTC under the TCJA substantially increases the reward for full-time full-year work for nondisabled working-age adults on noncash welfare programs without exacerbating strong work disincentives for unmarried part-time workers and second earners in the vast majority of families. Part-time work at low wages by unmarried adults receives only a small additional reward although the EITC already provides substantial benefits in these cases. In addition the greater reward for work from the expanded CTC would complement expanded work requirements in noncash welfare programs. Mead ( ) argues that the success of the EITC expansions in the 1990s was due to work requirements that ensured people initially entered the workforce and then received higher EITC benefits that rewarded work and hence ensured that they remained there. Similarly the expanded CTC under the TCJA could most effectively draw more nondisabled working-age adults on noncash welfare Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | programs into full-time full-year work to the extent that work requirements in these programs are also further expanded. Benefits for Children In addition to encouraging work among nondisabled working-age welfare recipients requiring supporting and rewarding work may benefit children living in families with parents who are subject to these reforms. Evidence from randomized controlled trials on welfare reforms in the 1990s suggests that when programs required work but offered no additional financial incentives children s academic achievement was unaffected but when work requirements were paired with additional financial incentives children s outcomes improved ( Morris et al. ; Duncan Morris and Rodrigues ) Meanwhile research shows that tax credits that link benefits to work significantly improve child outcomes. The EITC leads to improved test scores educational attainment adult employment and infant health ( Dahl and Lochner ; Chetty et al. ; Hoynes Miller and Simon ; Manoli and Turner ; Michelmore and Bastian ) In an extensive review of the literature on the EITC Nichols and Rothstein ( ) note that there is robust evidence of quite large effects of the EITC on children s academic achievement compared with the relatively small estimates of effects of family income on student outcomes that come from non-EITC settings. In explaining why the EITC may lead to larger improvements in child outcomes than those due to housing assistance Jacob Kapustin and Ludwig ( ) suggest one reason for the discrepancy could be that the EITC simultaneously provides income and encourages adult employment potentially exposing children to higher-quality child care environments at early ages. Consistent with these positive effects on childhood outcomes welfare reform during the 1990s tended to increase resources available for consumption among affected families. Meyer and Sullivan ( ) find that after welfare reform consumption increased ( or at least did not decrease ) among singlemother families across the distribution even for those in the bottom decile of consumption. Moreover Meyer and Sullivan ( ) find that consumption by single mothers appears to have increased more than consumption by single women without children and married women with children groups that were less affected by welfare reform. This suggests that welfare reform served to reduce material hardship or at least did not increase it. These reductions in material hardship have persisted with Meyer and Sullivan ( 2012b ) estimating that consumption-based poverty rates among single-parent families fell from percent in to percent in to percent in and down to percent in The actions taken by the Trump Administration that promote work among low-income Americans could thus both increase work among nondisabled working-age adults and improve child outcomes. Expanding work | Chapter requirements for childless adults increasing child care assistance for lowincome families and increasing tax-based rewards for work among adults with children in combination with strong economic growth are already bringing more nondisabled working-age adults into the workforce and at the same time reducing reliance on welfare programs. Further progress could be achieved by expanding work requirements in noncash welfare programs to additional groups of nondisabled working-age adults including those with children who make up the majority of these recipients as described in the report Expanding Work Requirements in Non-Cash Welfare Programs ( CEA ) These efforts will help ensure that progress in reducing poverty based on modern standards of material hardship will increasingly be achieved by helping nondisabled working-age adults increase their earnings through work. Conclusion President Lyndon B. Johnson declared a War on Poverty in Based on standards of material hardship his War on Poverty is largely over and has been a success. Limitations in both the OPM and the SPM that the Census Bureau produces each year make them incapable of fully capturing this success. When we use a new FPM that is anchored to standards and that thus includes the full impact of government taxes and transfers ( both cash and in-kind including the market value of health insurance ) ; that better accounts for inflation by using the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index ; and that uses the household instead of the family as the sharing unit we find that the poverty rate declined from percent in to percent in This is far more than the decline from to percent that the OPM reports for the same period. Of course the FPM would count a larger share of Americans as poor if it increased the standards of material hardship to reflect economic growth since However the task of establishing these new poverty thresholds is the responsibility of elected policymakers rather than researchers. Although the War on Poverty was successful in reducing material hardship it did not do so through increases in self-sufficiency as President Johnson envisioned. Rather it was substantial increases in the availability and generosity of government transfers to households in the bottom part of the income distribution that lifted nondisabled working-age people out of poverty. The proportion of nondisabled working-age adults ( age ) living in a household that receives welfare benefits ( AFDC/TANF food stamps / SNAP housing assistance and Medicaid ) increased from percent in to percent in whereas growth in their work rates began to reverse after This decline in self-sufficiency has resulted in the situation today where millions of nondisabled working-age adults receive these welfare benefits while not working. Reducing Poverty and Increasing Self-Sufficiency in America | A new war on poverty should focus on reducing material hardship ( based on modern standards that are explicitly determined by policymakers ) through work for nondisabled working-age people whenever possible. The highly successful welfare reforms during the 1990s that required supported and rewarded work can serve as a model for current efforts. The Trump Administration has taken important actions along these lines strengthening work requirements in noncash welfare programs ; increasing child care assistance for low-income families ; and increasing the reward for full-time full-year work as part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of by increasing the Child Tax Credit. Additional progress could be achieved by further expanding work requirements in noncash welfare programs such as food stamps / SNAP and Medicaid including for nondisabled working-age adults with children. | Chapter x Chapter The Year in Review and the Years Ahead Economic growth increased again during After growing by about percent during the four quarters of both and economic growth increased to percent during and then picked up again to percent at a compound annual rate during the first three quarters of compared with the Administration s forecast of percent for the four quarters of On the demand side much of the faster growth during these past two years was accounted for by investment and ( to a lesser extent ) by net exports offsetting slightly slower growth in residential investment and State and local government. Consumer spending growth edged slightly lower from percent in to percent through : Q3 at an annual rate. On the supply side the rise in growth ( during the first three quarters of relative to average growth after the : Q4 business cycle peak ) was accounted for by slightly higher growth in real output per hour a stabilization of the labor force participation rate after a protracted period of decline a lengthening of the workweek and further increases in the employment share of the labor force more than offsetting a decline in population growth. By the fourth quarter the unemployment rate had fallen to percent the lowest quarterly rate since Nominal average hourly earnings increased by percent during the months of up from a percent year-earlier rate and percent average annual rate during the business cycle expansion from : Q3 through : Q4. The percent annualized growth in real gross domestic product ( GDP ) during the first three quarters of exceeded consensus expectations for the second year in a row. Blue Chip Economic Indicators December survey forecasted growth of only percent during the four quarters of The unemployment rate fell another percentage point to percent ( fourth quarter to fourth quarter ) Over the course of the economy added million nonfarm jobs averaging per month with sizable job gains in most of the major sectors. It is unusual for jobs to increase at this rate nine years into an economic expansion. Labor productivity growth in the nonfarm business sector rose from a pre Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) expansion average of percent to percent at an annual rate during the first three quarters of In addition although the labor force participation rate has risen slightly overall and among prime-age workers specifically long-term trends in overall participation due to the aging Baby Boom generation will require fresh policy actions to offset ( such as those discussed in chapter of this Report ) In this chapter we also report on the Administration s progress in toward achieving the five pillars of U.S. trade policy as enumerated by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative ( USTR 2018a ) in its Annual Report : supporting our national security strengthening the U.S. economy negotiating better trade deals aggressively enforcing U.S. trade laws and reforming the multilateral trading system. Acknowledging both upside and downside risks the Trump Administration s policy-inclusive forecast ( which assumes full implementation of the Administration s economic agenda ) is for real GDP to grow at an average annual rate of percent during the years between and As noted in the Economic Report of the President and in chapter of this Report we expect growth to moderate slightly after as the capital-to-output ratio approaches its new post-TCJA steady state and as the effects of the TCJA s personal income tax provisions on the rate of growth dissipate leaving a permanent positive level effect. This moderation will be partially offset however by the supply-side effects of the assumed enactment of new deregulatory actions and infrastructure investment. With growth moderating in the latter half of the budget window from percent in to percent in the | Chapter Administration expects unemployment to rise to a natural rate of percent which will also maintain price stability. G rowth during both and surpassed expectations as shown in figure In January the Blue Chip consensus forecast for fourth quarter to fourth quarter growth of real GDP was percent in both and while the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) projected growth of and percent respectively. Actual real GDP growth during and annualized growth during the first three quarters of was and percent respectively. Consider the expenditure-side components of real GDP in turn : During the first three quarters of real consumer spending grew at a percent annual rate similar to the percent pace during Real disposable personal income grew at a percent annual rate and the saving rate was roughly flat from : Q1 to : Q3. Business fixed investment grew percent at an annual rate through : Q3 up from percent during and up from only percent during Private nonresidential fixed investment contributed almost one-third of GDP growth rising from a pre-TCJA expansion average of percentage point to percentage point. Residential investment fell percent at an annual rate during the first three quarters of retracing some of the year-earlier gain. Inventory investment added percentage point to average growth during the first three quarters of and accounted for much of the quarterly fluctuations in GDP with a large : Q3 contribution which was partially offset by negative contributions in : Q2. Government purchases added percentage point to overall GDP growth during the first three quarters of with nearly half of this accounted for by State and local purchases and half by defense purchases. Exports contributed percentage point to real GDP growth during the first three quarters of a notable increase from the average contribution of percentage point in the years Over the course of the U.S. economy added million nonfarm jobs averaging per month up from per month during By : Q4 the unemployment rate had fallen to percent the lowest quarterly rate since and down percentage point since : Q4. The unemployment rate for African Americans was down percentage points during the months through December to percent. The yearly average unemployment rate of percent for African Americans was the lowest rate recorded in a series that began in The annual average labor force participation rate has ticked up under President Trump to percent from percent in an improvement in contrast to a general pattern of decline since The influences responsible The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Evolution of Blue Chip Consensus Forecasts for Real GDP Growth during the Four Quarters of and forecast forecast forecast Percent change ( Q4-to-Q4 ) Feb-19 Sep. Mar. Sep. Mar. Sep. Mar. Month when the forecast was published Source : Blue Chip Economic Indicators. for the past decline in the participation rate include the retirement of Baby Boom generation cohorts an atypically slow recovery from the recession and government policies that discouraged participation ( see chapter of this Report and Mulligan ) The stabilization of the participation rate during the years with a modest uptick toward the end of reflects a tightening labor market that is bringing people off the sidelines and offsets the continued transition into retirement of peak Baby Boom cohorts. Administration policies to promote labor market reskilling as well as marginal personal income tax rate reductions under the TCJA have likely complemented the tightening labor market to promote higher participation. Most of the key inflation measures increased slightly during from below the Federal Reserve s target of percent as measured by the Personal Consumption Expenditures ( PCE ) Price Index to rates roughly in line with this target. The PCE and core PCE ( excluding volatile food and energy ) price indices rose by and percent over the months ending in November up from and percent during respectively. As measured instead by the core Consumer Price Index ( CPI ) inflation increased to percent during the months of from a year-earlier rate of percent. Market-based measures of inflation expectations show that inflation is expected to remain at roughly its current pace. | Chapter The small uptick in inflation during the past year is notable because it was accompanied by low and declining unemployment. Factors that have kept inflation low include low import prices and confidence in the Federal Reserve s ability to hit its target. Real average hourly earnings of nonfarm private sector employees rose by percent during the months through December deflating by the CPI inflation measure as nominal wage growth continued to exceed the subdued pace of price inflation which was more than double the percent real wage gain during and When measuring inflation using the PCE Price Index real average hourly earnings rose slightly faster ( by percent ) during the months through November Challenges in the labor market remain for and the longer term including increased opioid dependence the improving but still low rate of labor productivity and real wage growth and downward pressure on the labor force participation rate from demographic shifts ( see chapter ) However these challenges may be confronted with good policymaking regarding tax reform work requirements expanding labor market opportunities and deregulation. Capital deepening a key driver of labor productivity has improved during the past year in response to the last year s tax bill the TCJA. Meanwhile though demographics are a principal determinant of long-run trends in labor force participation much can be done to support rising participation for specific age groups. Policy has reduced participation in the past and many of these changes are reversible. For example as demonstrated in chapters and of this Report policies designed to mitigate the demand-side effects of rising unemployment during the Great Recession and other structural factors such as geographic immobility have had persistently negative effects on the labor supply of both prime-age and young adults. Recent policy proposals such as proposed work requirements for some public benefits can help reverse these negative effects. Assuming full implementation of the President s economic agenda the Administration projects real GDP to grow by percent during the four quarters of and by percent in the long term. After a further near-term decline the long-term unemployment rate is projected to gradually rise to a natural rate of percent while inflation as measured by the chained price index for GDP is expected to remain stable at its current rate of about percent. Yields on 10-year Treasury notes are expected to rise from the projected yield of percent in to historically more normal levels of or percent during the decade of the 2020s. Output Real GDP grew by percent at a compound annual rate through the first three quarters of a pace that if sustained through the end of the year would mark the fastest four-quarter growth in any calendar year since Real The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | gross domestic output an average of GDP and gross domestic income grew at a similar percent annual rate during the first three quarters of up from percent during the four quarters of Most of the growth during the first three quarters of can be attributed to strong increases in consumer spending business fixed investment and government spending. These were somewhat offset by declines in residential investment and net exports. Consumer Spending Consumer spending was the major demand-side contributor to real GDP growth during not because it grew especially rapidly but because it constitutes percent of real GDP. Real consumer spending grew at roughly the same rate ( percent at an annual rate ) as disposable income ( percent ) so the personal saving rate changed little ( on net ) from : Q4 to : Q3 ( figure ) One noteworthy development in was the huge upward revision in the saving rate. In July the Commerce Department s revision of the National Income and Product Accounts showed that the previously released saving rate almost doubled from percent to percent ( also shown in figure ) Small revisions extend back historically but revisions of percentage point or more affected data from forward and upward saving rate revisions of about percentage points affected data from to For the period large upward revisions to proprietors income were almost entirely attributable to revised estimates of the misreporting of nonfarm proprietors income based on IRS data which exceed $ billion for ( BEA ) For the huge upward revision of percentage points resulted from both proprietors income and new administrative data for wages and salaries collected through the unemployment insurance tax system. The prerevision saving rate data might have been viewed as worrisome because it suggested that the saving rate was falling to such a low level that it constrained the growth of consumer spending. The large upward revision dispelled that view. Real consumer spending grew at a pace similar to that of real income during so that the saving rate was little changed during the four quarters of the year. The real wages and salaries component of income tends to track real spending well as was the case in and During the first three quarters of for example real wage and salary income grew by percent at a compound annual rate while real consumer spending grew by percent. In addition to income consumer spending was supported by strong consumer sentiment a declining ratio of debt service payments to disposable personal income through : Q3 improving access to credit and continued gains in wealth. During the first three quarters of growth was strong for real household purchases of goods which grew at a percent annualized rate while | Chapter  $ "    * )  '    $ ) "    /  Percentage of disposable personal income   / ./  * ./ 0'4  $ $ * )  0'4  $ $ * )  *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $  * /    /   ! *  / #  0'4  $ $ * )    / # * " #     #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * ) service purchases grew moderately by percent. Consumer sentiment increased in ( figure ) During the two major indices of consumer sentiment reached their highest quarterly averages since The Conference Board Index increased faster during partly because it includes a question on employment expectations while the University of Michigan s overall Consumer Sentiment Index does not. Household wealth peaked at a value equivalent to years of income in : Q3 the highest household wealth-to-income ratio since records began in However a nearly percent drop in the stock market during : Q4 lowers our end-of-year wealth-to-income ratio estimate below year-earlier levels. Despite a net decline during the past four quarters the wealth-to-income ratio is predicted to remain high from a historical perspective ( figure ) Consumer spending tends to move up and down in parallel with wealth as seen in the positively correlated co-movement of wealth and consumption in figure And so one might have expected the increases in the consumption rate during and to be in parallel with the rising wealth-toincome ratio. In contrast the consumption rate remained roughly flat from through : Q3. It could be argued therefore that the predicted : Q4 level of wealth ( despite the projected declines during that quarter ) could have supported a higher level of consumer spending relative to income ( or equivalently a lower saving rate ) than observed during Or viewed The Year in Review and the Years Ahead |  $ "   * ) (   ) / $ ( ) /  Index ( = )   * ) (   ) / $ ( ) /  )    ) $ $ /4  * !   $  # $ "  )   * ) (   * ) ! $  )   )    * ) ! )    *    *    ) $ $ /4  * !   $  # $ "  )   * ) ! )    *          '  '  / $ * )  * /   #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * )  $ "    * ) ( +/ $ * )   )     '/ #   '  / $  / *   $ *   '   * )  '  )  * (     Ratio to annual DPI Years of DPI   * /  '  ) /  '/ # $ " # /  $  * ) ( +/ $ * ) ' ! /   $  / # * $ ) "   '/ # $ " # /   $  / *  &  (  -& /   '/ # $ " # /   $  *      '      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /   #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * )  The     ./ $ (  /   the     /   ! * (  / #  '  / ./   $ '4  * ( * ) / # '4    /   | Chapter another way the historically high level of the wealth-to-income ratio ( seen in figure ) can be expected to buffer whatever negative effects might ensue from the predicted : Q4 decline in wealth so that it would have only a small negative effect on consumer spending this year. For a discussion of investment in see chapter of this Report Evaluating the Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Government Purchases Real government purchases Federal State and local consumption plus gross investment contributed percentage point to real GDP growth through the third quarter of up from and percentage point in and respectively ( figure ) Real Federal purchases increased by percent through : Q3 at an annual rate up from percent growth during Defense purchases defense consumption and gross investment which grew by percent during the same period accounted for nearly all of the faster growth of real Federal purchases. The growth of defense purchases partially offset several years of declining real defense capital stock. State and local government purchases consumption plus gross investment contributed percentage point to real GDP growth during the first three quarters of growing percent over this time frame after falling percent during State and local purchases as a share of nominal GDP fell from their historical peak of percent in to percent in and as State and local governments curtailed spending in the face of budget pressures. Even so State and local government purchases as a share of nominal GDP have exceeded the Federal share since ( figure ) State and local governments employ about percent of nonfarm workers and added jobs during Net Exports Real U.S. exports of goods and services rose by percent at an annual rate during the first three quarters of a strong growth rate but down from percent in the largest four-quarter rate of growth since Exports contributed percentage point at an annual rate to real GDP growth during the three quarters through : Q3 ( figure ) The pickup of U.S. export growth during and the slower growth in reflected the pattern of growth among our trading partners with relatively synchronized global growth in succeeded by evident decoupling in when U.S. growth increased while foreign growth slowed. Meanwhile real U.S. imports increased by percent at an annual rate during the first three quarters of faster than exports. The Year in Review and the Years Ahead |  $ "   * ) ( ) /   #        #  * !   * ( $ )  '      Percent  * /  '     '  /  /   )   ' *   '    '   ! )    '  ) * )  ! )  *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /   #   $ ) "   ) * /    $ * )  $ "    * ) /- $  0/ $ * )  * !   /   * -/.  / *       '       * 2/ #  Percentage points ( annual rate )  *     * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /   * ) /- $  0/ $ * )     * ( +0/  $ ) "   / *    #  ) "   +/  ! *   # $  #    / # * " #   | Chapter The Trade Year in Review This section reviews trade activities in First it looks at U.S. trade policy during the year. Second it discusses two global safeguards imposed to temporarily protect domestic industries from imports. Third it examines major trade actions aimed at reducing imports of steel and aluminum to address the national security issues resulting from such imports. Fourth it considers the year s largest trade action : the imposition of import tariffs on $ billion in goods from China. Fifth it explains how the United States successfully updated its trade agreement with South Korea and modernized its agreement with Mexico and Canada. And sixth it presents a case study of how the U.S. decided to withdraw from the Universal Postal Union reflecting the Administration s vision of how to best advance our Nation s interests. U.S. Trade Policy in After decades of underperforming trade deals that put American families and businesses at a disadvantage President Trump has been clear that he intends to pursue free fair and reciprocal trade for the United States and its workers. In the Trump Administration made strides toward realizing his vision for the future of American and global trading relations a vision in which he stands up for American workers and actively responds to economic competitors that do not adhere to international trading norms. The Administration s trade policy rests on five pillars as enumerated by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative ( USTR 2018a ) in its Annual Report : supporting our national security strengthening the U.S. economy negotiating better trade deals aggressively enforcing U.S. trade laws and reforming the multilateral trading system. Table provides a timeline of major events for the primary trade policy actions in that are discussed in this section. In keeping with the pillars laid out by USTR it is worth noting that an economic lens is not well suited to analyze all active trade policy issues. For example reform of the World Trade Organization is a priority for the United States. However the issues there center on transparency the vitality of the negotiating and monitoring functions judicial overreach enforcement publication compliance the willingness of countries to engage in negotiations and issues of legal interpretation. The CEA ( 2018a ) has catalogued some of these structural topics ; they are not raised again here. The changes in the global trading system during the past generation have triggered a reconsideration of policies in the United States and around the world. As a measure of the growing importance of trade the value of imports plus exports as a share of U.S. GDP tripled from to Economic forces have changed historical production patterns and factor allocations. The CEA ( 2018a ) presents a comprehensive review of the benefits of increased trade and The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | the costs that arise as a result particularly the distributional consequences. These effects have triggered a political response that has fueled resolve to address the underlying shifts. Fortunately addressing the issues and pressures facing the global trading system could deliver large and lasting economic net benefits. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) has highlighted the gains from reduced global barriers to trade. Reducing trade barriers in each sector to the lowest levels currently observed in any economy belonging to the Group of Twenty would expand global trade by percent. President Trump s goal of zero tariffs zero nontariff barriers and zero subsidies promises to deliver these and greater gains to American consumers and workers and to other countries around the world. In the Trump Administration took three principal tariff actions that are designed to protect American workers firms and national security. ( These three actions are explained in detail in the next subsections. ) In addition to working with our trading partners to eliminate unfair trading practices the President elected to use tariffs to protect U.S. workers businesses and national security. The tariffs implemented in raised the U.S. average applied tariff by percentage points from percent in January to percent in November Tariffs provide benefits as well as costs. The Federal government benefited from $ billion in revenue collected in from newly imposed tariffs. Revenue was historically a major impetus for tariff policy though it has not been one for more than a century ( Irwin ) In addition to this revenue domestic producers also stand to benefit from price increases supported by tariff protections. Offsetting these benefits are the costs paid by consumers in the form of higher prices and reduced consumption. Foreign exporters also bear some of tariffs economic incidence although the extent varies across products. The foreign incidence is smallest for substitutable products such as commodities. Concurrent with higher tariffs the United States has successfully updated its trade agreements with key trade partners in record time signing a revised U.S. South Korea Free Trade Agreement in September and a new United States Mexico Canada Agreement in November. These agreements include new enforceable rules that promote free fair and reciprocal trade. The many dimensions that modern trade agreements address make the quick timetable of these agreements all the more impressive. The expected long-term gains are substantial for Americans from new trade patterns that are not bedeviled by current problems like weak intellectual property laws and enforcement losses in manufacturing capacity and barriers to expanded exports. In addition the USTR has notified Congress of its intent to enter into negotiations with the European Union and Japan. And the USTR has also notified Congress that it | Chapter intends to begin negotiations with the United Kingdom as soon as it is willing to do so after Brexit resolves issues surrounding future trading relationships. In the remainder of this section the United States trade policy actions are introduced sequentially. First its three tariff actions are discussed. Understanding the differences between these trade actions and how they interacted with one another is key to understanding trade policy in and for years to come as the Administration s agenda progresses. Section : Solar Cells and Large Residential Washing Machines The first major actions in were two global safeguards imposed to temporarily protect domestic industries from imports. These actions proceeded contemporaneously at the request of U.S. firms that petitioned for relief from import competition in with the result that a combination of tariffs and quotas was imposed in late January. Global safeguard investigations are conducted by the U.S. International Trade Commission ( USITC ) under several different legal authorities. The safeguards invoked Section of the Trade Act of a provision that had not been used since when the USITC conducted an investigation into imports of steel products that resulted in the imposition of tariff remedies. In both the solar cells and large residential washing machine cases previous antidumping and countervailing duties had not been effective in part because foreign producers shifted production to countries not subject to duties. In the USITC completed two investigations. First in November an investigation determined that imported crystalline silicon photovoltaic ( CSPV ) cells and modules were a substantial cause of serious injury to the domestic industry.1 Then in December an investigation determined that the imports of large residential washing machines were a substantial cause of serious injury to the domestic industry. The recommendations of the USITC commissioners were submitted to the President who under the statute has substantial discretion in deciding on the ultimate remedy. On January the President decided that tariff rate quotas ( TRQs ) would go into effect days later on February ( FR FR ) The TRQs apply to imports of these goods The investigation included assemblies of cells. A photovoltaic module consists of several photovoltaic cells that are connected together. Similarly a photovoltaic module is an intermediate input used in the construction of a photovoltaic array which is the complete powergenerating unit. The CSPV is not the only solar technology but is the most common and most photovoltaic cells are manufactured using mono- or polycrystalline silicon. A recent report by the CEA ( 2018a ) included a more detailed history of the solar safeguards dispute investigation and remedy. TRQs combine features of both a tariff and a quota. In a TRQ a lower or zero tariff rate applies to imports of the good until some quota quantity is reached after which point imports face a different higher tariff rate. The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | from all countries and last for four years for CSPV cells and modules and three years for washers.3 The purpose of the global safeguard is to provide sufficient temporary relief from import competition in order to allow domestic firms to compete on a level playing field. During previous Administrations tax incentives were offered to developers of renewable electric generation. But the Trump Administration has worked to eliminate these preferences to provide all sources of energy with the same advantage. Demand for CSPV products has historically been quite sensitive to these tax policies which are now lower with the expiration of the production tax credit. As a result after a substantial surge in late CSPV imports fell and prices also fell by percent from January through December The petitioning firm Suniva is currently in bankruptcy while the petition supporter SolarWorld was acquired in April by a competitor SunPower. After the Section action percent fewer foreign washers were imported between February and November compared with the same period in ; industrial production of major electrical household appliances increased by percent between December and ; and the CPI for washers and laundry equipment increased by percent year-over-year in December. Industrial production also includes dryers which are commonly purchased along with washers. The quota for washers was filled on October meaning that the higher out-of-quota rate applied to imports until the quota reset in February No official retaliatory tariffs were announced in response to these Section actions but China did launch a countervailing duty investigation of U.S. sorghum exports three days before both of the U.S. safeguards went into effect. This echoes events in September when China launched an investigation into U.S. exports of chicken the day after a U.S. safeguard tariff was applied to Chinese tires by the Obama Administration. In April China imposed antidumping and countervailing duties of percent on imports of U.S. sorghum ( valued at $ million in May ) but China removed and reimbursed these duties on May days after a U.S. trade delegation met in Beijing and after significant domestic criticism from Chinese sorghum purchasers. Nonetheless while China purchased percent of U.S. sorghum exports in the marketing year ( from September through August ) U.S. sorghum exports to China in the marketing year were down percent and U.S. exporters directed shipments to other markets. In CSPV module imports from all countries faced a tariff of percent while cell imports from all countries faced an in-quota rate of zero and an out-of-quota rate of percent. Washing machines and parts faced in-quota rate of percent and an out-of-quota rate of percent. In both cases the restrictions gradually loosen over the duration of the remedy. The washer safeguard applied to all residential washers not just the large residential washers with a capacity larger than kilograms described in the original petition. | Chapter Section : Steel and Aluminum The second major trade actions of were aimed at reducing imports of steel and aluminum in order to address the threatened impairment of the United States national security caused by such imports. Although the investigations of primary aluminum and steel were separate actions they followed similar and contemporaneous tracks and both resulted in the application of tariffs beginning in March These actions were taken based on the President s authority under Section of the Trade Expansion Act of In April the Department of Commerce initiated investigations into whether imports of steel and primary aluminum threatened to impair U.S. national security. In January Commerce reported to the President that current levels of both steel and primary aluminum imports threaten to impair U.S. national security. In light of this finding President Trump imposed import tariffs of percent on a wide range of aluminum products and also a percent tariff on steel and an array of steel products which became effective March The March tariffs did not apply to a number of countries including major importers and exporters of steel and aluminum like Canada and the members of the European Union as the United States entertained countryspecific alternative arrangements. In May the United States negotiated alternative means to address the threatened impairment to national security caused by imports of steel from Argentina Brazil and South Korea including the imposition of quantitative restrictions on imports of steel from these countries. Argentina and Brazil were able to reach a similar agreement on quantitative restrictions for aluminum though South Korea remained subject to the aluminum tariff. Australia reached an agreement to avoid both the tariff and quota on steel and aluminum. In total the quotas represented percent of U.S. steel and percent of U.S. aluminum imports in Canada Mexico and the EU did not reach a similar agreement and on June a and percent tariff was imposed on steel and aluminum imports respectively. The tariff on Japan went into effect March at the same rates. Concurrently the United States and South Korea agreed to an alternative means to address the threat to national security posed by steel imports from South Korea. As part of the Section agreement imports of steel from South Korea became subject to a quantitative restriction equivalent to percent of U.S. steel imports from South Korea based on an annual average across and The President also determined that the Section actions should have an exclusion process to allow domestic firms to import specific products not available in the United States without paying a tariff. Other domestic producers are able to file objections to exclusion requests claiming that domestic supplies are indeed available. This mechanism provides a means for steel users The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | | Chapter Presidential Proclamations Sorghum AD/CVD for solar investigation and washer by China TRQs under begins Section ( Jan. ) ( Feb. ) Section Commerce Department initiates of Commerce aluminum submits investigation aluminum under Section report ( Apr. ) ( Jan. ) ( Apr. ) ( Jan. ) Department of Commerce Department initiates steel of Commerce investigations submits steel under Section report Section ( June ) Whirlpool files washer petition ( Feb. ) ( May ) Feb. Solar and washer tariffs go into effect Jan. Suniva files solar petition ( Mar. ) Aluminum tariffs go into effect with exemptions Steel tariffs go into effect with exemptions ( Mar. ) Mar. May June July ( June ) ( Apr. ) ( June ) Retaliation by EU ( June ) ( July ) Retaliation by Turkey Retaliation by China Retaliation by Retaliation Mexico by Canada ( June ) are replaced with quotas Exemptions ( June ) Exemptions are replaced with quotas Sorghum Sorghum AD/CVD AD/CVD duties duties imposed by removed by China China ( Apr. ) ( May ) Apr. Table Timeline of Trade Events ( Aug. ) Additional retaliation by Turkey Retaliation by Russia ( Aug. ) ( Aug. ) Rate increases for steel from Turkey Aug. Sep. ( Oct. ) Washer quota filled now subject to percent tariff Oct. Nov. Dec. The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | President Trump informs Congress of intention to renegotiate NAFTA ( May ) ( July ) USTR informs Korea of intention to renegotiate KORUS ( Aug. ) Jan. Feb. Renegotiated KORUS agreement reached in principle ( Mar. ) USTR releases Section Report ( Mar. ) Mar. Apr. May June ( Aug. ) Retaliation on $ billion ( Aug. ) ( July ) Retaliation on $ billion ( July ) U.S. reaches deal in principle with Mexico ( Aug. ) on $ billion Tranche Aug. Tranche on $ billion July U.S. reaches deal in principle with Canada ( Sep. ) ( Sep. ) Re-negotiated KORUS agreement signed ( Sep. ) Retaliation on $ billion ( Sep. ) Tranche on $ billion Sep. Oct. Dec. President Trump announces agreement to delay increases of tariffs on Tranche ( Dec. ) ( Nov. ) USMCA agreement signed Nov. Sources : Council of Economic Advisers using information from the White House Federal Register Office of the U.S. Trade Representative U.S. Customs and Border Protection U.S. Department of Commerce and the World Trade Organization. FTAs Section USTR initiates Section investigation that can not source steel or aluminum domestically to acquire inputs without paying tariffs. Since the tariffs went into effect imports have decreased while production has increased for steel and aluminum. Domestic primary aluminum production increased by percent from March to December while employment in alumina and aluminum production rose by jobs over the same period. From April to November aluminum imports were percent lower than in the same period one year earlier ( before the imposition of tariffs ) U.S. Midwest aluminum prices fell percent between when the tariff actions went in force ( March ) and December In the steel industry production increased by percent from March to December with iron and steel mills and ferroalloy production employment increasing by over the same period. From April to November steel imports were percent lower than in the same period one year earlier. From March to December the producer price index of iron and steel rose percent. In response to U.S. actions under Section Canada China the EU Mexico Russia and Turkey imposed retaliatory tariffs on a total of $ billion of U.S. exports.4 These retaliations were symmetric insofar as they were import tariffs against U.S. exports but they targeted a wide array of products beyond steel and aluminum. However these retaliatory tariffs are being challenged by the United States at the World Trade Organization. Section : China The United States largest trade action of was its imposition of import tariffs on $ billion worth of goods from China in three tranches ( import value ) The tariffs follow a thorough process initiated by the Trump Administration in August when the USTR opened an investigation into Chinese policies and practices regarding technology and intellectual property under Section of the Trade Act of The USTR ( 2018b ) issued a report in March that detailed a variety of unfair Chinese policies and practices : ( ) forced technology transfer from U.S. inventors and companies ; ( ) nonmarketbased terms for technology licenses ; ( ) Chinese state-directed and -facilitated acquisition of strategic U.S. assets ; and ( ) cyber-enabled intrusions into U.S. commercial networks to steal trade secrets for commercial gain. Initial negotiations to address China s policies and practices failed to yield satisfactory outcomes resulting in the United States imposing additional tariffs on $ billion worth of Chinese imports. The first Section action applied an additional percent ad valorem tariffs to Chinese imports worth $ billion in import value and took effect on July A second tranche In addition India announced retaliatory tariffs but has repeatedly delayed numerous implementation dates. Japan has notified the World Trade Organization of its intent to impose retaliatory tariffs but has not produced a list of goods or announced an expected date. | Chapter Box Mitigating Trade Retaliation for Agricultural Producers Under the leadership of President Trump the U.S. Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) launched programs in to assist American farmers who were negatively affected in by retaliatory trade actions. The USDA made direct payments to affected farmers through the Market Facilitation Program subject to payment limits and qualification criteria. Payments were available for producers of corn cotton dairy fresh sweet cherries hogs shelled almonds sorghum soybeans and wheat. Payments were based on production ( except for hog farmers who were compensated based on inventories ) and how much the market for the particular commodity was estimated to be affected by retaliatory tariffs ( USDA 2018a ) The total authorization for this program was $ billion. As of February $ billion has been distributed. The USDA also provided assistance to farmers in the form of direct purchases of pork and beef plus a variety of fruits nuts and vegetables that were negatively affected by retaliatory tariffs. The Food Purchase and Distribution Program will purchase and distribute $ billion worth of agricultural products ( USDA 2018b ) In addition the USDA is providing $ million in trade promotion of agricultural products through the Agricultural Trade Promotion Program. consisted of an additional percent tariffs on a further $ billion in imports from China taking effect on August Rather than changing its practices China announced retaliatory tariffs on U.S. goods. The first and second tranches were met with symmetric responses against $ and $ billion worth of U.S. exports respectively. Notably the first tranche of retaliation included a percent tariff on $ billion worth of U.S. soybean exports the Chinese market represented over percent of total U.S. soybean exports in Soybeans were the largest single product among dozens of agricultural exports targeted ( see box ) The United States subsequently took supplemental tariff action under the authority of Section A third tranche of an additional percent ad valorem tariffs applied to $ billion in import value took effect on September When the third tranche was announced China was unable to retaliate symmetrically on a quantitative basis with import tariffs because China s imports from the U.S. were less than $ billion. However China targeted $ billion in U.S. exports with a range of tariff rates up to percent. After the three tranches of tariffs and retaliation $ billion worth of U.S. exports to China remain unaffected while $ billion worth of imports to the United States have not been targeted with Section tariffs. In December given ongoing negotiations with China the Administration announced a delay in the implementation date for the increase in tariffs on the third tranche of goods which was due to take place on January The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | On December China and the United States agreed to a 90-day period during which to negotiate structural changes with respect to forced technology transfer intellectual property protection and other issues. During this time the United States agreed to delay increasing its tariffs on $ billion worth of Chinese imports from to percent as had been scheduled to occur on January until March Trade Agreements In the United States successfully updated its trade agreement with South Korea and modernized its trade agreement with Mexico and Canada. The Administration also formally announced its intention to enter into negotiations for a trade agreement with the EU and Japan and its wish to initiate negotiations with the United Kingdom as soon as it is ready to do so after it leaves the EU. North America. Canada and Mexico are key U.S. trading partners in the four quarters ending in : Q3 a total of percent of U.S. two-way trade in goods and services was with Canada or Mexico. Canada and Mexico are even more dependent on North American trade with and percent of their total trade in the region respectively. Since the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) has governed trading relationships in the region. Although some contend that NAFTA delivered broad net benefits to the U.S. economy ( Caliendo and Parro ) the benefits were not evenly dispersed and the costs of adjustment fell disproportionately on certain workers such as those in the Upper Midwest with less educational attainment ( Hakobyan and McLaren ) President Trump informed Congress in May of his intention to renegotiate NAFTA. On November President Trump signed the United States Mexico Canada Agreement ( USMCA ) thereby fulfilling his promise to the American people to renegotiate NAFTA. Once passed by Congress USMCA will modernize the rules of trade and create a gold standard for modern provisions such as digital trade intellectual property rights state-owned enterprises and advanced customs procedures. In addition USMCA will rebalance the terms of trade between all three countries to ensure that American workers and businesses across all sectors of the economy manufacturing services and agriculture receive benefits. The centerpiece of USMCA is a revision of the automotive rules of origin provisions that dictate when motor vehicles will be allowed to cross borders tariff free ( see box ) USMCA also makes substantial improvements in many other areas including in labor and environmental protections new disciplines on digital trade and expanded dairy market access. With respect to labor USMCA For a recent study of the impact of rules of origin on trade within NAFTA see Conconi et al. ( ) Rules of origin led to a substantial reduction in the amount of intermediate goods imported by Mexico from nonparty countries. | Chapter Box USMCA and U.S. Auto Manufacturing Under NAFTA a vehicle must be assembled in North America and at least percent of the value of parts must originate in North America to qualify for tariff-free entry. An important loophole is that content can come in from outside the NAFTA members and can be combined with other inputs to become deemed North American content. After the U.S. auto assembly and parts sectors lost market share to NAFTA partners over the past years U.S. negotiators focused on using this provision to help bring back assembly and parts production in the United States. USMCA increases the stringency of the requirement for regional value content from to percent and eliminates the practice of deeming. In addition the content requirement is applied to core parts ( engine transmission chassis axle and steering ) that must also be satisfied. A new requirement pertains to the value of labor inputs. Depending on the type of vehicle or percent of a vehicle s inputs must be made by workers paid at least an average of $ per hour. These new provisions are designed to ensure that the highest-valued parts are made in North America and will protect U.S. workers from lower-wage competition. commits Mexico to adopt legislation recognizing the right of workers to engage in collective bargaining ; and unlike NAFTA the provisions in both labor and environment chapters are enforceable and subject to trade sanctions. USMCA increases Canadian import quotas for U.S. dairy products and also eliminates Canadian milk-pricing rules that limited opportunities for U.S. producers ( see box ) South Korea. The U.S. South Korea Free Trade Agreement ( KORUS ) is a bilateral agreement that entered into force in March At the President s direction the USTR informed South Korea of its intention to amend the KORUS Agreement on July On March the United States and South Korea reached an agreement in principle on KORUS amendments. On September the United States and South Korea signed a revised KORUS Agreement. Among other improvements these revisions sought to achieve a level playing field for automobile trade. One issue of improvement was regulatory harmonization ; the two countries have different safety standards and thus an automobile deemed safe and legal to sell in one country may not be accepted in the other. The amended KORUS gave each automaker exporting from the United States an additional annual quota of vehicles ( doubling the total to units a year ) that are recognized as meeting South Korean safety standards as long as they meet U.S. standards. This improvement provides greater certainty for U.S.-based auto exporters to Korea to further increase sales and exports. The quota is also high enough to accommodate all vehicles exported to South Korea in The update also delayed The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box USMCA and Canadian Dairy Canada has a dairy supply management program that includes milk quotas and price supports for Canadian dairy farmers. A major achievement of USMCA is that it gives U.S. dairy producers an exclusive quota of metric tons for fluid milk by the sixth year of the agreement with a farmgate value of nearly $ million. Under the current system the U.S. producers must compete with producers from many other countries. USMCA also includes greater access for value-added products like cheese cream powdered dairy products and yogurt. A second major breakthrough was Canada s agreement to eliminate milk price classes and which allowed marketing of surplus skimmed milk and milk protein products. Before the creation of class in the value of annual U.S. exports to Canada of powdered milk components was over $ million. USMCA restores the Canadian export market for these powdered milk products and helps reduce low-priced Canadian surplus products from competing with U.S. dairy products in the global marketplace. The increased access for U.S. dairy products to the Canadian market plus the elimination of Canadian milk price classes and could increase the value of annual exports of U.S. dairy products to Canada by over $ million by year six of the agreement. the date on which Korean light trucks would enter the U.S. duty free pushing it back from to U.S. tariffs were to begin to fall starting in reaching duty free in New agreements. Building on these successes the Trump Administration is seeking more new trade agreements that will help American workers and U.S. commerce. On October the Administration notified Congress of its intent to enter into free trade agreement negotiations with Japan and the EU and with the U.K. These agreements could benefit the United States through reducing trade barriers in several areas including agriculture manufacturing and services. For example in agriculture Japan imposes a variable system of tariffs on pork imports with rates as high as $ per pound ; for beef Japanese tariffs range from to percent. A number of international competitors such as Australia face much lower Japanese tariffs so a free trade agreement with Japan could level the playing field for U.S. exporters. For the EU there are a number of nontariff barriers that impede trade. Beyond agriculture other tariffs and nontariff barriers stand in the way of U.S. goods and services exports to Japan. For the U.S. a number of nontariff barriers impede trade. Arita Mitchell and Beckman ( ) estimate that removing even a subset of agricultural barriers could increase U.S. exports to the EU by $ billion compared with the baseline. Negotiations with the EU will also focus on making rules for | Chapter standards and product testing fairer and reciprocal. Finally depending on the terms of Brexit negotiations with the U.K. could also further open that market to American goods and services. Case Study : The Universal Postal Union The United States had been a member of the Universal Postal Union ( UPU ) since its founding in ; but in October the U.S. submitted notice of its intention to withdraw from the organization.7 This action reflects the Administration s priority of achieving a U.S. role in the international postal system consistent with the vision articulated in the August Presidential Memorandum a vision that would advance the interests of the U.S. alongside those of a number of other countries. The historic nature of the set of reforms to the international postal system to be undertaken by the U.S. in reflects the historic nature of the changes in the economics of the international postal system that have occurred in recent years. These reforms are poised to occur through steps taken by the U.S. upon its exit from the UPU in October In the event that the UPU passes reforms that fully reflect the principles of the Presidential Memorandum before then however the U.S. could achieve its objectives without withdrawing. The U.S. therefore stands poised to adopt a remuneration system for items likely to contain goods that consist of nondiscriminatory self-declared rates that do not favor foreign mailers over domestic mailers or postal operators over nonpostal operators. The only question is the compatibility of this achievement with U.S. membership in the UPU. The United States commitment to ensuring the provision of the benefits that the UPU originally intended to deliver at the time of its founding in has not changed. However developments in the state of technology and the global economy have in recent years upended the economics of the international postal system. These changes have resulted in the UPU s terminal dues remuneration system imposing net costs on the national economies of certain member countries including the United States. Although the costs imposed by the UPU s remuneration system for items likely to contain goods have in recent years increased for the U.S. the costs of exiting the UPU have decreased. As a result the costs of U.S. membership in the UPU relative to its benefits has trended upward. In the spirit of the Nobel Prize winning economist Milton Friedman s admonition against the evaluation of policies and programs by their intentions rather than results the Administration s approach to the U.S. role in the international postal system reflects its prioritization of the results that the international postal system delivers. The emergence of substitutes for some of the services provided by the UPU has lowered the cost of U.S. withdrawal from the organization. Technological This subsection was first published by the Council of Economic Advisers in January The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | change has created these substitutes. For example the very first article of the Treaty of Bern that is the UPU s foundation underscores the goal of creating of a single postal territory for the reciprocal exchange of correspondence between their post-offices. One plausible substitute for this function email is estimated to generate over $ in value per year for the median consumer and is available to anyone with access to the Internet at a typical marginal cost of zero ( Brynjolfsson Eggers and Gannameneni ) A single substitute for the exchange of correspondence then appears to generate annual economic value for today s median consumer in excess of the entirety of real U.S. GDP per capita in ( Bolt et al. ) Analysis of the international postal sector corroborates a direct link between global decline in volumes of letters since and the rise of technology like email ( Copenhagen Economics ) Due to technology then the exchange of correspondence across international borders could occur for the roughly percent of American adults who use the Internet without access to the UPU s single postal network ( Anderson Perrin and Jiang ) This decreases the cost of a prospective exit from the UPU relative to a world where services like email could not substitute for international mail s role in facilitating the exchange of correspondence. Although the costs of an exit from the UPU have decreased the costs attributable to its remuneration system for items likely to contain goods have not. The UPU s existing terminal dues remuneration system determines the rates ( i.e. prices ) that one country s designated postal operator receives from a foreign postal operator for completing the delivery of mail originating in the foreign country. But these prices do not under the status quo need to have any relationship to either the cost that the designated postal operator incurs for completing the delivery or to the prices that it would charge a domestic mailer ( i.e. customer of the postal service ) for completing similar services. This creates conditions ripe for prices deviating from what they would be in the world of unrestricted and undistorted competition in the provision of international postal services envisioned in the August Presidential Memorandum. Under the status quo for instance foreign mailers can pay prices that are a fraction of those offered to U.S. producers for delivering the same goods between the same two places by the U.S. Postal Service ( Fountain and Malone ; Navarro ) Instead the scope of the economic costs that the terminal dues remuneration system could impose has increased due to the increase in volumes of goods transiting the international postal stream in recent years ( Copenhagen Economics ) With the introduction of goods into the international postal stream distortions in the pricing of international postal services created by the UPU s remuneration system can impose costs on producers and consumers that do not transact directly with any postal operator. These distortions in the pricing of international postal services for items likely to contain goods would be expected like any set of price distortions to lead to the types of | Chapter misallocations of the factors of production that lower standards of living in both developed and developing countries ( e.g. Jones ; Restuccia and Rogerson ) If by contrast the international mail were to consist exclusively of letters ( i.e. correspondence ) these distortions of prices within the postal sector would affect only the postal operators and mailers of letters directly involved in postal transactions. The rise of e-commerce allows these price distortions within the postal sector to impose burdens on actors throughout the global economy. According to one survey of e-commerce consumers in countries percent of cross-border goods purchased online are of the type that would be subject to the terminal dues system if delivered by a designated postal operator ( International Postal Corporation ) Any economics textbook would lead to the conclusion that these distortions in the price of shipping in a competitive e-commerce market induce additional distortions in underlying economic activity. First these differences in consumer prices could influence and distort outcomes within the e-commerce sector in which the sensitivity of consumer demand to price differences can exceed its sensitivity during bricks-andmortar shopping ( e.g. Ellison and Ellison ) Second any distortions in the prices of e-commerce goods could induce substitution toward online and away from offline retail vendors. New evidence that consumers have rates of substitution between online and offline vendors comparable to their rates of substitution between offline vendors underscores the plausibility of distortions accruing through this channel ( Dolfen et al. ) And at least some offline establishments appear to generate positive local externalities or spillovers in terms of employment and output ( e.g. Shoag and Veuger ) a condition that would both enlarge the magnitude of the aggregate costs that could be imposed by online/offline substitution and broaden the scope of who bears these costs to include workers and producers even in the nontradable sector. Complementing this retail-specific evidence Barrot and others ( ) demonstrate that the differences in the local exposure to the general import competition generated by differences in shipping costs can affect local employment local output and even household finances.8 A paucity of data on the value of goods transiting the international postal system prevents estimating the aggregate macroeconomic burden imposed by the price distortions that result from the terminal dues system for items likely to contain goods. Nonetheless in the case of the United States the economics of the current U.S. role in the existing terminal dues system permits the inference that these distortions exist and that the incidence of the burden they However the official trade data from the U.S. Census Bureau that inform the approach of Barrot et al. ( ) would not capture information about any goods that enter the U.S. through the international postal system. Barrot et al. ( ) detail the methodology for constructing the data used by Barrot et al. ( ) including the role of official trade statistics from the U.S. Census Bureau. The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | impose could fall on a variety of actors in the tradable and even nontradable sectors. Given the upward trend over time in the share of e-commerce items in the international postal system in the absence of a change to the remuneration system these economic costs of the distortions it imposes would only increase ( Copenhagen Economics ) This Administration s approach to the reform of the terminal dues system though consistent with the spirit of U.S. concerns about the UPU s relationship to marketplace competition in international mail expressed as early as the Reagan Administration reflects the novelty of these developments in the international postal sector s role in economic activity ( Reagan ) The Administration s attempts at terminal dues reform in amounted to a strategy of voice in the canonical exit voice or loyalty economics framework articulated by Hirschman ( ) for rational approaches for the redress of grievances from within an organization. But sufficient progress toward the realization of the vision laid out in the Presidential Memorandum has yet to materialize and per Hirschman ( ) voice and exit can be substitutes as well as complements. If negotiations continue to fail to yield sufficient progress the U.S. stands poised to continue on its path toward an exit from the UPU rather than continue its strategy of voice from within. The vision articulated in the August Presidential Memorandum looks toward the international postal system s future rather than its past. In the UPU s founders spoke of an international organization that would facilitate correspondence around the world. But since the volume of letters transiting the international postal system has trended downward while the volume of items containing goods has trended upward ( Copenhagen Economics ) Developing countries in particular seem to substitute electronic correspondence for letters ( Copenhagen Economics ) Given these changes in the international postal stream and its underlying economics realizing the vision of undistorted and unrestricted competition articulated in the Presidential Memorandum would deliver benefits to both developing and developed countries a reality reflected in the unanimous endorsement of the concerns voiced by the U.S. by the members of the Postal Union of the Americas Spain and Portugal ( ) Other countries including China and the Netherlands seem to favor the UPU embracing a remuneration system for items likely to contain goods that dates to an era when the international mail comprised many fewer goods and many more letters. To minimize the distortions created by postal remuneration policy given the underlying economics of the postal sector the U.S. intends to adopt a system of self-declared and nondiscriminatory rates of remuneration for items likely to contain goods. The U.S. would welcome the opportunity to realize this forward-looking vision for its role in the international postal system as a member of the international postal union that it helped to found. | Chapter Policy Developments Principal developments in the realm of economic policy pertain to fiscal policy and monetary matters. This section considers each in turn with regulatory policy addressed in chapters and of this Report on respectively deregulation energy and banking. Fiscal Policy The most important fiscal policy actions during fiscal year were the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( signed on December ) and the Bipartisan Budget Act of ( BBA ; signed on February ) The tax cut together with the relaxing of the budget caps from the Budget Control Act of resulted in an increase in the Federal deficit in For a discussion of the TCJA see chapter of this Report. For nearly the first six months of the fiscal year ( October March ) Congress funded the Federal government through a string of five short-term continuing resolutions ( CRs ) funding the various budget accounts at the level of the preceding fiscal year. The last of these CRs on February was accompanied by the BBA. This final CR provided funding through March when Congress passed the Consolidated Appropriations Act of which settled the remaining budget issues for The legislation that enacted the first CR of the fiscal year also suspended the debt ceiling from October through December ( when the limit was increased and reset at the debt level on that day ) after which the Treasury resorted to extraordinary measures to keep the government functioning. On February as part of the BBA the debt limit was lifted again for the period through March The Bipartisan Budget Act of which was signed into law by President Trump on February raised the statutory discretionary spending limits imposed by the Budget Control Act of ( BCA ) for two years at the beginning of the budget window offsetting this by extending the mandatory budget sequester by two years later in the budget window ( from to ) For fiscal year ( FY ) the BBA increased the defense limit by $ billion ( to $ billion ) and the nondefense limit by $ billion ( to $ billion ) For FY it increased the defense limit by $ billion ( to $ billion ) and the nondefense limit by $ billion ( to $ billion ) The national defense discretionary spending budgets for FY and FY also include $ billion and $ billion respectively in supplemental funding for Overseas Contingency Operations. The budget caps do not apply to spending designated for these operations or emergency purposes. The BBA also : Included a continuing resolution to fund the government through March because most appropriations to government agencies and programs were set to expire February The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Suspended the debt ceiling until March Granted $ billion in disaster relief funding for areas affected by hurricanes and wildfires. The BBA is the third in a series of discretionary spending cap increases made to the BCA including the Bipartisan Budget Act of and the Bipartisan Budget Act of The BCA the Federal statute that the BBA amended imposed annual statutory discretionary limits on both military and nondefense spending. It also required annual reductions to the initial discretionary spending limits and created automatic mandatory spending reductions ( known as sequestration ) which would be triggered by the absence of a deficit reduction agreement. In the wake of the BBA these sequester rules are scheduled to be reinstated in FY On October the beginning of FY the President signed spending bills for the Departments of Defense Labor Education and Health and Human Services while the rest of the government was funded through more continuing resolutions through December When the CR was not renewed a shutdown of these unfunded Federal departments and agencies began on December and continued through January when Congress and the President agreed to another three-week continuing resolution. During the shutdown s five weeks the CBO ( ) estimated that an average of roughly nonessential Federal employees were furloughed while essential employees worked temporarily without pay. Although legislation to eventually pay the furloughed Federal workers was passed and signed those paychecks were not delivered until the shutdown was over. The cost to the Federal government for work that was paid for but not performed was about $ million per day of the shutdown. The National Income and Product Accounts treat work that is paid for but not performed as a component of nominal GDP but not real GDP. An unknown number of Federal contractors were also furloughed. After factoring in the work missed by Federal contractors the CBO ( ) estimates that real GDP growth was reduced by respectively and percentage point at an annual rate in : Q4 and : Q1. A rebound in growth in : Q2 returns the level of real GDP to its previous path although much of the output lost during the shutdown will not be recovered. As a result of the partial government shutdown real fourth-quarter over fourth-quarter GDP growth is expected to be slightly lower in and slightly higher in relative to the nonshutdown counterfactual. Monetary Policy Before the year began the Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) expected to continue gradually raising the Federal funds rate during with the | Chapter caveat that the precise path of rate hikes would depend on the economy s course especially employment and inflation. In its December forecast the median FOMC participant expected three 25-basis-point rate hikes during which would have elevated the Federal funds rate from the percent range at the end of to the range at the end of ( FOMC 2017b ) Against the backdrop of stronger growth and a lower unemployment rate than expected the FOMC raised rates four times to the percent range. Along the way the FOMC noted that the inflation rate which began the year below its percent target had moved up ; and by May the FOMC began noting that core and overall inflation had moved close to percent ( FOMC 2018a ) In its final meeting of the FOMC signaled that some further rate hikes would likely be appropriate to meet its objectives with the median FOMC participant expecting the Federal funds rate to reach percent ( i.e. two further rate hikes ) by the end of ( FOMC 2018b ) Another dimension of monetary policy during was the reduction of the Federal Reserve s holdings of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities. The Federal Reserve s total holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities peaked at $ trillion during the period of quantitative easing ( ; see figure ) By acquiring these assets ( and taking them off the market ) the Federal Reserve raised the price ( and lowered interest rates ) at these longer maturities. During the interval when these holdings were at or close to their peak ( ) it is estimated that they reduced the yields on 10-year Treasury securities by more than a full percentage point. In June the FOMC announced a plan to reduce these holdings by allowing them to mature without replacement ( FOMC 2017b ) According to this plan initially up to $ billion per month would be allowed to roll off the balance sheet and this upper limit would increase in steps of $ billion per month every three months until it would reach $ billion per month for Treasury securities and $ billion per month for agency mortgage-backed securities. The plan was initiated in October with $ billion per month in securities allowed to mature without replacement. Following the June plan this cap on maturation without replacement was increased by further increments of $ billion per month four times during until it reached its intended plateau of $ billion per month in October By December these holdings of Treasury and agency securities had fallen to $ trillion. The Committee judges that some further gradual increases in the target range for the Federal funds rate will be consistent with sustained expansion of economic activity strong labor market conditions and inflation near the Committee s symmetric percent objective over the medium term ( Federal Reserve ) The Year in Review and the Years Ahead |  $ "   The    '   s   * /  '   /. Dollars ( trillions )    * -/ "  "    &    $ / $  " )     /      $  *      '    *   With this pace of asset reduction operating in the background the FOMC regards changes in the Federal funds rate as its active tool for adjusting the stance of monetary policy.10 Productivity During the postwar period from : Q1 through : Q4 real output per hour of all persons in the nonfarm business sector grew at a compound annual rate of percent. During the current business cycle through : Q4 real output per hour grew at a compound annual rate of just percent or just percent since the start of the expansion in : Q3. During the first three quarters of growth in real output per hour rose to percent at a compound annual rate. As discussed in chapters and of the Economic Report of the President contributing to this slowdown in labor productivity growth was a declining contribution of capital intensity. Whereas during the postwar period through the average contribution of capital intensity to labor productivity growth averaged percentage point during the current cycle through From Jerome Powell s press conference on December : So we thought carefully about this on how to normalize policy and came to the view that we would effectively have the balance sheet runoff on automatic pilot and use monetary policy rate policy to adjust to incoming data ( Federal Reserve 2018c ) | Chapter : Q4 the contribution declined to just percentage point ( to percentage point during the eight full years after the start of the recovery ) In and the five-year average contribution of capital deepening to labor productivity growth actually turned negative for the first time in measured history. The Economic Report demonstrated that this was due in large part to an internationally uncompetitive corporate tax rate that deterred domestic capital formation. By lowering the cost of capital the TCJA was intended to raise demand for capital services and thus capital s contribution to labor productivity growth. The CEA therefore anticipates that as the economy approaches a higher target capital-to-output ratio in response to the TCJA the contribution of capital deepening to labor productivity growth will increase. Inflation Most measures of wage and price inflation increased during with the increase from a too-low level to ones roughly compatible with the Federal Reserve s target of percent inflation for the PCE Chain-Type Price Index. ( For a discussion of wage inflation see chapter of this Report and CEA 2018b. ) The PCE Price Index increased by percent during the months through November ( as shown in figure ) This growth rate was slightly elevated by a percent increase in energy prices. Core PCE inflation which removes volatile components like food and energy prices was percent during the months through November up from percent during Therefore relative to the Federal Reserve s target inflation has increased from a too-low pace to a pace roughly in line with that target. A market-based measure of inflation expectations ( the expected five-year CPI inflation rate five years from now ) shows that inflation is expected to remain near its current pace of percent. The moderate rate of consumer price inflation during is close to year-earlier expectations. For example the December Blue Chip consensus forecast for CPI inflation was percent over the four quarters of ( virtually matching the percent realized value at a compound annual rate through : Q3 ) Though the unemployment rate averaging percent in was a 49-year low the unemployment rate is just one factor affecting the path of inflation. An important factor holding down inflation has been international competition in the form of low import prices relative to U.S. prices. Nonpetroleum import prices have generally fallen during the past five years relative to U.S. prices. Financial Markets During most U.S. equity indices reached all-time highs in September before falling toward the year end ; the yield curve flattened in part due to The Year in Review and the Years Ahead |  $ "    * ) (   $   ) ! '  / $ * )  Percent change ( 12-month )      '    ' * ) " )  *  %  / $  *      * /  '      * (    *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $       '  '  / $ * )  * /       * )  '   * ) ( +/ $ * )   )  $ /0-   $   )  asymmetric monetary policy normalization across advanced economies ; and credit default spreads rose. Oil prices increased in the first half of the year but fell substantially in the second half and ended with the December prices of Brent Crude Oil at $ per barrel down $ from months earlier. In a response to low oil prices the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries agreed in December together with Russia to slice production by million barrels per day with the cuts coming from Saudi Arabia and Russia. The perceived volatility of the financial markets as measured by the Chicago Board Options Exchange s Market Volatility Index ( VIX ) which translates prices for stock options into a measure of volatility more than doubled from December to December though for as a whole the VIX remained below its long-run postwar average. Equity Markets U.S. equity markets fluctuated during peaking around September before falling in December. From the end of through its September peak the Standard & Poor s index rose percent but subsequent declines cumulated to a net loss of percent by year-end The VIX which uses the prices of options to uncover investors expectations of volatility for the S&P more than doubled from on average in December to on average in December ( figure ) to a year-end value of This is elevated compared with an average of during the current expansion | Chapter Figure The CBOE s Market Volatility Index Percent Dec Jan. Mar. May July Sep. Nov. Sources : Bloomberg ; CEA calculations. Note : CBOE = Chicago Board Options Exchange. ( VIX levels below are generally considered low ) but below levels observed in and Cryptocurrencies in particular bitcoin experienced massive declines in The price for bitcoin reached an all-time high of nearly $ toward the end of In the price plummeted by percent to $ Bitcoin experienced numerous blows in that caused its price to tumble. First security concerns regulatory challenges and a lack of mainstream institutional adoption are key reasons why bitcoin has fallen out of favor with investors. For example the Securities and Exchange Commission announced in December that it plans to postpone its decision on whether to approve a proposed bitcoin exchange-traded fund until next year ( SEC 2018b ) Bitcoin competitors such as Ether Litecoin and XRP have experienced similar declines. Interest Rates and Credit Spreads During short-term yields on Treasury bills and notes ( those with a maturity of two years or less ) mostly edged higher following the lead of the Federal Reserve which raised the Federal funds rate four times for a cumulative hike of basis points during the course of the year to the percent range. Similarly the yield on 10-year Treasury notes increased basis points to percent during the months of the year with most of this increase in January The Year in Review and the Years Ahead |  $ "   * -/ #   ( $   ) ) ./ ( ) /       )   $ " #  $ '    $ /   !  '/         Basis points Basis points     $ " #  $ '  $ " # /  $ ) ./ ( ) / "   ' ! /  $  *    ' * * (  " and February For the first time since the 10-year yield exceeded percent in October and November before falling to percent during the last week of December. Market participants perceptions of bond default risk which are gauged by credit default swap ( CDS ) spreads rose sharply during the year. Credit default swaps pay their purchasers in the event of a default and are essentially insurance policies on the bond to which they are attached. The increase in this measure of perceived risk was similar to the perceptions of equity-market risk ( as indicated by the VIX discussed above ) An aggregate of North American investment-grade CDS spreads rose basis points over the year to their highest levels in more than two years ( figure ) Moreover CDS spreads on high-yield bonds rose basis points also to their highest levels in more than two years. Meanwhile consensus forecasts of long-run U.S. interest rates remained unchanged. The long-term forecast for the 10-year Treasury yield by the Blue Chip panel of professional forecasters remained unchanged at percent from March to October Similarly the market-implied expectation for the 10-year Treasury yield ( years from now ) edged up from percent on the last trading day in December to percent in December with most of the increase early in | Chapter  $ "        $   $ '       Percent   ) e          Maturity      *        -/ ( ) /  * !  / #     * /    (     /  ) /  / #  '  ./  /-   $ ) "     * !    #   / $   For maturity M = month and Y = year. The yield curve for U.S. Treasury notes flattened noticeably during the months of as yields on short-term debt increased faster than yields on long-term debt ( figure ) Normally yields on longer-term debt are higher because investors money is locked up over a longer period and thus require more compensation. The 10-year U.S. Treasury yield ended the year at percent basis points above its level at the end of The spread between 10-year and 2-year Treasury notes narrowed to basis points by December The December figure is below the average of basis points and is at the 19th percentile relative to the historical distribution. The yield-curve spread is considered a leading indicator but two qualifications should be considered. First at the 19th percentile it is low but not extremely low. Second Federal Reserve holdings of long-term debt remain considerable because of asset purchases during the period of quantitative easing. Third earlier normalization of monetary policy particularly unconventional monetary policy in the United States relative to Europe and Japan combined with high substitutability of advanced-economy sovereign debt likely placed continued downward pressure on the longer end of the U.S. yield curve through the international portfolio balance channel. The mortgage rate for 30-year fixed rate contracts was up basis points during finishing at percent. Mortgage rates generally move in parallel with the 10-year Treasury yield which has increased by basis points over The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | the same time frame. Toward the end of the 30-year fixed mortgage rate fell along with other interest rates. Market measures of risk perception increased during Borrowing costs for BBB-rated companies increased faster than 10-year U.S. Treasury yields in with the BBB spread over 10-year U.S. Treasuries increasing from basis points at the end of to basis points at the end of December roughly matching its average postrecession spread of basis points. Widening corporate credit spreads relative to Treasury notes consistent with rising CDS spreads for corporate debt over the year indicate that markets perceived a higher probability of corporate debt defaults at the end of than at the start of the year. With CDS and BBB spreads rising corporate bond issuance has tapered from its robust pace in ; in corporate bond issuers issued $ trillion in debt down from $ trillion in This decline may in part have been in response to the new cap ( established by the TCJA ) on interest deductibility which limits the deduction to no more than percent of earnings before interest taxes depreciation and amortization commonly called EBITDA and thereby incentivizes the substitution of equity for debt. The Global Macroeconomic Situation Exports are a key contributor to economic growth in the United States nearly doubling as a share of GDP over the past three decades. As figure shows U.S. export growth tends to rise and fall with foreign GDP.12 This section provides an overview of the macroeconomic situation among the United States major trading partners. It also discusses several major ongoing global trends that affect the demand for U.S. products including ( ) the global slump in productivity growth ; ( ) the puzzlingly low wage growth in the advanced economies despite strengthening labor markets ; and ( ) the increasing pockets of financial vulnerability across certain emerging market and developing economies. Developments in In contrast to the United States where real GDP growth exceeded forecasts by the OECD and the International Monetary Fund growth rates edged lower in the rest of the world in as can be seen in figure Real GDP among major U.S. trading partners grew by percent during the four quarters through : Q3 down from percent during the year-earlier period but similar to the percent average annual rate of growth during the five This measure was provided by the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association and it includes all nonconvertible corporate debt medium-term notes and Yankee bonds but excludes all issues with maturities of one year or less and certificates of deposit. 12The CEA calculates trade-weighted global growth as a weighted average of real GDP growth for foreign economies and the euro zone using these economies share of U.S. goods exports as weights. | Chapter  $ "    * $ " )   '       )        '   * -/   * 2/ #  Percent change ( four-quarter )     $ " # /   ! * $ " )   '      " * 2/ #     '  * -/  " * 2/ #  *     * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $  )  / $ * )  '  *      )  '4/ $         '  '  / $ * )  * /    /     / # * " #            /     ) * /  /    $ '   '  ! *   ' '   * ) /- $ preceding years. As estimated by the OECD and the IMF growth slowed in in the euro area China Japan and Canada ( as shown in the year-over-year growth figures in table ) Growth is expected to slow further in in the euro area and China. In part these slowdowns reflect macroeconomic policies that are becoming less accommodative particularly through monetary policy normalization and the continuation of headwinds from trade uncertainty and tighter financial conditions. Upside risks include the harnessing of underutilized capacity in many regions including the European periphery and the BRICS economies Brazil Russia India China and South Africa as well as a global reduction in barriers to trade due to the Administration s trade negotiations. Downside risks include an elevation of global trade barriers including as might happen from a disorderly exit of the U.K. from the European Union additional financial market pressures in emerging market economies persisting financial vulnerabilities from high debt levels abroad and political uncertainty particularly in Europe. Fortunately inflationary pressures remain mild particularly in light of recent declines in energy prices and risks of higher or lower inflation appear symmetric. Labor market conditions are still improving with the OECD-wide unemployment rate at percent in December only percentage point above the The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Table Year-over-Year Real GDP Growth for Selected Areas and Countries Share of U.S. trade ( ) Euro area China Japan Canada Mexico IMF OECD Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) ; Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) Note : IMF forecasts are from January and OECD forecasts are from November series low. Business survey data also point to slower growth in the near term in both the advanced and emerging-market economies. Real GDP growth has been weaker than expected in other advanced economies especially in Europe in part reflecting the disruption of production in Germany resulting from new vehicle emission standards and heightened political uncertainty and Japan where several natural disasters adversely affected domestic demand and airport traffic in the third quarter of GDP growth also slowed in China in the fourth quarter reflecting ongoing deleveraging efforts and softer industrial production as well as in India. The euro area. During the four quarters through : Q4 real GDP in the euro area grew by percent a substantial slowing from the percent pace during the year-earlier period. Growth in the euro area has been driven by fixed investment which grew at a percent annual rate during the first three quarters of ( detailed : Q4 data were not available at the time of writing ) Recently the European Central Bank ( ECB 2018a ) announced that it intends to wind down its monetary stimulus. This past June marked four years since the ECB became the first major central bank to cut one of its benchmark interest rates below zero and now the ECB is ending its asset purchase program which has increased its balance sheet by trillion. The ECB continued purchasing assets at the rate of billion a month until the end of September Then its Governing Council reduced asset purchases to billion per month through December after which the asset purchase program ended. The ECB ( 2018b ) also announced in December that it will sustain its record-low interest rates until at least the end of the summer of The deposit rate ( for commercial bank reserves held at the central bank ) remains at minus percent ; the main refinancing rate ( the interest rate banks pay when borrowing money from the ECB ) remains at percent ; the marginal lending facility rate remains at percent. The ECB recently stated that its Governing Council intends to continue reinvesting in full the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the Asset Purchase Program for an extended period | Chapter of time past the date when it starts raising the key ECB interest rates and in any case for as long as necessary to maintain favorable liquidity conditions and an ample degree of monetary accommodation ( ECB 2018b ) After the phasing out of its asset purchases the ECB will continue holding these assets on its balance sheet which will reduce euro area interest rates and will assist euro area countries with particularly high public debt burdens to borrow at record low interest rates. That said phasing out of new purchases implies that the ECB is gaining confidence that the recovery in the euro area will continue to be robust. Signs from Italy and Spain however suggest political instability and a Euroskeptic coalition in Italy could bring debt problems. The overall CPI in the euro area rose by percent during the months of up from the percent pace during the year-earlier period and still below the percent cap established by the ECB. Core CPI inflation which excludes food energy alcohol and tobacco was percent over the same interval up slightly from a percent increase during the year-earlier period. The dollar value of exports from the EU member countries that use the euro has been slowing. In the months through December the dollar value of nominal exports of goods from the euro area decreased by percent a deceleration from the percent increase during the year-earlier period. The dollar value of nominal imports of goods also decreased ( percent in the months through December ) also decelerating from a percent increase during the year-earlier. Japan. During the four quarters through : Q4 Japan s economy was virtually stationary with real GDP remaining essentially unchanged down from the percent pace during the year-earlier period and well below the percent average annual pace during the preceding seven years. The long-term growth of Japan s real GDP has been low handicapped by an aging and declining population making negative growth more likely. The prime-age ( years ) population has fallen at a percent annual rate during the past decade. Exports have contributed to Japan s slowdown. During the months of the dollar value of nominal exports of goods from Japan decreased by percent down from the percent increase during the yearearlier period. The labor market in Japan continues to remain tight. Japan s unemployment rate fell by percentage point during the months of to percent in December the lowest since Moreover the ratio of job openings to job applicants averaged during the highest since When this ratio exceeds it indicates a tight labor market but Japan has yet to see a sustained increase in nominal wages. Despite the low unemployment rate consumer prices in Japan rose only percent during the months through December down from the percent pace one year earlier. Core inflation The Year in Review and the Years Ahead |  $ "   # $ )    *      $ /   )     / $ $ /4  *  Percent change ( year-over-year ) Percent change ( year-over-year ) May  *      $ /  $  ( * ) / #   #   ' ! /   $  # $ )   A  / $ $ /4  P- * $ " # /   $  *     $ /  '    * ) * ( $  Note : Capital Economics China Activity Proxy aggregates ( ) tonnage of inland freight shipping ; ( ) electricity output ; ( ) floor space under construction ; ( ) passengers traveling by rail road water and air ; and ( ) cargo volumes and seaports. Data for the China Activity Proxy are through November which excludes fresh food and energy was percent during the months of unchanged from the year-earlier increase. Except for the effects of a consumption tax increase in Japan has experienced low or negative inflation for most of the past years. These low or negative inflation rates have been a chronic problem and present several macroeconomic obstacles. Negative inflation dampens consumer spending and limits monetary policy because it is difficult for the central bank to lower interest rates much below zero. Another issue in Japan remains the country s demographics. Japan has the oldest population in the world and it is destined to get older. In individuals age and older accounted for percent of Japan s population. The Bank of Japan has continuously reaffirmed its decision to maintain extremely low interest rates against the tide of other major central banks that are scaling back monetary stimuli. The bank confirmed a negative interest rate of percent over the short term. The bank also stated its plans to continue purchases of 10-year Japanese Government Bonds so that yields will float at about zero percent ( Bank of Japan ) The Bank of Japan released its Tankan survey of manufacturers in December for : Q4 showing a drop of points from : Q4 to a still-strong points indicating that the percentage of manufacturers showing growth exceeded those that showed declines by points. | Chapter Figure Nonperforming Loans and Return on Assets for China s Commercial Banks Left axis : Loss loans Doubtful loans Substandard loans Percentage of nominal annual GDP Percent : Q4 Return on assets ( right axis ) Sources : China Banking Regulatory Commission ; CEA calculations.  $ "    ( " $ ) "   -& /    $ /  / *   * ) ! $ )  )  $  '   * *  / $ * ) Percentage of nominal GDP   # $ )   ( " $ ) " (  -& /   * ) * ( $  ( " $ ) "  (  -& /.   '0  $ ) "   # $ )   *     ) &  ! *  ) / )  / $ * )  '   // ' ( ) /.  )  / $ * )  '  *         '  '  / $ * )  * /   ( " $ ) "  (  -& /   * ) * ( $  $ )  '0    " ) / $ )     $ '   # $ '   # $ )   $ )  '0  $ ) "  * ) "  * ) "  ) "   )  $   )  * ) $     '  $    $  *   * '  )    $    * 0/ #   ! $     * 0/ #  *    #  $ '  )    )    0-&   The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | China. China s official statistics show a slowdown of real GDP to percent during the four quarters of from percent during These official growth rates have been remarkably stable with every four-quarter growth rate during the past five years in the interval between and percent. In contrast an alternate measure of China s economic activity ( Capital Economics China Activity Proxy ) shows growth during at about percent similar to but down noticeably from rates during the two preceding years. Broad credit growth ( which generally foreshadows the China Activity Proxy by six months ) has also been decreasing ( figure ) As a share of nominal GDP China s nonperforming loans have risen in each of the past six years to an percent average during while the return on total loans has fallen ( figure ) In addition excessive credit may be restraining China s economic growth. The total credit available to nonfinancial corporations has plateaued at about percent of annual GDP ( figure ) far in excess of that in other emerging market economies and well in excess of the roughly percent for the United States. The Outlook In accordance with the Employment Act of an essential component of this annual report is to set forth current and foreseeable trends in the levels of employment production and purchasing power and a program for carrying out the objective of creating and maintaining conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment opportunities including self-employment for those able willing and seeking to work and to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. Since execution of this mandate has involved providing an 11-year economic forecast that assumes full enactment and implementation of the Administration s economic agenda. To better distinguish the effects of legislatively contingent policy objectives from current law projections we decompose this forecast into a currentlaw baseline and intermediate and top lines that reflect the estimated growth effects discussed in this Report and the Economic Report of the President. To construct our current law baseline we treat the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act as an unanticipated shock arriving in the fourth quarter of Adapting the approach of Fernald and others ( ) we then decompose pre-2017 : Q4 growth rates into trend cyclical and higher-frequency components using Okun s law and a partial linear regression model with a frequency filter to estimate the long-run growth rate. We then estimate an unrestricted vector autoregressive model on detrended growth rates through : Q3 of real GDP the unemployment gap the labor force participation rate real personal consumption expenditures and the yield spread of 10-year over 3-month Treasuries. We determine optimal lag length by satisfaction of the Akaike and Hannan-Quinn information | Chapter criteria. Postestimation and vector autoregressive forecasting we then add the estimated long-run trend plus the TCJA s estimated effects. As reported in the Economic Report of the President these estimated effects reflect the economic effects of the individual and corporate tax cuts as well as the impact on net exports of reduced profit shifting for which we assume adjustment lags. We then construct an intermediate forecast by adding to the current-law baseline the estimated effects of the Administration s infrastructure plan as reported in the Economic Report of the President and making the TCJA s individual provisions permanent. Finally we construct our top-line full policy-inclusive forecast by adding to the intermediate forecast the effects of the Administration s labor market and deregulatory agendas as respectively discussed in chapters and of this Report. The top-line forecast constitutes the Administration s official Troika forecast by the Council of Economic Advisers Office of Management and Budget and Department of the Treasury. GDP Growth during the Next Three Years As illustrated in figure and reported in the third column ( Real GDP ) of table the Administration anticipates economic growth to remain at or above percent through assuming full implementation of the economic agenda detailed in this Report and its predecessor. We expect nearterm growth to be supported by the continuing effects of the TCJA discussed in chapter as well as new measures to promote increased labor force participation and deregulatory actions discussed in chapters and and an infrastructure program discussed in chapter of the Economic Report of the President which we assume will commence in with observable effects on output beginning in The Administration also expects the labor market to continue to exhibit strength in the near term with the civilian unemployment rate remaining below percent through as reported in the sixth column Unemployment rate of table Despite low unemployment inflation is expected to remain low and close to the Federal Reserve s percent target for the PCE Price Index. The Administration therefore expects inflation beyond to remain stable at percent through as shown in the fourth column ( GDP price index ) of table GDP Growth over the Longer Term As discussed in the Economic Report of the President and in chapter of this Report over the longer term the Administration s current-law baseline forecast is for output growth to moderate as the capital-to-output ratio asymptotically approaches a higher steady-state level in response to business tax reform and as the near-term effects of the TCJA s individual provisions on the rate of growth dissipate into a permanent level effect. As reflected by our intermediate forecast we expect the latter moderation to be partially offset in The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | | Chapter   '         #  $ ) /4+     $   $ )    * ) (  P- $    #  $ ) /4+ I )   ) ( ' * ( ) /   /   ) / ) / ./   /     ) / ./   /       ) * /      $ ''.   ) /  ) / '    ' )      *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $     -/ ( ) /  * !  / #      ! ! $   * !    )  " ( ) /   )     " /  CEA calculations  * /  This f *   ./        * )    /     $ '   '    * !   * (      #  $ ) / ./   /  * )     Treasury  $ ''.  $  (    * )     * )   (  -& /   $  * ) /    $  * ( $ )  '     a  /0  '     ) /   #  ) "   / *     '   The   ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * ) s    * ) * ( $    *   ./   $ "    *   ./  ! *   * 2/ #    /  * !    '           b  ' $ )  ) /  '  ! )    )         "   )   '   *  * ' $  $ Percent change ( Q4-to-Q4 )  *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $     -/ ( ) /  * !  / #      ! ! $   * !    )  " ( ) /   )     " /   EA calculations  * /  This f *   ./        * )    /     $ '   '    * !   * (    and by making permanent the TCJA s individual provisions which are currently legislated to expire on December Also reflected in our intermediate forecast is the effect of the Administration s plan for raising investment in public infrastructure estimates of which were reported in the Economic Report which as noted above we assume commencing in with observable effects on output beginning in The Administration s full policy-inclusive forecast is reported as the top line of figure In addition to successful implementation of the President s infrastructure plan and extension of the TCJA s individual provisions this forecast assumes full achievement of the Administration s agenda with respect to deregulation as reported in chapter and labor market policies designed to incentivize higher labor force participation reported in chapter Though we anticipate growth moderating toward the end of the budget window to percent on average between and the policy-inclusive forecast is for output to grow at an annual rate of percent. Relative to the current-law baseline we estimate that full policy implementation would cumulatively raise the level of output by percent over the budget window. Reflecting moderating growth in the latter half of the budget window the Administration expects unemployment to converge to a natural rate of percent consistent with the Federal Open Market Committee s December Summary of Economic Projections which reports a range of participant estimates from to The Year in Review and the Years Ahead |    '    0++'4  $    * ( * ) ) /.  * !    /0  '   )    * / ) / $  '    '   0/+0/   * 2/ #   * 2/ #   /    * ( * ) ) /      $ $ ' $  )  ) * ) $ ) ./ $ /0/ $ * )  '  * '  / $ * )   "    *  ! *    -/ $  $  / $ * )   /  ( ' *   #   * !  / #  '   *  ! *      / $ *  * !  ) * ) !  (   $ )  ( ' * ( ) /  / *  # * # * '   ( ' * ( ) /    "  &'4  # *  ) * ) !  (   $ )   0/+0/   # *  *   / $ $ /4  ) * ) !  (   $ )    / $ *  * !   '      / *  ) * ) !  (   $ )  * 0/+0/   (    /0  '   '        ( *      * / ) / $  '   '          0/+0/   * -&   $ ! ! ) / $  '       ) * ) !  (     '       )    '  ) * ) !  (   $ )  * 0/+0/    (      / #    "  * !  $ )  * (   )   *   / $   (   *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $    -/ ( ) /  * !  / #      ! ! $   * !    )  " ( ) /   )     " /        '  '  / $ * )  * /  GDO = gross domestic output which is the average of GDP and gross domestic income.  ' '   * ) /- $  0/ $ * )    $ )   ) /  "  * $ ) /.  ( p.p. )  /   )   ) )  '   /  with the ! *   ./  ! $ )  ' $   to  * (      he t * /  '  (   ) * /         / *  * )  $ ) "  The period        $ )   '   & ;    $  / #  '  / ./   -/  $ / #    $ '   '    /    * '  / $ * )  '   *  ! *    )   # * # * '   ( ' * ( ) /  #    )    % 0./   ! *   $  * ) / $ ) $ / $  $ )  / #  * '  / $ * )  $  percent with a median estimate of percent ( Federal Reserve 2018a ) The unemployment rate rising to percent is also expected to maintain a rate of inflation at percent as measured by the GDP chained price index ( see the fourth column of table ) As shown in table the Administration anticipates that the primary contributor to increased growth through will be higher output per hour worked. As discussed in chapter despite a modest rise in U.S. labor productivity growth was disappointing in recent years before the TCJA owing to a lack of capital deepening. By substantially raising the target capital stock and attracting increased net capital inflows including investment both by foreign firms and overseas affiliates of U.S. multinational enterprises we expect enactment of business tax reform to considerably increase capital per worker and thus labor productivity. Already during the first three quarters of labor productivity growth in the business sector doubled relative to its pre-TCJA postrecession average from to percent at a compound annual rate. Labor productivity growth in the nonfarm business sector similarly rose from | Chapter a : Q3 : Q4 average of percent to percent at a compound annual rate during the first three quarters of If fully implemented we also expect the labor market policies articulated in chapters and to partially offset the effects of demographic-related trends in labor force participation as reflected in line of table Upside and Downside Forecast Risks As noted in the Economic Report of the President upside risks to the forecast include higher net capital inflows due to international capital mobility exceeding estimates which would attenuate the potential crowding out of private fixed investment in response to business tax reform and public infrastructure investment. Second academic studies demonstrating that individual marginal income tax rates may have differential effects across the age distribution suggest that estimated trends in labor force participation may overstate the growth-detracting effect of demography. Third insofar as growth estimates presented in this Report and its predecessor have been derived from standard neoclassical growth models they may omit the positive externalities and spillover effects captured by endogenous growth models such as that of Ehrlich Li and Liu ( ) Tax reform that incentivizes investment in human capital regulatory reform that eliminates prohibitive barriers to entry for more innovative and entrepreneurial firms and health investments and labor market policies that facilitate human capital accumulation may therefore yield higher growth dividends than are estimated here. Because the Administration s forecast is policy-inclusive a key downside risk is the political contingency of full implementation of the President s economic agenda particularly in light of the inherent unpredictability of the legislative process. In addition by definition the policy-inclusive forecast assumes that the Administration s policies will be implemented and remain in place throughout the forecast window. In scenarios where future administrations or Congress partially or fully reverse the TCJA or otherwise raise taxes or significantly expand the Federal regulatory state economic growth would be lower or even negative. Chapter of this Report for example calculates that the Medicare for All bills currently in Congress would reduce real GDP by about percent in the long run if financed by taxes on labor income. In addition recent proposals to introduce a top marginal income tax rate of percent on personal income over $ million would if enacted result in lower output and Federal government tax revenue. Using open source software available from the Open Source Policy Center the CEA estimates that though such a proposal would generate on a static basis $ billion over years dynamic estimates indicate a net revenue loss. Specifically assuming an income elasticity of taxable income of and a substitution elasticity of taxable income of ( from Gruber and Saez ) and an elasticity of longterm capital gains of ( from Dowd McClelland and Muthitacharoen ) The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | the cumulative 10-year change in personal income tax revenue is $ billion. Including the effect on payroll tax revenue the combined cumulative effect is $ billion. Assuming an elasticity of GDP with respect to minus the average marginal tax rate of ( from Barro and Redlick ) GDP would decline by percent in year one. Because this decline constitutes a permanent level effect cumulatively over years nominal economic output would be $ billion smaller relative to the CBO s January 10-year GDP projections. Cyberattacks and cyber thefts constitute additional downside risks that we have attempted to quantify in chapter of this Report. A slowing global economy as projected by the IMF ( ) and OECD ( ) also poses a near-term downside risk as more synchronized growth observed in was succeeded by evident decoupling in In particular the deceleration of economic activity and sentiment in China and parts of Europe along with high public debt levels in several advanced and emerging economies and high corporate debt levels in the United States may generate economic headwinds. Conclusion For the second consecutive year the U.S. economy outperformed expectations by a substantial margin. In October the Congressional Budget Office projected that during the four quarters of real GDP would grow by percent the unemployment rate would decline by percentage point to percent and employment growth would average jobs per month. In actuality real GDP grew by percent at a compound annual rate through : Q3 virtually in line with the Administration s own forecast for an unprecedented second successive year the unemployment rate declined by percentage point from : Q4 to a 49-year low of percent in : Q4 and employment growth averaged jobs per month during As the chapters that constitute this Report demonstrate and were not merely continuations of trends already under way during the postrecession expansion but rather constituted a distinct break from the previous pace of economic and employment growth after the start of the current expansion in : Q3. In particular the effects on business expansion and domestic capital formation of deregulatory actions and business tax reform have been substantial. In addition labor market policies and reductions in effective marginal personal income tax rates have helped to attenuate previous downward trends in labor force participation. Looking ahead this Report recommends further implementation of policies to expand the supply-side potential of the U.S. economy to sustain growth in the years to come. | Chapter x References Chapter Abel A. Optimal Investment under Uncertainty. American Economic Review no. : Alstadsaeter A. M. Jacob and R. Michaely. Do Dividend Taxes Affect Corporate Investment ? Journal of Public Economics : Arulampalam W. M. Devereux and G. Maffini. The Direct Incidence of Corporate Income Tax on Wages. European Economic Review no. : Asness C. T. Hazelkorn and S. Richardson. Buyback Derangement Syndrome. Journal of Portfolio Management no. : Auerbach A. Wealth Maximization and the Cost of Capital. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Auerbach A. and K. Hassett. Tax Policy and Business Fixed Investment in the United States. Journal of Public Economics no. : On the Marginal Source of Investment Funds. Journal of Public Economics no. : Averett S. H. Peters and D. Waldman. Tax Credits Labor Supply and Child Care. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Bar-Ilan A. and W. Strange. Investment Lags. American Economic Review no. : Barro R. and J. Furman. Macroeconomic Effects of the Tax Reform. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring Barro R. and C. Redlick. Macroeconomic Effects from Government Purchases and Taxes. Quarterly Journal of Economics no.1 : Barth E. A. Bryson J. Davis and R. Freeman. It s Where You Work : Increases in Earnings Dispersion across Establishments and Individuals in the U.S. Journal of Labor Economics no. S2 ( part ) : S67 S97. BEA ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) U.S. Direct Investment Abroad ( USDIA ) https : //www.bea.gov/index.php/help/glossary/ us-direct-investment-abroad-usdia. Bilicka K. and M. Devereux. CBT Corporate Tax Ranking Oxford : Oxford University Centre for Business Taxation. Blanchard O. and R. Perotti. An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Blau D. and P. Robins. Fertility Employment and Child-Care Costs. Demography no. : Blouin J. and L. Krull. Bringing It Home : A Study of the Incentives Surrounding the Repatriation of Foreign Earnings under the American Jobs Creation Act of Journal of Accounting Research no. : Bradford D. The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on Corporate Distributions. Journal of Public Economics no.1 : Brav A. J. Graham C. Harvey and R. Michaely. Payout Policy in the 21st Century. Journal of Financial Economics no. : Brennan M. and A. Thakor. Shareholder Preferences and Dividend Policy. Journal of Finance no. : Business Roundtable. Business Roundtable CEO Economic Outlook Index Reaches Highest Level in Survey s 15-Year History. https : //www. businessroundtable.org/about-us/ceo-economic-outlook-index/ ceo-survey-q1-2018. Caballero R. On the Sign of the Investment Uncertainty Relationship. American Economic Review no. : Caballero R. E. Engel and J. Haltiwanger. Plant-Level Adjustment and Aggregate Investment Dynamics. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : Caldara D. and C. Kamps. The Analytics of SVARs : A Unified Framework to Measure Fiscal Multipliers. Review of Economic Studies no. : Card D. A. Cardoso J. Heining and P. Kline. Firms and Labor Market Inequality : Evidence and Some Theory. Journal of Labor Economics no. S1 : S13 S70. CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) 2017a. Corporate Tax Reform and Wages : Theory and Evidence. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/ documents/Tax % 20Reform % 20and % 20Wages.pdf. 2017b. Evaluating the Anticipated Effects of Changes to the Mortgage Interest Deduction. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/images/ Effects % 20of % 20Changes % 20to % 20the % 20Mortgage % 20Interest % Deduction % 20FINAL.pdf. Taxes and Growth. In Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. Chetty R. and E. Saez. Dividend Taxes and Corporate Behavior : Evidence from the Dividend Tax Cut. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Clausing K. Profit Shifting Before and After the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Unpublished paper. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers. cfm ? abstract_id = Cochrane J. Stock Buybacks Are Proof of Tax Reform s Success. Wall Street Journal March https : //www.wsj.com/articles/ stock-buybacks-are-proof-of-tax-reforms-success-1520292384. | References Cummins J. and K. Hassett. The Effects of Taxation on Investment : New Evidence from Firm Level Panel Data. National Tax Journal no. : Cummins J. K. Hassett and R. Hubbard. Tax Reforms and Investment : A CrossCountry Comparison. Journal of Public Economics nos. : Cummins J. K. Hassett R. Hubbard and R. Hall. A Reconsideration of Investment Behavior Using Tax Reforms as Natural Experiments. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : Cummins J. K. Hassett and S. Oliner. Investment Behavior Observable Expectations and Internal Funds. American Economic Review no. : De Long J. and L. Summers. Macroeconomic Policy and Long-Run Growth. Paper presented at Symposium on Policies for Long-Run Growth sponsored by Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole WY August https : //www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/1992/s92long.pdf. Desai M. C. Foley and J. Hines. Trade Credit and Taxes. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Desai M. and A. Goolsbee. Investment Overhang and Tax Policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : Devereux M. R. Griffith and A. Klemm. Corporate Income Tax : Reforms and Competition. Economic Policy no. : Dharmapala D. C. Foley and K. Forbes. Watch What I Do Not What I Say : The Unintended Consequences of the Homeland Investment Act. Journal of Finance no. : Dittmar A. Why Do Firms Repurchase Stock ? Journal of Business no. : Dittmar A. and J. Mahrt-Smith. Corporate Governance and the Value of Cash Holdings. Journal of Financial Economics no. : Djankov S. T. Ganser C. McLiesh R. Ramalho and A. Shleifer. The Effect of Corporate Taxes on Investment and Entrepreneurship. American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics no. : Dwenger N. User Cost of Capital Revisited. Economica no. : Dyreng S. and R. Hills. Foreign Earnings Repatriations and Domestic Employment. Working paper Duke University. http : //tax.unc.edu/ wp-content/uploads/2018/04/Foreign-Earnings-Repatriations-and-DomesticEmployment.pdf. Eisner R. and M. Nadiri. Investment Behavior and Neo-classical Theory. Review of Economics and Statistics no.3 : Faulkender M. and M. Petersen. Investment and Capital Constraints : Repatriations under the American Jobs Creation Act. Review of Financial Studies no. : Favero C. and F. Giavazzi. Measuring Tax Multipliers : The Narrative Method in Fiscal VARs. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : References | Feldman R. Mortgage Rates Homeownership Rates and GovernmentSponsored Enterprises. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis : The Region : Fernald J. R. Hall J. Stock and M. Watson. The Disappointing Recovery of Output after Working paper Brookings Institution. https : //www. brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/fernaldtextsp17bpea.pdf. Fried J. and C. Wang. Are Buybacks Really Shortchanging Investment ? Harvard Business Review March April Gale W. H. Gelfond A. Krupkin M. Mazur and E. Toder. Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act : A Preliminary Analysis. Working paper Tax Policy Center Urban Institute and Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/ wp-content/uploads/2018/06/ES_20180608_tcja_summary_paper_final.pdf. Gale W. and J. Scholz. Intergenerational Transfers and the Accumulation of Wealth. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Giroud X. and J. Rauh. State Taxation and the Reallocation of Business Activity : Evidence from Establishment-Level Data. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Goolsbee A. Investment Tax Incentives Prices and the Supply of Capital Goods. Quarterly Journal of Economics no.1 : The Importance of Measurement Error in the Cost of Capital. National Tax Journal no. : Taxes and the Quality of Capital. Journal of Public Economics nos. : Graham J. M. Hanlon and T. Shevlin. Barriers to Mobility : The Lockout Effect of U.S. Taxation of Worldwide Corporate Profits. National Tax Journal no. : Grullon G. and R. Michaely. The Information Content of Share Repurchase Programs. Journal of Finance no. : Guay W. and J. Harford. The Cash-Flow Permanence and Information Content of Dividend Increases Versus Repurchases. Journal of Financial Economics no. : Guvenen F. R. Mataloni D. Rassier and K. Ruhl. Offshore Profit Shifting and Domestic Productivity Measurement. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Haan P. and K. Wrohlich. Can Child Care Policy Encourage Employment and Fertility ? Evidence from a Structural Model. Labour Economics no. : Hall R. and D. Jorgenson. Tax Policy and Investment Behavior. American Economic Review : Hanlon M. J. Hoopes and J. Slemrod. Tax Reform Made Me Do It ! NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. | References Hartman R. The Effects of Price and Cost Uncertainty on Investment. Journal of Economic Theory no. : Herrick A. Estimates of TCJA Repatriation of Foreign Earnings on Investment and GDP. Issues paper for Penn-Wharton Budget Model. http : //budgetmodel. wharton.upenn.edu/issues/2018/8/29/ estimates-of-tcja-repatriation-of-foreign-earnings-on-investment-and-gdp. Hines J. Treasure Islands. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Hines J. and E. Rice. Fiscal Paradise : Foreign Tax Havens and American Business. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Jagannathan M. C. Stephens and M. Weisbach. Financial Flexibility and the Choice Between Dividends and Stock Repurchases. Journal of Financial Economics no. : JCT ( Joint Committee on Taxation ) Macroeconomic Analysis of the Conference Agreement for H.R. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. https : //www.jct.gov/ publications.html ? func = startdown&id = Jensen M. Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow Corporate Finance and Takeovers. American Economic Review no. : Jorgenson D. Capital Theory and Investment Behavior. American Economic Review no. : Keane M. and R. Rogerson. Micro and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities : A Reassessment of Conventional Wisdom. Journal of Economic Literature no. : Reconciling Micro and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities : A Structural Perspective. Annual Review of Economics : King M. Public Policy and the Corporation. London : Chapman & Hall. Kotlikoff L. and L. Summers. The Role of Intergenerational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation. Journal of Political Economy no. : The Contribution of Intergenerational Transfers to Total Wealth : A Reply. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Krueger A. and L. Summers. Reflections on the Inter-Industry Wage Structure. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Efficiency Wages and the Inter-industry Wage Structure. Econometrica no. : Lieberknecht P. and V. Wieland. On the Macroeconomic and Fiscal Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Paper presented at Second Research Conference of Macroeconomic Modelling and Model Comparison Network Stanford University Stanford CA June Mertens K. The Near Term Growth Impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Research Department Working Paper Dallas : Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. References | Mertens K. and J. Montiel Olea. Marginal Tax Rates and Income : New Time Series Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Mertens K. and M. Ravn. Empirical Evidence on the Aggregate Effects of Anticipated and Unanticipated U.S. Tax Policy Shocks. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : The Dynamic Effects of Personal and Corporate Income Tax Changes in the United States. American Economic Review no. : A Reconciliation of SVAR and Narrative Estimates of Tax Multipliers. Journal of Monetary Economics : NAR ( National Association of Realtors ) NAR Statement on Tax Reform. https : // www.nar.realtor/nar-statement-on-tax-reform. National Association of Business Economists. Sales Strong with Costs and Wages Rising in Second Quarter of ; NABE Panel Expects Additional Investment and Job Gains. https : //nabe.com/NABE/Surveys/Business_ Conditions_Surveys/July_2018_Business_Conditions_Survey_Summary. aspx. Passmore W. S. Sherlund and G. Burgess. The Effect of Housing GovernmentSponsored Enterprises on Mortgage Rates. Real Estate Economics no. : http : //citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download ? doi = &rep = rep1&type = pdf. Phillips R. M. Gardner A. Robins and M. Surka. Offshore Shell Games : The Use of Offshore Tax Havens by Fortune Companies. https : //uspirg.org/ sites/pirg/files/reports/USP % 20ShellGames % 20Oct17 % 201.2.pdf. Pomerleau K. A Hybrid Approach : The Treatment of Foreign Profits under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Tax Foundation. https : //taxfoundation.org/ treatment-foreign-profits-tax-cuts-jobs-act/. Poterba J. The Estate Tax and After-Tax Investment Returns. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Poterba J. and T. Sinai. Tax Expenditures for Owner-Occupied Housing : Deductions for Property Taxes and Mortgage Interest and the Exclusion of Imputed Rental Income. American Economic Review : Papers and Proceedings no. : PwC ( PricewaterhouseCoopers ) Impact of Tax Reform Options on OwnerOccupied Housing Prepared for the National Association of Realtors. https : // narfocus.com/billdatabase/clientfiles/172/21/2888.pdf. Redmiles M. The One-Time Received Dividend Deduction. Statistics of Income Bulletin Spring Romer C. and D. Romer. The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax Changes : Estimates Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks. American Economic Review no. : Singh K. and A. Mathur. The Impact of GILTI and FDII on the Investment Location Choice of U.S. Multinationals. Working Paper Washington DC : American Enterprise Institute. | References Smolyansky M. G. Suarez and A. Tabova. U.S. Corporations Repatriation of Offshore Profits. FEDS Note. Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Song J. D. Price F. Guvenen N. Bloom and T. Wachter. Firming Up Inequality. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Whittington L. Taxes and the Family : The Impact of the Tax Exemption for Dependents on Marital Fertility. Demography no.2 : Williamson J. and S. Bawa. Estimated Effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act on Farms and Farm Households. Economic Research Report U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. Yagan D. Capital Tax Reform and the Real Economy : The Effects of the Dividend Tax Cut. American Economic Review no. : Zion D. R. Gomatam and R. Graziano. Parking A-Lot Overseas. Credit Suisse Securities Research & Analytics. https : //research-doc.credit-suisse.com/docVi ew ? language = ENG&format = PDF&source_id = em&document_id = 1045617491& serialid = jHde13PmaivwZHRANjglDIKxoEiA4WVARdLQREk1A7g % 3d. Zucman G. T. Torslov and L. Wier. The Missing Profits of Nations. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Zwick E. and J. Mahon. Tax Policy and Heterogenous Investment Behavior. American Economic Review no. : Chapter Aldy J. Learning from Experience : An Assessment of the Retrospective Reviews of Agency Rules and the Evidence for Improving the Design and Implementation of Regulatory Policy. http : //nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3 : HUL. InstRepos : Allcott H. and M. Greenstone. Is There an Energy Efficiency Gap ? Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Allcott H. and C. Knittel. Are Consumers Poorly Informed about Fuel Economy ? Evidence from Two Experiments. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Allcott H. and D. Taubinsky. Evaluating Behaviorally Motivated Policy : Experimental Evidence from the Lightbulb Market. American Economic Review no. : Allcott H. and N. Wozny. Gasoline Prices Fuel Economy and the Energy Paradox. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Ashley E. C. Nardinelli and R. Lavaty. Estimating the Benefits of Public Health Policies That Reduce Harmful Consumption. Health Economics : Auerbach A. and J. Hines Jr. Taxation and Economic Efficiency. Handbook of Public Economics : References | Avalere. Association Health Plans : Projecting the Impact of the Proposed Rule. Prepared for America s Health Insurance Plans. Ballard C. and D. Fullerton. Distortionary Taxes and the Provision of Public Goods. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Barkume A. The Structure of Labor Costs with Overtime Work in U.S. Jobs. Industrial and Labor Relations Review no. : Bauer D. The Misclassification of Independent Contractors : The Fifty-FourBillion-Dollar Problem. Rutgers Journal of Law and Public Policy no. : Becker G. and K. Murphy. The Division of Labor Coordination Costs and Knowledge. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Becker G. K. Murphy and M. Grossman. The Market for Illegal Goods : The Case of Drugs. Journal of Political Economy no. : Belfield C. A. Bowden and V. Rodriguez. Evaluating Regulatory Impact Assessments in Education Policy. American Journal of Evaluation BLS ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) 2018a. Independent Contractors Made Up Percent of Employment in May https : //www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2018/ independent-contractors-made-up-6-point-9-percent-of-employmentin-may-2017.htm. 2018b. Multifactor Productivity. https : //www.bls.gov/mfp/home.htm. Blumberg L. M. Buettgens and R. Wang. Updated Estimates of the Potential Impact of Short-Term Limited Duration Policies. Washington : Urban Institute. Borenstein S. and N. Rose. How Airline Markets Work or Do They ? Regulatory Reform in the Airline Industry. In Economic Regulation and Its Reform edited by N. Rose. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Breyer S. Breaking the Vicious Circle : Toward Effective Risk Regulation. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. British Columbia. Achieving a Modern Regulatory Environment : B.C. s Regulatory Reform Initiative. Government of British Columbia. https : //www2.gov.bc.ca/ assets/gov/government/about-the-bc-government/regulatory-reform/ pdfs/5330_regreform_ar_2017_web.pdf. Broughel J. What the United States Can Learn from the European Commission s Better Regulation Initiative. European Journal of Risk Regulation : Busse M. C. Knittel and F. Zettelmeyer. Are Consumers Myopic ? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases. American Economic Review no. : Carey M. Methods of Estimating the Total Cost of Federal Regulations. https : // crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R44348. Caves R. Air Transport and Its Regulators : An Industry Study. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. CBO ( Congressional Budget Office ) Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for People Under Age : to https : //www.cbo.gov/ | References system/files/115th-congress-2017-2018/reports/53826healthinsurancecoverage.pdf. Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for People Under Age : to https : //www.cbo.gov/system/files/115thcongress-2017-2018/reports/53826-healthinsurancecoverage.pdf. CCIIO ( Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight ) Essential Health Benefits Bulletin. https : //www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Files/ Downloads/essential_health_benefits_bulletin.pdf. CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Printing Office. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Printing Office. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. Deregulating Health Insurance Markets : Value to Market Participants. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/DeregulatingHealth-Insurance-Markets-FINAL.pdf. Cetin T. and E. Deakin. Regulation of Taxis and the Rise of Ridesharing. Transport Policy September Chetty R. Behavioral Economics and Public Policy : A Pragmatic Perspective. American Economic Review no. : CMS ( Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ) Estimated Financial Effects of the Short-Term Limited-Duration Policy Proposed Rule. https : //www.cms. gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Research/ActuarialStudies/ Downloads/STLD20180406.pdf. Coase R. The Problem of Social Cost. Journal of Law and Economics : Coglianese C. Improving Regulatory Analysis at Independent Agencies. American University Law Review : Cohen P. R. Hahn J. Hall S. Levitt and R. Metcalfe. Using Big Data to Estimate Consumer Surplus : The Case of Uber. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Crafts N. Regulation and Productivity Performance. Oxford Review of Economic Policy no. : Crain W. and N. Crain. The Cost of Federal Regulation to the U.S. Economy Manufacturing and Small Businesses. Report for the National Association of Manufacturers. https : //www.nam.org/Data-and-Reports/Cost-of-FederalRegulations/Federal-Regulation-Full-Study.pdf. Crews C. Ten Thousand Commandments : An Annual Snapshot of the Federal Regulatory State. Competitive Enterprise Institute. Dafny L. K. Ho and M. Varela. Let Them Have Choice : Gains from Shifting Away from Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance and Toward an Individual Exchange. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : References | DeMenno M. Technocracy Democracy and Public Policy : An Evaluation of Public Participation in Retrospective Regulatory Review. Regulation and Governance October. Demski J. Managerial Uses of Accounting Information. New York : Springer. DOT ( U.S. Department of Transportation ) Preparing for the Future of Transportation. https : //www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/ policy-initiatives/automated-vehicles/320711/preparing-futuretransportation-automated-vehicle-30.pdf. Dougan W. and J. Snyder. Are Rents Fully Dissipated ? Public Choice no. : Douglas G. and J. Miller. Economic Regulation of Domestic Air Transport : Theory and Policy. Washington : Brookings Institution. Dudley S. and B. Mannix. Improving Regulatory Benefit-Cost Analysis. Journal of Law & Politics no. : Eisenback J. The Role of Independent Contractors in the U.S. Economy. Navigant Economics. Elejalde-Ruiz A. Is McDonald s Responsible for Franchise Workers ? Labor Law Hearing Set to Begin. Chicago Tribune March Farrell J. and C. Shapiro. Horizontal Mergers : An Equilibrium Analysis. American Economic Review no. : FDA ( U.S. Food and Drug Administration ) Food Labeling : Nutrition of Standard Menu Items in Restaurants and Similar Retail Food Establishments. https : // www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/ReportsManualsForms/Reports/ EconomicAnalyses/UCM426165.pdf. Feldstein M. Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Fisher I. The Theory of Interest : As Determined by Impatience to Spend Income and Opportunity to Invest It. Pacifica CA : Kelley. Fraas A. and R. Morgenstern. Identifying the Analytical Implications of Alternative Regulatory Philosophies. Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis no. : FRED. Professional and Business Services : Temporary Help Services. FRED Economic Data Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis. https : //fred.stlouisfed. org/series/temphelpn. Friedman M. The Effects of Full Employment Policy on Economic Stability : A Formal Analysis. In Essays in Positive Economics edited by M. Friedman. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Furchtgott-Roth D. Executive Branch Overreach in Labor Regulation. Manhattan Institute New York. GAO ( U.S. Government Accountability Office ) Reexamining Regulations : Opportunities Exist to Improve Effectiveness and Transparency of Retrospective Reviews. https : //www.gao.gov/new.items/d07791.pdf. | References Reexamining Regulations : Agencies Often Made Regulatory Changes but Could Strengthen Linkages to Performance Goals. https : //www.gao.gov/ products/GAO-14-268. Garvey T. A Brief Overview of Rulemaking and Judicial Review. https : //fas.org/ sgp/crs/misc/R41546.pdf. Gayer T. and W. Viscusi. Overriding Consumer Preferences with Energy Regulations. Journal of Regulatory Economics no. : Determining the Proper Scope of Climate Change Policy Benefits in U.S. Regulatory Analyses : Domestic verses Global Approaches. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy : Gayer T. R. Litan and P. Wallach. Evaluating the Trump Administration s Regulatory Reform Program. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings. edu/research/ evaluating-the-trump-administrations-regulatory-reform-program/. Gitis B. The NLRB s New Joint Employer Standard Unions and the Franchise Business Model. American Action Forum. https : //www.americanactionforum. org/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/Joint-Employer-and-Franchises.pdf. Glaeser E. Paternalism and Psychology. University of Chicago Law Review : Goulder L. and R. Williams III. The Substantial Bias from Ignoring General Equilibrium Effects in Estimating Excess Burden and a Practical Solution. Journal of Political Economy no. : Government of Canada. Annual Report on the Application of the One-for-One Rule : https : //www.canada.ca/en/treasury-board-secretariat/ services/federal-regulatory-management/annual-report-application-one-forone-rule-2014-2015.html. Gray W. The Cost of Regulation : OSHA EPA and the Productivity Slowdown. American Economic Review no. : Greenhouse S. McDonald s Ruling Could Open Door for Unions. New York Times July Hahn R. and P. Dudley. How Well Does the U.S. Government Do Benefit-Cost Analysis ? Review of Environmental Economics and Policy no. : Hahn R. and P. Tetlock. Has Economic Analysis Improved Regulatory Decisions ? Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Hansen L. and T. Sargent. Robustness. Princeton N.J. : Princeton University Press. Harberger A. Monopoly and Resource Allocation. American Economic Review no. : Taxation Resource Allocation and Welfare. In The Role of Direct and Indirect Taxes in the Federal Reserve System : A Conference Report of the NBER and the Brookings Institution edited by National Bureau of Economic Research. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. References | Harrington W. R. Morgenstern and P. Nelson. On the Accuracy of Regulatory Cost Estimates. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : Haveman R. and B. Weisbrod. Defining Benefits of Public Programs : Some Guidance for Policy Analysts. Policy Analysis no. : Hayek F. The Use of Knowledge in Society. American Economic Review no. : Hazilla M. and R. Kopp. Social Cost of Environmental Quality Regulations : A General Equilibrium Analysis. Journal of Political Economy no. : Hendrikse G. and T. Jiang. Plural Form in Franchising : An Incomplete Contracting Approach. In Economics and Management Networks : Franchising Strategic Alliances and Cooperatives edited by G. Cliquet et al. Heidelberg : Physica-Verlag. Institute of Medicine. Secondhand Smoke Exposure and Cardiovascular Effects : Making Sense of the Evidence. Report from Institute of Medicine and Committee on Secondhand Smoke Exposure and Acute Coronary Events. Washington : National Academies Press. Joskow P. and N. Rose. The Effects of Economic Regulation. Handbook of Industrial Organization : Kahn A. Applications of Economics to an Imperfect World. American Economic Review no. : I Would Do It Again. Regulation no. : Karaca-Mandic P. J. Abraham and C. Phelps. How Do Health Insurance Loading Fees Vary by Group Size ? Implications for Healthcare Reform. International Journal of Healthcare Finance and Economics : Krueger A. and O. Ashenfelter. Theory and Evidence on Employer Collusion in the Franchise Sector. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Levy H. E. Norton and J. Smith. Tobacco Regulation and Cost-Benefit Analysis. American Journal of Health Economics no. : Luna N. McDonald s and NLRB Reach Settlement in Joint-Employer Case. Nation s Restaurant News March Madrian B. and D. Shea. The Power of Suggestion : Inertia in ( k ) Participation and Savings Behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Malone T. and J. Lusk. Brewing Up Entrepreneurship : Government Intervention in Beer. Journal of Entrepreneurship and Public Policy no. : Morgenstern R. Retrospective Analysis of U.S. Federal Environmental Regulation. Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis no. : Morrison R. Lester Jones on Beer Taxes. Tax Policy Podcast Tax Foundation. Morse A. The Business Impact Target : Cutting the Cost of Regulation. London : National Audit Office. | References Mulligan C. 2015a. Misallocations Substitution and the Robustness of Activist Public Policy. Manuscript University of Chicago January. 2015b. Side Effects and Complications : The Economic Consequences of Health Care Reform. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Mulligan C. and K. Tsui. The Upside-Down Economics of Regulated and Otherwise Rigid Prices. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Murray B. A. Keeler and W. Thurman. Tax Interaction Effects Environmental Regulation and Rule of Thumb Adjustments to Social Cost. Environmental and Resource Economics : NFIB ( National Federation of Independent Business ) The National Small Business Poll. NHTSA ( National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ) and EPA ( U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ) The Safer Affordable Fuel-Efficient ( SAFE ) Vehicles Rule for Model Year Passenger Cars and Light Trucks. https : // www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.dot.gov/files/documents/ld-cafe-co2-nhtsa-2127al76-epa-pria-180823.pdf. Niskanen W. Bureaucracy and Representative Government. Chicago : Aldine-Atherton. NLRB ( National Labor Relations Board ) NLRB Office of the General Counsel Authorizes Complaints Against McDonald s Franchisees and Determines McDonald s USA LLC Is a Joint Employer. https : //www.nlrb.gov/newsoutreach/news-story/ nlrb-office-general-counsel-authorizes-complaints-against-mcdonalds. Norton S. Towards a More General Theory of Franchise Governance. In Economics and Management of Franchising Networks edited by J. Windsperger G. Cliquet G. Hendrikse and M. Tuunanen. Heidelberg : Springer. OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) Table I.7 : Top Statutory Personal Tax Rate and Top Marginal Tax Rates for Employees. https : //stats.oecd.org/index.aspx ? DataSetCode = TABLE_I7. OMB ( Office of Management and Budget ) Report to Congress on the Benefits and Costs of Federal Regulations. https : //obamawhitehouse. archives.gov/omb/inforeg_chap2 # t1. Report to Congress on the Benefits and Costs of Federal Regulations. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/assets/OMB/ inforeg/2000fedreg-report.pdf. Stimulating Smarter Regulation : Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations and Unfunded Mandates on State Local and Tribal Entities. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/ omb/assets/OMB/inforeg/2002_report_to_congress.pdf. Circular A-4 : Regulatory Impact Analysis A Primer. https : // obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/omb/circulars_a004_a-4/. References | Validating Regulatory Analysis : Report to Congress on the Benefits and Costs of Federal Regulations and Unfunded Mandates on State Local and Tribal Entities. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/ omb/assets/OMB/inforeg/2005_cb/final_2005_cb_report.pdf. Report to Congress on the Costs and Benefits of Federal Regulations and Unfunded Mandates on State Local and Tribal Entities. https : //www. whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/assets/OMB/inforeg/2006_ cb/2006_cb_final_report.pdf. Report to Congress on the Benefits and Costs of Federal Regulations and Unfunded Mandates on State Local and Tribal Entities. https : //www. whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/inforeg/inforeg/2013_ cb/2013_cost_benefit_report-updated.pdf. 2017a. Regulatory Reform : Two-for-One Status Report and Regulatory Cost Caps. https : //www.reginfo.gov/public/pdf/eo13771/FINAL_TOPLINE_ All_20171207.pdf 2017b. Draft Report to Congress on the Benefits and Costs of Federal Regulations and Agency Compliance with the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wpcontent/uploads/2017/12/draft_2017_ cost_benefit_report.pdf. Regulatory Reform under Executive Order : Final Accounting for Fiscal Year https : //www.reginfo.gov/public/pdf/eo13771/EO_13771_ Final_Accounting_for_Fiscal_Year_2018.pdf. Phillips M. Amicus Brief of the General Counsel. Case 32-RC-109684 National Labor Relations Board. Pizer W. M. Alder J. Aldy D. Anthoff M. Cropper et al. Using and Improving the Social Cost of Carbon. Science no. : Pollitz K. M. Long A. Semanskee and R. Kamal. Understanding Short-Term Limited Duration Health Insurance. San Francisco : Kaiser Family Foundation. http : //files.kff.org/attachment/ Issue-Brief-Understanding-Short-Term-Limited-Duration-Health-Insurance. Potter R. Why Trump Can t Undo the Regulatory State So Easily. Brookings Institution. Rao P. S. Nowak and C. Eibner. What Is the Impact on Enrollment and Premiums If the Duration of Short-Term Health Insurance Plans Is Increased ? Commonwealth Fund. https : //www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/ fund-reports/2018/jun/ what-impact-enrollment-and-premiums-if-duration-short-term. Raso C. Assessing Regulatory Retrospective Review under the Obama Administration. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/research/ assessing-regulatory-retrospective-review-under-the-obama-administration/. Renda A. One Step Forward Two Steps Back ? The New U.S. Regulatory Budgeting Rules in Light of the International Experience. Journal of BenefitCost Analysis no. : | References Romer D. Advanced Macroeconomics. New York : McGraw-Hill. Rose N. After Airline Deregulation and Alfred E. Kahn. American Economic Review no. : Rosen J. Putting Regulators on a Budget. https : //www.nationalaffairs.com/ publications/detail/putting-regulators-on-a-budget. Rosen J. and B. Callanan. The Regulatory Budget Revisited. Administrative Law Review no. : Saez E. J. Slemrod and S. Giertz. The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect to Marginal Tax Rates : A Critical Review. Journal of Economic Literature : Sallee J. S. West and W. Fan. Do Consumers Recognize the Value of Fuel Economy ? Evidence from Used Car Prices and Gasoline Price Fluctuations. Journal of Public Economics : Stigler G. The Theory of Economic Regulation. Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science no. : Sunstein C. Opening Keynote Address : The Regulatory Lookback. Boston University Law Review : The Cost-Benefit Revolution. Cambridge MA : MIT Press. Thaler R. and C. Sunstein. Nudge : Improving Decisions about Health Wealth and Happiness. New York : Penguin Books. Tirole J. The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge MA : MIT Press. Trejo S. The Effects of Overtime Pay Regulation on Worker Compensation. American Economic Review no. : Tullock G. The Welfare Costs of Tariffs Monopolies and Theft. Western Economic Journal : U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation. 2014a. Food Truck Nation : U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation Food Truck Index. https : //www.foodtrucknation.us/ wp-content/themes/food-truck-nation/Food-Truck-Nation-Full-Report.pdf. 2014b. Regulatory Climate Index https : //www.uschamberfoundation. org/sites/default/files/CityReg % 20Report_0.pdf. U.S. Congress. H.R. Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of https : //www.congress.gov/bill/99th-congress/house-bill/3128. Weber C. Toward Obtaining a Consistent Estimate of the Elasticity of Taxable Income Using Difference-in-Differences. Journal of Public Economics : Whinston M. Lectures on Antitrust Economics. Cambridge MA : MIT Press. White House. Executive Order on Federal Regulation. https : //www. archives.gov/federal-register/codification/executive-order/12291.html. Memorandum of Agreement : Review of Tax Regulations under Executive Order https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/ OIRA-TreasuryMOA_4.11.18.pdf. References | Williamson O. Economies as an Antitrust Defense : The Welfare Tradeoffs. American Economic Review no. : World Bank. Doing Business : Rankings & Ease of Doing Business Score Economy Rankings. www.doingbusiness.org/en/rankings. Zerbe R. Jr. and H. McCurdy. The Failure of Market Failure. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : Chapter Akerlof G. The Market for Lemons : Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Aliprantis D. and M. Schweitzer. Opioids and the Labor Market. Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. https : //www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-andevents/publications/working-papers/2018-working-papers/ wp-1807-opioids-and-the-labor-market.aspx. Ashenfelter O. H. Farber and M. Ransom. Labor Market Monopsony. Journal of Labor Economics no. : Baker M. J. Gruber and K. Milligan. Universal Child Care Maternal Labor Supply and Family Well-Being. Journal of Political Economy no. : Baughman R. and S. Dickert-Conlin. The Earned Income Tax Credit and Fertility. Journal of Population Economics no. : Bernstein J. and K. Hassett. Unlocking Private Capital to Facilitate Economic Growth in Distressed Areas. Economic Innovation Group. https : //eig.org/ wp-content/uploads/2015/04/Unlocking-Private-Capital-to-Facilitate-Growth. pdf. Bertrand M. and S. Mullainathan. Are Emily and Greg More Employable Than Lakisha and Jamal ? A Field Experiment on Labor Market Discrimination. American Economic Review no. : Bhuller M. G. Dahl K. L ken and M. Mogstad. Incarceration Recidivism and Employment. University of California San Diego. https : //econweb.ucsd. edu/ ~ gdahl/papers/incarceration-recidivism-employment.pdf. Bivens J. L. Mishel and J. Schmitt. It s Not Just Monopoly and Monopsony : How Market Power Has Affected American Wages. Economic Policy Institute Research Report. https : //www.epi.org/publication/ its-not-just-monopoly-and-monopsony-how-market-power-has-affectedamerican-wages. Blau D. Unintended Consequences of Child Care Regulations. Labour Economics no. : BLS ( U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Overview of BLS Statistics on Pay and Benefits. https : //www.bls.gov/bls/wages.htm. Borio C. E. Kharroubi C. Upper and F. Zampolli. Labour Reallocation and Productivity Dynamics : Financial Causes Real Consequences. Working Paper | References Bank for International Settlements. https : //www.bis.org/publ/work534. pdf. Bound J. and R. Freeman. What Went Wrong ? The Erosion of Relative Earnings and Employment among Young Black Men in the 1980s. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Brill M. C. Holman C. Morris R. Raichoudhary and N. Yosif. Understanding the Labor Productivity and Compensation Gap. Beyond the Numbers : Productivity ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) no. https : //www.bls.gov/opub/ btn/volume-6/understanding-the-labor-productivity-and-compensation-gap. htm. Burns C. and J. Macdonald. America s Diverse Family Farms Edition. U.S. Department of Agriculture. https : //www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/ publications/81408/eib-164.pdf ? v = Busso M. J. Gregory and P. Kline. Assessing the Incidence and Efficiency of a Prominent-Place-Based Policy. American Economic Review no. : Card D. J. Kluve and A. Weber. Active Labour Market Policy Evaluations : A Meta-analysis. Economic Journal no. : F452 Care. This Is How Much Child Care Costs in https : //www.care.com/c/ stories/2423/how-much-does-child-care-cost. Carpenter D. L. Knepper A. Erickson and J. Ross. License to Work : A National Study of Burdens from Occupational Licensing. https : //www.ij.org/images/ pdf_folder/economic_liberty/occupational_licensing/licensetowork.pdf. Carson E. Prisoners in Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin NCJ251149. https : //www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/p16.pdf. CBO ( U.S. Congressional Budget Office ) The Budget and Economic Outlook : to CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) The Underestimated Cost of the Opioid Crisis. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/images/ The % 20Underestimated % 20Cost % 20of % 20the % 20Opioid % 20Crisis.pdf. 2018a. Addressing America s Reskilling Challenge. https : //www.whitehouse. gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Addressing-Americas-Reskilling-Challenge. pdf. .2018b. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2018/02/ERP_2018_Final-FINAL.pdf. 2018c. How Much are Workers Getting Paid ? A Primer on Wage Measurement. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/How-Much-AreWorkers-Getting-Paid-A-Primer-on-Wage-Measurement-Sept-2018.pdf. 2018d. Military Spouses in the Labor Market. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Military-Spouses-in-the-Labor-Market.pdf. References | .2018e. Returns on Investments in Recidivism-Reducing Programs. https : // www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Returns-on-Investmentsin-Recidivism-Reducing-Programs.pdf. CEA Department of the Treasury and Department of Labor. Occupational Licensing : A Framework for Policymakers. https : //obamawhitehouse. archives.gov/sites/default/files/docs/licensing_report_final_nonembargo.pdf. Charles K. E. Hurst and M. Schwartz. The Transformation of Manufacturing and the Decline in U.S. Employment. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. http : //www.nber.org/papers/w24468. pdf. ChildCare Aware of America. The U.S. and the High Cost of Childcare : A Review of Prices and Proposed Solutions for a Broken System. http : //usa. childcareaware.org/advocacy-public-policy/resources/research/costofcare. Couch K. and R. Fairlie. Last Hired First Fired ? Black-White Unemployment and the Business Cycle. Demography no. : Crump R. G. Goda and K. Mumford. Fertility and the Personal Exemption : Comment. American Economic Review no. : Currie J. J. Jin and M. Schnell. U.S. Employment and Opioids : Is There a Connection ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w24440.pdf. Currie J. and V. Hotz. Accidents Will Happen ? Unintentional Childhood Injuries and the Effects of Child Care Regulations. Journal of Health Economics no. : Daly M. and B. Hobijn. Composition and Aggregate Real Wage Growth. American Economic Review no. : Darity W. Jr. and P. Mason. Evidence on Discrimination in Employment : Codes of Color Codes of Gender. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Decker P. and W. Corson. International Trade and Worker Displacement : Evaluation of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Program. Industrial and Labor Relations Review no. : Department of the Treasury and DOD ( Department of Defense ) Supporting Our Military Families : Best Practices for Streamlining Occupational Licensing across State Lines. https : //www.treasury.gov/connect/blog/Pages/ Supporting-Our-Military-Families.aspx. Desai M. C. Foley and J. Hines Jr. Labor and Capital Shares of the Corporate Tax Burden : International Evidence. http : //www.people.hbs.edu/ffoley/ labcapshr.pdf. DOD ( U.S. Department of Defense ) Demographics : Profile of the Military Community. http : //download.militaryonesource.mil/12038/MOS/ Reports/2016-Demographics-Report.pdf. Economic Innovation Group. Opportunity Zones : The Map Comes into Focus. https : //eig.org/news/opportunity-zones-map-comes-focus. | References Elsby M. B. Hobijn and A. Sahin. The Labor Market in the Great Recession. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/wp-content/ uploads/2016/07/2010a_bpea_eslby.pdf. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Wage Growth Tracker. https : //www.frbatlanta. org/chcs/wage-growth-tracker.aspx. Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Monetary Policy Report to the Congress Pursuant to the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of https : // www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/hh/2000/February/FullReport.pdf. 2018a. Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in https : // www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm. 2018b. Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking. https : //www. federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm. Felix A. Passing the Burden : Corporate Tax Incidence in Open Economies. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. https : //www.kansascityfed.org/ Publicat/RegionalRWP/RRWP07-01.pdf. Do State Corporate Income Taxes Reduce Wages ? Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. https : //www.kansascityfed.org/PUBLICAT/ECONREV/ PDF/09q2felix.pdf. Fernald J. Productivity and Potential Output Before During and After the Great Recession. NBER Macroeconomics no. : Fiore A. L. Niehem J. Hurst J. Son A. Sadachar D. Russell D. Swenson and C. Seeger. Will They Stay or Will They Go ? Community Features Important in Migration Decisions of Recent University Graduates. Economic Development Quarterly no. : Flood S. M. King R. Rodgers S. Ruggles and R. Warren. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series Current Population Survey : Version https : //doi. org/10.18128/DO30.V6.0. Freedman M. Teaching New Markets Old Tricks : The Effects of Subsidized Investment on Low-Income Neighborhoods. Journal of Public Economics no. : Gelfond H. and L. Looney. Learning from Opportunity Zones : How to Improve Place-Based Policies. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/ wp-content/uploads/2018/10/Looney_Opportunity-Zones_final.pdf. Ghertner R. and L. Groves. The Opioid Crisis and Economic Opportunity : Geographic and Economic Trends. https : //aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/ pdf/259261/ASPEEconomicOpportunityOpioidCrisis.pdf. Gittleman M. M. Klee and M. Kleiner. Analyzing the Labor Market Outcomes of Occupational Licensing. Industrial Relations no. : Gittleman M. and M. Kleiner. Wage Effects of Unionization and Occupational Licensing Coverage in the United States. Industrial and Labor Relations Review no. : References | Goetz S. M. Partridge and H. Stephens. The Economic Status of Rural America in the President Trump Era and Beyond. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy no. : Goetz S. and A. Rupasingha. Determinants of Growth in Non-Farm Proprietor Densities in the U.S. Small Business Economics no. : Gorry D. and D. Thomas. Regulation and the Cost of Childcare. Journal of Applied Economics no. : Gramlich J. The Gap Between the Number of Blacks and Whites in Prisons is Shrinking. Pew Research Center. http : //www.pewresearch.org/facttank/2018/01/12/ shrinking-gap-between-number-of-blacks-and-whites-in-prison. Gurley-Calvez T. T. Gilbert K. Harper D. Marples and K. Daly. Do Tax Incentives Affect Investment ? An Analysis of the New Markets Tax Credit. Public Finance Review no. : Harger K. and A. Ross. Do Capital Tax Incentives Attract New Businesses ? Evidence across Industries from the New Markets Tax Credit. Journal of Regional Science no. : Harris M. L. Kessler M. Murray and M. Glenn. Prescription Opioids and Labor Market Pains : The Effect of Schedule II Opioids on Labor Force Participation and Unemployment. http : //cber.haslam.utk.edu/staff/harris/Opioids_HKMG. pdf. Hashimoto M. Minimum Wage Effects on Training on the Job. American Economic Review no. : Hassett K. and A. Mathur. Taxes and Wages. American Enterprise Institute. http : //pcsi.pa.go.kr/files/20060706_TaxesandWages.pdf. Havnes T. and M. Mogstad. No Child Left Behind : Subsidized Child Care and Children s Long-Run Outcomes. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Hellerstein J. D. Neumark and K. Troske. Wages Productivity and Worker Characteristics : Evidence from Plant-Level Production Functions and Wage Equations. Journal of Labor Economics no. : Herbst C. Universal Child Care Maternal Employment and Children s Long-Run Outcomes : Evidence from the U.S. Lanham Act of Journal of Labor Economics no. : Herbst C. and E. Tekin. The Impact of Child-Care Subsidies on Child Development : Evidence from Geographic Variation in the Distance to Social Service Agencies Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : HHS ( Department of Health and Human Services ) Research Brief # : Trends in Child Care Center Licensing Regulations and Policies for Administration for Children and Families Office of Child Care. https : //www. naralicensing.org/assets/docs/ChildCareLicensingStudies/2014CCStudy/ center_licensing_trends_brief_2014.pdf. | References Prices Charged in Early Care and Education : Initial Findings from the National Survey of Early Care and Education. https : //www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/ default/files/opre/es_price_of_care_toopre_041715_2.pdf. Holzer H. P. Offner and E. Sorensen. Declining Employment among Young Black Less-Educated Men : The Role of Incarceration and Child Support. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : Hotz V. and M. Xiao. The Impact of Regulations on the Supply and Quality of Care in Child Care Markets. American Economic Review no. : Ilg R. and S. Haugen. Earnings and Employment Trends in the 1990s. Monthly Labor Review no. : IRS ( Internal Revenue Service ) Internal Revenue Bulletin : https : // www.irs.gov/irb/2018-10_IRB # RP-2018-18. Johnson J. and M. Kleiner. Is Occupational Licensing a Barrier to Interstate Migration Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. https : //www. minneapolisfed.org/research/sr/sr561.pdf. Juhn C. and S. Potter. Changes in Labor Force Participation in the United States. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Kaplan G. and S. Schulhofer-Wohl. Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Interstate Migration. International Economic Review no. : Kaye S. The Impact of the Recession on Workers with Disabilities. Monthly Labor Review no. : https : //www.bls.gov/opub/ mlr/2010/10/art2full.pdf. Kim Y. and P. Orazem. Broadband Internet and New Firm Location Decisions in Rural Areas. American Journal of Agricultural Economics no. : Kleiner M. Occupational Licensing. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Kleiner M. and A. Krueger. The Prevalence and Effects of Occupational Licensing. British Journal of Industrial Relations no. : Kleiner M. A. Krueger and A. Mas. A Proposal to Encourage States to Rationalize Occupational Licensing Practices. Brookings Institution. http : //www.hhh. umn.edu/file/9441/download. Kluve J. The Effectiveness of European Active Labor Market Programs. Labour Economics no. : Knop B. and A. Mohanty. Child Care Costs in the Redesigned Survey of Income and Program Participation ( SIPP ) : A Comparison to the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement ( CPS ASEC ) Census Bureau Working Paper https : //www.census.gov/library/workingpapers/2018/demo/SEHSD-WP2018-21.html. Krueger A. Where Have All the Workers Gone ? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate. Brookings Institution. https : //www. brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/1_krueger.pdf. References | Laird J. and T. Nielsen. The Effects of Physician Prescribing Behaviors on Prescription Drug Use and Labor Supply : Evidence from Movers in Denmark. Harvard University. https : //scholar.harvard.edu/files/lairdja/files/Laird_ JMP_1.pdf. LaLumia S. J. Sallee and N. Turner. New Evidence on Taxes and the Timing of Birth. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Leduc S. and D. Wilson. Has the Wage Phillips Curve Gone Dormant ? Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. https : //www.frbsf.org/economic-research/ publications/economic-letter/2017/october/ has-wage-phillips-curve-gone-dormant. Lefebvre P. and P. Merrigan. Child-Care Policy and the Labor Supply of Mothers with Young Children : A Natural Experiment from Canada. Journal of Labor Economics no. : Lefebvre P. P. Merrigan. and M. Verstraete. Dynamic Labour Supply Effects of Childcare Subsidies : Evidence from a Canadian Natural Experiment on Low-Fee Universal Child Care. Labour Economics no. : Lerman R. Do Firms Benefit from Apprenticeship ? IZA World of Labor. https : // wol.iza.org/articles/do-firms-benefit-from-apprenticeship-investments/long. Manyika J. S. Lund M. Chui J. Bughin J. Woetzel P. Batra R. Ko and S. Sanghvi. Jobs Lost Jobs Gained : Workforce Transitions in a Time of Automation. McKinsey Global Institute. https : //www.mckinsey.com/ featured-insights/future-of-organizations-and-work/ jobs-lost-jobs-gained-what-the-future-of-work-will-mean-for-jobs-skills-andwages. McClelland R. and S. Mok. A Review of Recent Research on Labor Supply Elasticities. Congressional Budget Office Working Paper https : // www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/cbofiles/attachments/10-25-2012-Recent_ Research_on_Labor_Supply_Elasticities.pdf. Meyer B. Labor Supply at the Extensive and Intensive Margins : The EITC Welfare and Hours Worked. American Economic Review no. : Milligan K. Subsidizing the Stork : New Evidence on Tax Incentives and Fertility. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Molloy R. C. Smith and A. Wozniak. Internal Migration in the United States. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Job Changing and the Decline in Long Distance Migration in the United States. Demography no. : Morrissey T. Child Care and Parent Labor Force Participation : A Review of the Research Literature. Review of Economics of the Household no. : Moss P. and C. Tilly. Soft Skills and Race : An Investigation of Black Men s Employment Problems. Work and Occupations no. : Muehlemann S. P. Ryan and S. Wolter. Monopsony Power Pay Structure and Training. ILR Review no. : | References National Center on Early Childhood Quality Assurance. Increasing Quality in Early Care and Education Programs : Effects on Expenses and Revenues. https : //childcareta.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/public/pcqc_increase_ quality_final.pdf. NBER ( National Bureau of Economic Research ) U.S. Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions. https : //www.nber.org/cycles.html. Neal D. and A. Rick. The Prison Boom and the Lack of Black Progress after Smith and Welch. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w20283. Neal D. and W. Johnson. The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage Differences. Journal of Political Economy no. : Neumark D. and J. Kolko. Do Enterprise Zones Create Jobs ? Evidence from California s Enterprise Zone Program. Journal of Urban Economics no. : Neumark D. and D. Rothstein. Do School-to-Work Programs Help the Forgotten Half ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w11636. Neumark D. and W. Wascher. Minimum Wages and Skill Acquisition : Another Look at Schooling Effects. Economics of Education Review no. : NFIB ( National Federation of Independent Business ) 2018a. October Report : Small Business Optimism Index. http : //www.nfib.com/surveys/ small-business-economic-trends/. 2018b. Small Business Introduction to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act : Part https : //www.nfib.com/assets/TCJA-Survey.pdf. NIH ( National Institutes of Health ) Overdose Death Rates. https : //www. drugabuse.gov/related-topics/trends-statistics/overdose-death-rates. Nollenberger N. and N. Rodr guez-Planas. Full-Time Universal Childcare in a Context of Low Maternal Employment : Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Spain. Labour Economics no. : North Carolina State Board of Dental Examiners v. Federal Trade Commission. https : //www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/14pdf/13-534_19m2.pdf. OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) Time for the U.S. to Reskill ? What the Survey of Adult Skills Says. https : //www.oecdilibrary.org/education/time-for-the-u-s-to-reskill_9789264204904-en. 2018a. OECD Economic Survey of the United States http : //www.oecd. org/eco/surveys/economic-survey-united-states.htm. 2018b. Putting a Face Behind the Jobs at Risk of Automation. http : //www. oecd.org/employment/Automation-policy-brief-2018.pdf. Oreopoulos P. M. Page and A. Stevens. The Intergenerational Effect of Worker Displacement. Journal of Labor Economics no. : References | Ozimek A. There Is No U.S. Wage Growth Mystery. Moody s Analytics. https : // www.economy.com/dismal/analysis/datapoints/296127/ There-Is-No-US-Wage-GrowthMystery. Pager D. B. Western and N. Sugie. Sequencing Disadvantage : Barriers to Employment Facing Young Black and White Men with Criminal Records. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science no. : PwC ( PricewaterhouseCoopers ) Will Robots Really Steal Our Jobs ? An International Analysis of the Potential Long-Term Impact of Automation. https : //www.pwc.com/hu/hu/kiadvanyok/assets/pdf/impact_of_ automation_on_jobs.pdf. Reichert C. J. Cromartie and R. Arthun. Impacts of Return Migration on Rural U.S. Communities. Rural Sociology Journal no. : Rinz K. Labor Market Concentration Earnings Inequality and Earnings Mobility. Census Bureau Working Paper https : //www.census.gov/ content/dam/Census/library/working-papers/2018/adrm/carra-wp-2018-10. pdf. Rupasingha A. and S. Goetz. Self-Employment and Local Economic Performance : Evidence from U.S. Counties. Papers in Regional Science no. : Schochet P. R. D Amico J. Berk S. Dolfin and N. Wozny. Estimated Impacts for Participants in the Trade Adjustment Assistance ( TAA ) Program Under the Amendments. U.S. Department of Labor. http : //wdr.doleta.gov/ research/FullText_Documents/ETAOP % 5F2013 % 5F10 % 5FParticipant % 5FImp act % 5FReport % 2Epdf. Sentencing Project. Trends in U.S. Corrections. https : //www.sentencingproject. org/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/Trends-in-US-Corrections.pdf. Shapiro C. Investment Moral Hazard and Occupational Licensing. Review of Economic Studies no. : Shulman S. Discrimination Human Capital and Black-White Unemployment : Evidence from Cities. Journal of Human Resources no. : Stevens A. and J. Schaller. Short-Run Effects of Parental Job Loss on Children s Academic Achievement. Economic of Education Review no. : Task Force on Apprenticeship Expansion. Final Report to the President of the United States. https : //www.dol.gov/apprenticeship/docs/task-forceapprenticeship-expansion-report.pdf. Tsvetkova A. M. Partridge and M. Betz. Entrepreneurial and Employment Responses to Economic Conditions across the Rural-Urban Continuum. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science no. : Twomey J. and J. Monks. Monopsony and Salary Suppression : The Case of Major League Soccer in the United States. American Economist no. : | References Urban Institute. Net Income Change Calculator. http : //nicc.urban.org/ netincomecalculator. USDA ( U.S. Department of Agriculture ) 2017a. Manufacturing Is Relatively More Important to the Rural Economy than the Urban Economy. https : //www. usda.gov/media/blog/2017/09/12/ manufacturing-relatively-more-important-rural-economy-urban-economy. 2017b. Report to the President of the United States from the Task Force on Agriculture and Rural Prosperity. https : //www.usda.gov/sites/default/files/ documents/rural-prosperity-report.pdf. 2017c. Rural Employment and Unemployment. https : //www.ers.usda.gov/ topics/rural-economy-population/employment-education/ rural-employment-and-unemployment. .2017d. Rural Manufacturing at a Glance. https : //www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/ publications/84758/eib-177.pdf ? v = 2017e. Urban Areas Offer Higher Earnings for Workers with More Education. https : //www.ers.usda.gov/amber-waves/2017/july/ urban-areas-offer-higher-earnings-for-workers-with-more-education. 2018a. Ag and Food Sectors and the Economy. https : //www.ers.usda.gov/dataproducts/ag-and-food-statistics-charting-the-essentials/ ag-and-food-sectors-and-the-economy. 2018b. Farming and Farm Income. https : //www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/ ag-and-food-statistics-charting-the-essentials/farming-and-farm-income. 2018c. Rural Education. https : //www.ers.usda.gov/topics/rural-economypopulation/employment-education/rural-education. Webber D. Firm Market Power and the Earnings Distribution. Labour Economics no. : Weller C. The Black and White Labor Gap in America. Center for American Progress. https : //www.americanprogress.org/issues/economy/ reports/2011/07/25/9992/the-black-and-white-labor-gap-in-america. Western B. and B. Pettit. Incarceration and Racial Inequality in Men s Employment. Industrial and Labor Relations Review no. : Black-White Wage Inequality Employment Rates and Incarceration. American Journal of Sociology no. : White House. Presidential Executive Order on Promoting Agriculture and Rural Prosperity in America. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/ presidential-executive-order-promoting-agriculture-rural-prosperity-america. 2018a. Federal Interagency Council on Crime Prevention and Improving Reentry. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/ federal-interagency-council-crime-prevention-improving-reentry. 2018b. The Opioid Crisis. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/opioids. 2018c. Presidential Executive Order on Streamlining and Expediting Requests to Locate Broadband Facilities in Rural America. https : //www.whitehouse. References | gov/presidential-actions/ presidential-executive-order-streamlining-expediting-requests-locatebroadband-facilities-rural-america. Wilmoth D. The Retreat of the Rural Entrepreneur. U.S. Small Business Administration. https : //www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/advocacy/RetreatRural-Entrepreneur.pdf. Wilson V. Black Unemployment Is Significantly Higher Than White Unemployment Regardless of Educational Attainment. Economic Policy Institute. https : //www.epi.org/publication/ black-unemployment-educational-attainment. Yellen J. Current Conditions and the Outlook for the U.S. Economy. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/speech/yellen20160606a.htm. Chapter AAM ( Association for Accessible Medicines ) Generic Drug Access & Savings in the U.S. : Access in Jeopardy. https : //accessiblemeds.org/sites/default/ files/2018_aam_generic_drug_access_and_savings_report.pdf. Acemoglu D. and J. Linn. Market Size in Innovation : Theory and Evidence from the Pharmaceutical Industry. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Aitken M. E. Berndt B. Bosworth I. Cockburn R. Frank M. Kleinrock and B. Shapiro. The Regulation of Prescription Drug Competition and Market Responses : Patterns in Prices and Sales Following Loss of Exclusivity. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Aitken M. E. Berndt and D. Cutler. Prescription Drug Spending Trends in the United States : Looking Beyond the Turning Point. Health Affairs no. : Alpert B. Drug War. Barrons June https : //www.barrons.com/articles/ SB108690508847334356. Andrews M. FDA s Approval of a Cheaper Drug for Hepatitis C Will Likely Expand Treatment. NPR October http : //www.npr.org/sections/healthshots/2017/10/04/555156577/ fdas-approval-of-a-cheaper-drug-for-hepatitis-c-will-likely-expand-treatment. Arrow K. Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care. American Economic Review no. : Berndt E. and M. Aitken. Brand Loyalty Generic Entry and Price Competition in Pharmaceuticals in the Quarter Century after the Waxman-Hatch Legislation. International Journal of the Economics of Business no. : | References Berndt E. T. McGuire and J. Newhouse. A Primer on the Economics of Prescription Pharmaceutical Pricing in Health Insurance Markets. Forum for Health Economics & Policy no. Blahous C. 2018a. The Costs of a National Single-Payer Healthcare System. Mercatus Working Paper. Arlington VA : Mercatus Center at George Mason University. 2018b. How Much Would Medicare for All Cut Doctor and Hospital Reimbursements ? https : //economics21.org/m4a-reimbursements-blahous. Blume-Kohout M. and N. Sood. Market Size and Innovation : Effects of Medicare Part D on Pharmaceutical Research and Development. Journal of Public Economics : Boardman A. and A. Vining. Ownership and Performance in Competitive Environments : A Comparison of the Performance of Private Mixed and StateOwned Enterprises. Journal of Law & Economics no. : Book R. Medicare Administrative Costs Are Higher Not Lower Than for Private Insurance. Heritage Foundation. https : //www.heritage.org/node/14322/ print-display. Brook R. E. Keeler K. Lohr J. Newhouse J. Ware W. Rogers A. Davies et al. The Health Insurance Experiment : A Classic RAND Study Speaks to the Current Health Care Reform Debate. RAND Health. https : //www.rand.org/ pubs/research_briefs/RB9174.html. Busch F. and P. Houchens. The Individual Mandate Repeal : Will It Matter ? Milliman. http : //www.milliman.com/insight/2018/ The-individual-mandate-repeal-Will-it-matter/. Buttorff C. T. Ruder and M. Bauman. Multiple Chronic Conditions in the United States. RAND Corporation. https : //www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TL221.html. Candon M. S. Zuckerman D. Wissoker B. Saloner G. Kenney K. Rhodes and D. Polsky. Declining Medicaid Fees and Primary Care Appointment Availability for New Medicaid Patients. Journal of the American Medical Association no. : Caves R. M. Whinston M. Hurwitz and A. Pakes. Patent Expiration Entry and Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity : Microeconomics no. : https : //www.brookings.edu/ wp-content/uploads/1991/01/1991_bpeamicro_caves.pdf. CBO ( U.S. Congressional Budget Office ) Cost Estimate of Senate Amendment Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act to H.R. https : //www.cbo. gov/sites/default/files/111th-congress-2009-2010/costestimate/41423-hr3590-senate.pdf. Budgetary and Economic Effects of Repealing the Affordable Care Act. https : //www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/114th-congress-2015-2016/ reports/50252effectsofacarepeal.pdf. Private Health Insurance Premiums and Federal Policy. https : //www. cbo.gov/sites/default/files/114th-congress-2015-2016/reports/51130-Health_ Insurance_Premiums.pdf References | Repealing the Individual Health Insurance Mandate : An Updated Estimate. https : //www.cbo.gov/system/files/115th-congress-2017-2018/ reports/53300-individualmandate.pdf. Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for Consumers Under Age : to https : //www.cbo.gov/publication/53826. CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Understanding Recent Developments in the Individual Health Insurance Market. Council of Economic Advisers Issue Brief. https : //obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/page/ files/201701_individual_health_insurance_market_cea_issue_brief.pdf. 2018a. The Administration s FDA Reforms and Reduced Biopharmaceutical Drug Prices. Washington : White House. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2018/10/The-Administrations-FDA-Reforms-and-ReducedBiopharmaceutical-Drug-Prices.pdf. 2018b. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. 2018c. The Opportunity Costs of Socialism. Washington : White House. https : // www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/The-Opportunity-Costsof-Socialism.pdf. Deregulating Health Insurance Markets : Value to Market Participants. Washington : White House. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2019/02/Deregulating-Health-Insurance-Markets-FINAL.pdf. Chandra A. A. Finkelstein A. Sacarny and C. Syverson. 2016a. Healthcare Exceptionalism ? Productivity and Allocation in the U.S. Healthcare Sector. American Economic Review no. : 2016b. Productivity Dispersion in Medicine and Manufacturing. American Economic Review no. : Chase D. and J. Arensmeyer. The Affordable Care Act s Impact on Small Business. Commonwealth Fund. https : //www.commonwealthfund.org/ publications/issue-briefs/2018/oct/ affordable-care-act-impact-small-business. Chernew M. Z. Cooper E. Larsen-Hallock and F. Morton. Are Health Care Services Shoppable ? Evidence from the Consumption of Lower-Limb MRI Scans. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. CIHI ( Canadian Institute for Health Information ) How Canada Compares : Results from the Commonwealth Fund s International Health Policy Survey of Seniors. https : //www.cihi.ca/sites/default/files/document/ commonwealth-survey-2017-chartbook-en-rev2-web.pptx. CMS ( Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ) Actuarial Report on the Financial Outlook for Medicaid. https : //www.cms.gov/Research-StatisticsData-and-Systems/Research/ActuarialStudies/Downloads/ MedicaidReport2017.pdf. | References Projected Medicare Expenditures under an Illustrative Scenario with Alternative Payment Updates to Medicare Providers. https : //www.cms.gov/ Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/ ReportsTrustFunds/Downloads/2018TRAlternativeScenario.pdf Collins S. and M. Gunja. Premium Tax Credits Are the Individual Market s Stabilizing Force. Commonwealth Fund. https : //www.commonwealthfund. org/blog/2018/premium-tax-credits-are-individual-markets-stabilizing-force. Conrad R. W. Liu Z. Tillman A. So A. Schick C. Nardinelli and R. Lutter. Estimating Cost Savings from Generic Drug Approvals in U.S. Food and Drug Administration. https : //www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/ ResourcesForYou/Consumers/BuyingUsingMedicineSafely/GenericDrugs/ UCM609808.pdf. Cullis J. P. Jones and C. Propper. Waiting Lists and Medical Treatment : Analysis and Policies. In Handbook of Health Economics vol. edited by A. Culyer and J. Newhouse. Amsterdam : Elsevier. Cutler D. Your Money or Your Life : Strong Medicine for America s Health Care System. New York : Oxford University Press. Cutler D. and M. McClellan. Is Technological Change in Medicine Worth it ? Health Affairs no. : DeMasi J. Price Trends for Prescription Pharmaceuticals : Background report prepared for Conference on Pharmaceutical Pricing Practices Utilization and Costs sponsored by U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Washington August Desai S. L. Hatfield. A. Hicks. M. Chernew and A. Mehrotra. Association between Availability of a Price Transparency Tool and Outpatient Spending. Journal of the American Medical Association no. : DiMasi J. H. Grabowski and R. Hansen. Innovation in the Pharmaceutical Industry : New Estimates of R&D Costs. Journal of Health Economics : Durlauf S. and B. Lawrence. The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. New York : Palgrave Macmillan. Eibner C. and S. Nowak. The Effect of Eliminating the Individual Mandate Penalty and the Role of Behavioral Factors. Commonwealth Fund. http : // www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/fund-reports/2018/jul/ eliminatingindividual-mandate-penalty-behavioral-factors. Einav L. A. Finkelstein and M. Polyakova. Private Provision of Social Insurance : Drug-Specific Price Elasticities and Cost Sharing in Medicare Part D. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Faber M. M. Bosch H. Wollersheim S. Leatherman and R. Grol. Public Reporting in Health Care : How Do Consumers Use Quality-of-Care Information ? A Systematic Review. Medical Care no.1 : Farmer C. S. Hosek and D. Adamson. Balancing Demand and Supply for Veterans Health Care : A Summary of Three RAND Assessments Conducted References | under the Veterans Choice Act. Rand Health. https : //www.rand.org/content/ dam/rand/pubs/research_reports/RR1100/RR1165z4/RAND_RR1165z4.pdf. FDA ( U.S. Food and Drug Administration ) Activities Report of the Generic Drugs Program ( FY ) Monthly Performance. Activities Report of the Generic Drugs Program ( FY ) Monthly Performance. https : //www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/ HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/ApprovalApplications/ AbbreviatedNewDrugApplicationANDAGenerics/ucm584749.htm. 2018a. Activities Report of the Generic Drugs Program ( FY ) Monthly Performance. https : //www.fda.gov/drugs/developmentapprovalprocess/ howdrugsaredevelopedandapproved/approvalapplications/ abbreviatednewdrugapplicationandagenerics/ucm375079.htm. 2018b. Healthy Innovation Safer Families : FDA s Strategic Policy Roadmap Summary of Strategic Policy Areas. https : //www.fda.gov/ downloads/AboutFDA/ReportsManualsForms/Reports/UCM592001.pdf. 2018c. USP Therapeutic Categories Model Guidelines. https : //www.fda.gov/ RegulatoryInformation/LawsEnforcedbyFDA/ SignificantAmendmentstotheFDCAct/ FoodandDrugAdministrationAmendmentsActof2007/ FDAAAImplementationChart/ucm232402.htm. Feldstein M. Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax. Review of Economic and Statistics no. : Finkelstein A. Static and Dynamic Effects of Health Policy : Evidence from the Vaccine Industry. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Finkelstein A. N. Hendren and E. Luttmer. The Value of Medicaid : Interpreting Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Finkelstein A. N. Mahoney and M. Notowidigdo. What Does ( Formal ) Health Insurance Do and for Whom ? Working paper University of Chicago. http : // faculty.chicagobooth.edu/neale.mahoney/research/papers/Finkelstein_ Mahoney_Noto_AR_2017.pdf. Frakt A. Price Transparency Is Nice. Just Don t Expect It to Cut Health Costs. New York Times December https : //www.nytimes.com/2016/12/19/upshot/ price-transparency-is-nice-just-dont-expect-it-to-cut-health-costs. html ? module = inline. Frank R. and D. Salkever. Generic Entry and the Price of Pharmaceuticals. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy no. : Frost A. and D. Newman. Spending on Shoppable Services in Health Care. Health Cost Institute. https : //www.healthcostinstitute.org/images/easyblog_ articles/110/Shoppable-Services-IB-3.2.16_0.pdf. Gaes G. Cost Performance Studies Look at Prison Privatization. National Institute of Justice Journal : | References Gallen T. Using Participant Behavior to Measure the Value of Social Programs : The Case of Medicaid. PhD diss. University of Chicago. Gallen T. and C. Mulligan. Wedges Labor Market Behavior and Health Insurance Coverage under the Affordable Care Act. National Tax Journal no. : GAO ( U.S. Government Accountability Office ) Veterans Choice Program. https : // www.gao.gov/assets/700/692271.pdf. Garthwaite C. T. Gross and M. Notowidigdo. Hospitals as Insurers of Last Resort. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : Ghanta P. List of Countries with Universal Healthcare. https : //truecostblog. com/2009/08/09/countries-with-universal-healthcare-by-date/. Goldman D. A. Jena D. Lakdawalla J. Malin J. Malkin and E. Sun. The Value of Specialty Oncology Drugs. Health Services Research no. : Goldman D. G. Joyce G. Lawless W. Crown and V. Willey. Benefit Design and Specialty Drug Use. Health Affairs no. : Goulder L. and R. Williams III. The Substantial Bias from Ignoring General Equilibrium Effects in Estimating Excess Burden and a Practical Solution. Journal of Political Economy no. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Grabowski D. D. Lakdawalla D. Goldman M. Eber L. Liu T. Abdelgawad A. Kuznik M. Chernew and T. Philipson. The Large Social Value Resulting from Use of Statins Warrants Steps to Improve Adherence and Broaden Treatment. Health Affairs no. : Grabowski H. and J. Vernon. Brand Loyalty Entry and Price Competition in Pharmaceuticals after the Drug Act. Journal of Law and Economics : Gruber J. Health Care Reform Is a Three-Legged Stool : The Costs of Partially Repealing the Affordable Care Act. Washington : Center for American Progress. HHS ( U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ) Expanding the Use of Generic Drugs. Issue Brief Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. https : //aspe.hhs.gov/system/files/pdf/76151/ib.pdf. Reforming America s Healthcare System Through Choice and Competition. Published jointly with the Department of the Treasury and the Department of Labor. https : //www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/Reforming-AmericasHealthcare-System-Through-Choice-and-Competition.pdf. Himmelstein D. A Comparison of Hospital Administrative Costs in Eight Nations : U.S. Costs Exceed All Others by Far. Commonwealth Fund. https : //www. commonwealthfund.org/publications/journalarticle/2014/sep/ comparison-hospital-administrative-costs-eight-nations-us. Ho J. and S. Preston. U.S. Mortality in an International Context : Age Variations. Population and Development Review no. : References | Hoxby C. Covering the Costs. In What Lies Ahead for America s Children and Their Schools edited by E. Finn and R. Sousa. Stanford CA : Hoover Institution Press. Jena A. and T. Philipson. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis and Innovation. Journal of Health Economics no. : Kaiser Family Foundation. 2017a. Health Insurance Coverage of the Total Population. https : //www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/total-population/ ? currentTimefram e = 0&sortModel = % 7B % 22colId % : % 22Location % % 22sort % : % 22asc % % 7D. 2017b. Medicare Advantage Spotlight : Enrollment Market Update. https : //www.kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/ medicare-advantage-2017-spotlight-enrollment-market-update/ Data Note : Changes in Enrollment in the Individual Health Insurance Market. https : //www.kff.org/health-reform/issue-brief/ data-note-changes-in-enrollment-in-the-individual-health-insurancemarket/. Kessler G. Medicare Private Insurance and Administrative Costs : A Democratic Talking Point. Washington Post September https : //www.washingtonpost. com/news/fact-checker/wp/2017/09/19/medicare-private-insurance-andadministrative-costs-a-democratic-talking-point/ ? utm_term = .b96f58ff9cc7. Ketchum J. C. Lucarelli and C. Powers. Paying Attention or Paying Too Much in Medicare Part D. American Economic Review no. : Kless S. C. Wolfe and C. Curtis. Brief Summaries of Medicare & Medicaid. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https : //www.cms.gov/ResearchStatistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/ MedicareProgramRatesStats/Downloads/MedicareMedicaidSummaries2017. pdf. Lakdawalla D. D. Goldman P. Michaud N. Sood R. Lempert Z. Cong H. de Vries and I. Gutierrez. U.S. Pharmaceutical Policy in a Global Marketplace. Health Affairs no. : w138 w150. Lakdawalla D. and T. Philipson. Does Intellectual Property Restrict Output ? An Analysis of Pharmaceutical Markets. Journal of Law and Economics no. : Lee T. Me Too Products : Friend or Foe ? New England Journal of Medicine : Leland H. Quacks Lemons and Licensing : A Theory of Minimum Quality Standards. Journal of Political Economy no. : Lichtenberg F. and T. Philipson. The Dual Role of Intellectual Property Regulations : Within- and Between-Patent Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceuticals Industry. Journal of Law and Economics no. S2 : Mossialos E. M. Wenzl R. Osborn and C. Anderson. International Profiles of Health Care Systems. Commonwealth Fund. https : //www. | References commonwealthfund.org/publications/fund-reports/2017/may/ international-profiles-health-care-systems. Mulligan C. Side Effects and Complications : The Economic Consequences of Health Care Reform. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Mulligan C. and T. Philipson. Merit Motives and Government Intervention : Public Finance in Reverse. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Insurance Market Participation under Symmetric Information. Paper presented at American Economic Association Meetings. Mulligan C. and K. Tsui. The Upside-Down Economics of Regulated and Otherwise Rigid Prices. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Murrin S. Medicaid Fraud Control Units Fiscal Year Annual Report. Office of Inspector General U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Newhouse J. Free for All ? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. Nyman J. Is Moral Hazard Inefficient ? The Policy Implications of a New Theory. Health Affairs no. : Pagliarulo N. AbbVie Surprised Investors with Its Hepatitis C Success. Will It Last ? AbbVie Biopharmadive. https : //www.biopharmadive.com/news/ abbvies-surprised-investors-mavyret-hepatitis-c-success-will-it-last/529158/. Pauly M. The Economics of Moral Hazard : Comment. American Economic Review no. : Pauly M. A. Leive and S. Harrington. Losses ( and Gains ) from Health Reform for Non-Medicaid Uninsured. Journal of Risk and Insurance July. https : //doi. org/10.1111/jori.12255. Philipson T. What s Wrong with Private Insurance ? Forbes October https : // www.forbes.com/sites/tomasphilipson/2013/10/20/ whats-wrong-with-private-insurance/. Philipson T. E. Berndt A. Gottschalk and E. Sun. Cost-Benefit Analysis of the FDA : The Case of the Prescription Drug User Fee Acts. Journal of Public Economics nos. : Phillipson T. M. Eber D. Lakdawalla M. Corral R. Conti and D. Goldman. An Analysis of Whether Higher Healthcare Spending in the United States versus Europe Is Worth it in the Case of Cancer. Health Affairs no. : Philipson T. and A. Jena. Who Benefits from New Medical Technologies ? Estimates of Consumer and Producer Surpluses for HIV/AIDS Drugs. Forum for Health Economics & Policy ( De Gruyter ) no. : Philipson T. and E. Sun. Is the Food and Drug Administration Safe and Effective ? Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : References | Reinhardt U. Health Care Uncertainty and Morality. New York Times Economix Blog August https : //economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/08/13/healthcare-uncertainty-and-morality/ ? mtrref = the60sat50.blogspot.com. Ringel J. S. Hosek B. Vollaard and S. Mahnovski. The Elasticity of Demand for Health Care : A Review of the Literature and Its Application to the Military Health System. Santa Monica CA : RAND Corporation. https : //www.rand.org/pubs/ monograph_reports/MR1355.html. Robinson C. T. Brown and C. Whaley. Reference Pricing Changes Choice Architecture of Healthcare for Consumers. Health Affairs no. : Sacks D. The Health Insurance Marketplaces. Journal of American Medical Association no. : Saez E. J. Slemrod and S. Giertz. The Elasticity of Taxable Income with Respect to Marginal Tax Rates : A Critical Review. Journal of Economic Literature : Sood N. E. Sun L. Daugherty and A. Ghosh. How Much Is Too Much ? An Analysis of Health Plan Profits and Administrative Costs in California. California HealthCare Foundation. https : //www.chcf.org/wp-content/ uploads/2017/12/PDF HowMuchIsTooMuchPlanProfits.pdf. Stigler G. The Theory of Economic Regulation. Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science no. : Toich L. Will Hepatitis C Virus Medication Costs Drop in the Years Ahead ? Pharmacy Times February http : //www.pharmacytimes.com/resourcecenters/hepatitisc/ will-hepatitis-c-virus-medicaton-costs-drop-in-the-years-ahead. U.S. Census Bureau. Selected Characteristics of the Uninsured in the United States. https : //factfinder.census.gov/faces/tableservices/jsf/pages/ productview.xhtml ? src = bkmk. U.S. Congress. H.R.3128 Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of https : //www.congress.gov/bill/99th-congress/house-bill/3128. Walker J. Gilead to Slice List Prices of Liver Drugs. Wall Street Journal September https : //www.wsj.com/articles/ gilead-to-slice-list-prices-of-liver-drugs-1537818060. Weber C. Towards Obtaining a Consistent Estimate of the Elasticity of Taxable Income Using Difference-in-Differences. Journal of Public Economics : Weiner J. R. Rosenquist and E. Hartman. State Efforts to Close the Health Coverage Gap. https : //ldi.upenn.edu/brief/ state-efforts-close-health-coverage-gap. Weisbart E. A Single-Payer System Would Reduce U.S. Health Care Costs. Virtual Monitor no. : White C. and M. Eguchi. Reference Pricing : A Small Piece of the Health Care Price and Quality Puzzle. NIHCR Research Brief National Institute for | References Health Care Reform. https : //nihcr.org/analysis/improving-care-delivery/ prevention-improving-health/reference-pricing2/ # ib4. Woodman J. Patients Beyond Borders : Everybody s Guide to Affordable WorldClass Medical Travel. Chapel Hill NC : Healthy Travel Media. Woolhandler S. T. Campbell and D. Himmelstein. Costs of Health Care Administration in the United States and Canada. New England Journal of Medicine no. : Yin W. Market Incentives and Pharmaceutical Innovation. Journal of Health Economics no. : Zeckhauser R. Medical Insurance : A Case Study of the Trade-Off Between Risk Spreading and Appropriate Incentives. Journal of Economic Theory no. : Zerbe R. and H. McCurdy. The Failure of Market Failure. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : Chapter Adamson S. Comparing Interstate Regulation and Investment in U.S. Gas and Electric Transmission. Economics of Energy and Environmental Policy no. : Adelman M. Genie Out of the Bottle : World Oil Markets since Cambridge MA : MIT Press. Alchian A. and W. Allen. University Economics. Belmont CA : Wadsworth. Alyeska Pipeline Service Company. Low Flow Impact Study. https : //www. alyeska-pipe.com/assets/uploads/pagestructure/TAPS_Operations_LowFlow/ editor_uploads/LoFIS_Summary_Report_P6 % 2027_FullReport.pdf. AOGHS ( American Oil & Gas Historical Society ) Trans-Alaska Pipeline History. https : //aoghs.org/transportation/trans-alaska-pipeline/ Argueta C. L. Hanson and C. Vincent. Federal Land Ownership : Overview and Data. Congressional Research Service. https : //fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42346. pdf Bahndari N. N. Mehta V. Joshi P. Creuset and T. Chen. The IMO : Global Shipping s Blue Sky Moment. Goldman Sachs Equity Research May http : //www.weltinnenpolitik.net/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/IMO-2020Global-Shipping-Blue-Sky-Moment.pdf. Bakhtiari A. World Oil Production Capacity Model Suggests Output Peak by Oil & Gas Journal April Balash P. K. Kern J. Brewer J. Adder C. Nichols G. Pickpaugh and E. Shuster. Reliability Resilience and the Oncoming Wave of Retiring Baseload Units. DOE National Energy Technology Laboratory March https : //www. districtenergy.org/HigherLogic/System/DownloadDocumentFile. ashx ? DocumentFileKey = 246e582e-81b7-cc50-c9c550031845aca0&forceDialog = References | Barsky R. and L. Kilian. Do We Really Know That Oil Caused the Great Stagflation ? A Monetary Alternative. NBER Macroeconomics Annual : Baumeister C. and G. Peersman. Time-Varying Effects of Oil Supply Shocks on the U.S. Economy. American Economic Review : Macroeconomics no. : Bentley R. Global Oil & Gas Depletion : An Overview. Energy Policy : http : //www.oilcrisis.com/bentley/depletionoverview.pdf. BLM ( Bureau of Land Management ) Federal Coal Program Programmatic Environmental Impact Statement ( PEIS ) : Scoping Report Appendices. U.S. Department of the Interior. https : //www.eenews.net/assets/2017/01/11/ document_gw_03.pdf. Borenstein S. J. Bushnell and F. Wolak. Measuring Market Inefficiencies in California s Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market. American Economic Review no. : Borenstein S. and R. Kellogg. The Incidence of an Oil Glut : Who Benefits from Cheap Crude Oil in the Midwest ? Energy Journal no. : Boslett A. T. Guilfoos and C. Lang. Valuation of Expectations : A Hedonic Study of Shale Gas Development and New York s Moratorium. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management : Boyce J. Prediction and Inference in the Hubbert-Deffeyes Peak Oil Model. Energy Journal no. : BP. BP Statistical Review of World Energy. London : BP. https : //www.bp.com/ content/dam/bp/business-sites/en/global/corporate/pdfs/energy-economics/ statistical-review/bp-stats-review-2018-full-report.pdf. Brown S. and H. Huntington. Evaluating U.S. Oil Security and Import Reliance. Energy Policy : Burtraw D. and S. Szambelan. U.S. Emissions Trading Markets for SO2 and NOx. RFF Discussion Paper Resources for the Future Washington. Bushnell J. and K. Novan. Setting with the Sun : The Impacts of Renewable Energy on Wholesale Power Markets. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Busse M. and N. Keohane. Market Effects of Environmental Regulation : Coal Railroads and the Clean Air Act. RAND Journal of Economics no. : Campbell C. Industry Urged to Watch for Regular Oil Production Peaks Depletion Signals. Oil & Gas Journal July Carlson C. D. Burtraw M. Cropper and K. Palmer. Sulfur Dioxide Control by Electric Utilities : What Are the Gains from Trade ? Journal of Political Economy no. : CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. | References Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. 2016a. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. 2016b. The Economics of Mineral Leasing on Federal Lands : Ensuring a Fair Return to Taxpayers. https : //obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/ files/page/files/20160622_cea_coal_leasing.pdf. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. Cosgrove B. D. LaFave S. Dissanayake and M. Donihue. The Economic Impact of Shale Gas Development : A Natural Experiment along the New York/ Pennsylvania Border. Agricultural and Resource Economics Review no. : Covert T. and R. Kellogg. Crude by Rail Option Value and Pipeline Investment. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Cullen J. Measuring the Environmental Benefits of Wind-Generated Electricity. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Davis L. and C. Hausman. Market Impacts of a Nuclear Power Plant Closure. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : Davis L. and C. Wolfram. Deregulation Consolidation and Efficiency : Evidence from U.S. Nuclear Power. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : Deffeyes K. Hubbert s Peak : The Impending World Oil Shortage. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. Beyond Oil : The View from Hubbert s Peak. New York : Hill & Wang. Deutch J. The Good News About Gas : The Natural Gas Revolution and Its Consequences. Foreign Affairs no. : EIA ( U.S. Energy Information Administration ) Annual Energy Outlook with Projections to https : //www.eia.gov/outlooks/archive/aeo06/aeoref_tab. html. Annual Energy Outlook with Projections to https : //www.eia.gov/ outlooks/archive/aeo10/aeoref_tab.html. Annual Energy Review https : //www.eia.gov/totalenergy/data/annual/ showtext.php ? t = ptb0702. International Energy Outlook https : //www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/ data/ browser/ # / ? id = 10-IEO2017. References | 2018a. Analysis of Projected Crude Oil Production in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. https : //www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/ANWR.pdf. 2018b. Annual Energy Outlook https : //www.eia.gov/outlooks/aeo/. 2018c. Coal Data Browser. https : //www.eia.gov/coal/data/browser/. 2018d. Electric Power Annual. https : //www.eia.gov/electricity/annual/. 2018e. Electric Power Monthly : Table B.2 Major Disturbances and Unusual Occurrences https : //www.eia.gov/electricity/monthly/epm_table_ grapher.php ? t = epmt_b_2. 2018f. Nonassociated Natural Gas Proved Reserves Wet After Lease Separation. https : //www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/NG_ENR_NANG_A_EPG0_R40_ BCF_A.htm/. 2018g. November Monthly Energy Review. https : //www.eia.gov/ totalenergy/data/monthly/index.php. 2018h. Pipeline Projects. https : //www.eia.gov/naturalgas/pipelines/ EIA-NaturalGasPipelineProjects.xlsx. 2018i. Short-Term Energy Outlook Data Browser. https : //www.eia.gov/ outlooks/steo/data/browser/. 2018j. U.S. State-to-State Capacity. https : //www.eia.gov/naturalgas/pipelines/ EIA-StatetoStateCapacity.xlsx. EPA ( Environmental Protection Agency ) 2018a. Air Pollutant Emissions Trends Data : Average Annual Emissions : Criteria Pollutants National Tier for March https : //www.epa.gov/air-emissions-inventories/ air-pollutant-emissions-trends-data. 2018b. Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks : EPA 430-R-18-003. https : //www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/ inventory-us-greenhouse-gas-emissions-and-sinks-1990-2016. 2018c. Our Nation s Air https : //gispub.epa.gov/air/ trendsreport/2018/ # highlights. European Commission. Liquefied Natural Gas. https : //ec.europa.eu/energy/en/ topics/oil-gas-and-coal/liquefied-natural-gas-lng. Fabrizio K. N. Rose and C. Wolfram. Do Markets Reduce Costs ? Assessing the Impact of Regulatory Restructuring on U.S. Electric Generation Efficiency. American Economic Review no. : Fally T. and J. Sayre. Commodity Trade Matters. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //ideas.repec. org/p/nbr/nberwo/24965.html. Fell H. and D. Kaffine. The Fall of Coal : Joint Impacts of Fuel Prices and Renewables on Generation and Emissions. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : FERC ( Federal Energy Regulatory Commission ) North American LNG Import/ Export Terminals Approved. https : //www.ferc.gov/industries/gas/ indus-act/lng/lng-approved.pdf. | References Fitzgerald T. Regulatory Obsolescence through Technological Changes in Oil and Gas Extraction. William & Mary Environmental Law & Policy Review no. GAO ( U.S. Government Accountability Office ) Coal Leasing : BLM Could Enhance Appraisal Process More Explicitly Consider Coal Exports and Provide More Public Information. GAO Publication Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. Gerking S. and S. Hamilton. What Explains the Increased Utilization of Powder River Basin Coal in Electric Power Generation ? American Journal of Agricultural Economics no. : Gold R. The Boom : How Fracking Ignited the American Energy Revolution and Changed the World. New York : Simon & Schuster. Hahn R. and P. Passell. The Economics of Allowing More U.S. Oil Drilling. Energy Economics no. : Hamilton J. This Is What Happened to the Oil Price Macroeconomy Relationship. Journal of Monetary Economics no. : What Is an Oil Shock ? Journal of Econometrics : Hausman C. Corporate Incentives and Nuclear Safety. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Hausman C. and R. Kellogg. Welfare and Distributional Implications of Shale Gas. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring Hefner R. III. The United States of Gas : Why the Shale Revolution Could Have Happened Only in America. Foreign Affairs no. : Hirsch R. R. Bezdek and R. Wendling. Peaking of World Oil Production : Impacts Mitigation and Risk Management. Office of Science and Technical Information U.S. Department of Energy NETL-IR-2005-093. https : //www.osti. gov/servlets/purl/939271. Hoover K. and S. Perez. Post Hoc Ergo Propter Once More : An Evaluation of Does Monetary Policy Matter ? in the Spirit of James Tobin. Journal of Monetary Economics : Hubbert M. Nuclear Energy and the Fossil Fuels. Paper presented at Spring Meeting of Southern District of American Petroleum Institute San Antonio March http : //www.hubbertpeak.com/hubbert/1956/1956.pdf. Energy Resources : A Report to the Committee on Natural Resources of the National Academy of Sciences National Research Council. https : //www. nap.edu/read/18451/chapter/3. Hummels D. and A. Skiba. Shipping the Good Apples Out ? An Empirical Confirmation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture. Journal of Political Economy no. : IAEA ( International Atomic Energy Agency ) SANMEN-1. IAEA Power Reactor Information System. https : //pris.iaea.org/PRIS/CountryStatistics/ ReactorDetails.aspx ? current = References | IEA ( International Energy Agency ) Oil : Analysis and Forecasts to https : //www.iea.org/oilmarketreport/. Imsirovic A. and B. Pryor. IMO and the Brent-Dubai Spread. Oxford Institute for Energy Studies. https : //www.oxfordenergy.org/publications/ imo-2020-brent-dubai-spread/. Inman M. The Oracle of Oil : A Maverick Geologist s Quest for a Sustainable Future. New York : W. W. Norton. Jaffe A. and R. Soligo. The Role of Inventories in Oil Market Stability. Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance no. : Jenkins J. What s Killing Nuclear Power in U.S. Electricity Markets ? Drivers of Wholesale Price Declines at Nuclear Generators in the PJM Interconnection. CEEPR Working Paper Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Jevons W. The Coal Question : An Inquiry Concerning the Progress of the Nation and the Probable Exhaustion of the Coal-Mines. London : Macmillan. Jim nez-Rodr guez R. and M. S nchez. Oil Price Shocks and Real GDP Growth : Empirical Evidence for Some OECD Countries. ECB Working Paper Frankfurt : European Central Bank. Kaffine D. B. McBee and J. Lieskovsky. Emissions Savings from Wind Power Generation in Texas. Energy Journal no. : Keiser D. and J. Shapiro. Consequences of the Clean Water Act and the Demand for Water Quality. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Kilian L. Exogenous Oil Supply Shocks : How Big Are They and How Much Do They Matter for the U.S. Economy ? Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Kilian L. and R. Vigfusson. The Role of Oil Price Shocks in Causing U.S. Recessions. Journal of Money Credit and Banking : Kleinberg R. S. Paltsev C. Ebinger D. Hobbs and T. Boersma. Tight Oil Development Economics : Benchmarks Breakeven Points and Inelasticities. CEEPR Working Paper Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Komarek T. Labor Market Dynamics and the Unconventional Natural Gas Boom : Evidence from the Marcellus Region. Resource and Energy Economics : Laherr re J. World Oil Supply : What Goes Up Must Come Down but When Will It Peak ? Oil & Gas Journal February https : //www.ogj.com/articles/print/ volume-97/issue-5/in-this-issue/general-interest/world-oil-supply-what-goesup-must-come-down-but-when-will-it-peak.html. Linn J. L. Muehlenbachs and Y. Wang. How Do Natural Gas Prices Affect Electricity Consumers and the Environment ? Resources for the Future Discussion Paper http : //www.rff.org/files/sharepoint/WorkImages/ Download/RFF-DP-14-19.pdf. | References Malthus T. An Essay on the Principle of Population as It Affects the Future Improvement of Society. http : //www.esp.org/books/malthus/population/ malthus.pdf. McNally R. Crude Volatility : The History and the Future of Boom-Bust Oil Prices. New York : Columbia University Press. McRae S. Crude Oil Price Differentials and Pipeline Infrastructure. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Melek N. and E. Ojeda. Lifting the US Crude Oil Export Ban : Prospects for Increasing Oil Market Efficiency. Economic Review Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas second quarter. https : //www.kansascityfed.org/ ~ /media/files/ publicat/econrev/econrevarchive/2017/2q17cakirmelekojeda.pdf. MSHA ( Mine Safety and Health Administration ) Quarterly Mine Employment and Coal Production Report. U.S. Department of Labor Form https : // www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2018-title30-vol1/pdf/CFR-2018title30-vol1.pdf. NADP ( National Atmospheric Deposition Program ) National Trends Network ( NTN ) : Precipitation-Weighted Mean ( PWM ) Concentrations. http : //nadp.slh. wisc.edu/data/ntn/ntnAllsites.aspx. NEI ( Nuclear Energy Institute ) Nuclear Costs in Context. https : //www.nei.org/ CorporateSite/media/filefolder/resources/reports-and-briefs/nuclear-costscontext-201810.pdf. NEISO ( New England Independent System Operator ) Operational Fuel-Security Analysis. January https : //www.iso-ne.com/static-assets/ documents/2018/01/20180117_operational_fuel-security_analysis.pdf. Newell R. and B. Prest. The Unconventional Oil Supply Boom : Aggregate Price Response from Microdata. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/ w23973. Novan K. Valuing the Wind : Renewable Energy Policies and Air Pollution Avoided. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Power Reactor Status Reports for https : //www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/event-status/ reactor-status/2018/. ONRR ( Office of Natural Resources Revenue ) Oil and Gas Lease Sale Data CY U.S. Bureau of Land Management. OPEC ( Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries ) 2018a. Annual Statistical Bulletin. https : //www.opec.org/opec_web/en/publications/202.htm. 2018b. Monthly Oil Market Report. https : //www.opec.org/opec_web/en/ publications/338.htm. Parry I. and J. Darmstadter. The Costs of U.S. Oil Dependency. Washington : Resources for the Future. References | Pierru A. J. Smith and T. Zamrik. OPEC s Impact on Oil Price Volatility : The Role of Spare Capacity. Energy Journal no. : PJM Interconnection. PJM s Evolving Resource Mix and System Reliability. https : //www.pjm.com/ ~ /media/library/reports-notices/specialreports/20170330-pjms-evolving-resource-mix-and-system-reliability.ashx. Shapiro J. and R. Walker. Why Is Pollution from U.S. Manufacturing Declining ? The Roles of Environmental Regulation Productivity and Trade. American Economic Review no. : Skrebowski C. Oil Field Mega Projects Petroleum Review no : Sullivan T. C. Driscoll C. Beier D. Burtraw I. Fernandez J. Galloway D. Gay C. Goodale G. Likens G. Lovett and S. Watmough. Air Pollution Success Stories in the United States : The Value of Long-Term Observations. Environmental Science and Policy : United Nations. UN Comtrade Database. Department of Economic and Social Affairs Statistics Division Trade Statistics Branch. https : //comtrade.un.org/ data/. U.S. Census Bureau. USA Trade Online. https : //usatrade.census.gov/. USGS ( U.S. Geological Survey ) The Oil and Gas Resource Potential of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge Area Alaska. https : //pubs.usgs.gov/of/1998/ ofr-98-0034/ANWR1002.pdf. Updated Assessment of Undiscovered Oil and Gas Resources of the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska ( NPRA ) https : //pubs.usgs.gov/ fs/2010/3102/ 2017a. Assessing U.S. Coal Resources and Reserves. Fact Sheet https : //pubs.er.usgs.gov/publication/fs20173067. 2017b. Assessment of Undiscovered Oil and Gas Resources in the Cretaceous Nanushuk and Torok Formations Alaska North Slope and Summary of Resource Potential of the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska. https : // pubs.usgs.gov/fs/2017/3088/fs20173088.pdf. Weber J. The Effects of a Natural Gas Boom on Employment and Income in Colorado Texas and Wyoming. Energy Economics no. : https : // doi.org/10.1016/j.eneco.2011.11.013. Weber J. and C. Hitaj. What Can We Learn About Shale Gas Development from Land Values ? Opportunities Challenges and Evidence from Texas and Pennsylvania. Agricultural and Resource Economics Review no. : Wolak F. Assessing the Impact of the Diffusion of Shale Oil and Gas Technology on the Global Coal Market. Unpublished paper Stanford University. Wyeno R. Natural Gas Infrastructure in Mexico. S&P Global : Platts November Zhuravleva P. Analysis of LNG Arbitrage Examines Main Barriers to Developing Market. LNG Journal. | References Zuckerman G. The Frackers : The Outrageous Inside Story of the New Billionaire Wildcatters. New York : Penguin. Chapter Angell C. and N. Williams. FYI Revisited : U.S. Home Prices Does Bust Always Follow Boom ? FYI : An Update on Emerging Issues in Banking ( Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ) May http : //www.fdic.gov/bank/analytical/ fyi/050205fyi.pdf. Baily M. R. Litan and M. Johnson. The Origins of the Financial Crisis. Working paper Brookings Fixing Finance Series. https : //www.brookings.edu/ wp-content/uploads/2016/06/11_origins_crisis_baily_litan.pdf. Belsky E. and N. Richardson. Understanding the Boom and Bust in Nonprime Mortgage Lending. Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard University. http : //www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/default/files/ubb10-1.pdf. Bordo M. and J. Duca. The Impact of the Dodd-Frank Act on Small Business. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Breitenstein E. and J. McGee. Brick-and-Mortar Banking Remains Prevalent in an Increasingly Virtual World. FDIC Quarterly no. https : //www.fdic.gov/ bank/analytical/quarterly/2015-vol9-1/fdic-4q2014-v9n1-brickandmortar.pdf. Brunnermeier M. A. Crockett C. Goodhart A. Persaud and H. Shin. The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation. Geneva Report on the World Economy. Princeton NJ : Princeton University. https : //www.princeton. edu/ ~ markus/research/papers/Geneva11.pdf. Capone C. Providing Alternatives to Mortgage Foreclosure : A Report to Congress. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Washington : U.S. Government Printing Office. https : //www.huduser.gov/portal/Publications/ pdf/alt.pdf. Choi D. M. Holcomb and D. Morgan. Bank Leverage Limits and Regulatory Arbitrage : New Evidence on a Recurring Question. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports no. Coates J. Cost-Benefit Analysis of Financial Regulation : Case Studies and Implications. Yale Law Journal no. : Dahl D. J. Fuchs A. Meyer and M. Neely. Compliance Costs Economies of Scale and Compliance Performance. Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis Division of Bank Supervision. https : //www.communitybanking.org/ ~ /media/files/ compliance % 20costs % 20economies % 20of % 20scale % 20and % compliance % 20performance.pdf. FCIC ( Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission ) The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. https : //www.gpo.gov/fdsys/ pkg/GPO-FCIC/pdf/GPO-FCIC.pdf. References | FDIC ( Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ) History of the Eighties Volume I : An Examination of the Banking Crises of the 1980s and Early 1990s. Washington : FDIC. JPMorgan Chase Acquires Banking Operations of Washington Mutual. Press release. https : //www.fdic.gov/news/news/press/2008/pr08085.html. Community Banking Study. https : //www.fdic.gov/regulations/resources/ cbi/report/cbi-full.pdf. Crisis and Response : An FDIC History Washington : FDIC. Quarterly Bank Profile Fourth Quarter https : //www.fdic.gov/bank/ analytical/qbp/2018dec/qbp.pdf. Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Report to Congress on Implementation of Enhanced Prudential Standards. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/ publications/files/report-to-congress-on-eps-implementation-201801.pdf. FFIEC ( Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council ) Uniform Financial Institutions Rating System. Federal Register no. : GAO ( U.S. Government Accountability Office ) Financial Regulatory Reform : Financial Crisis Losses and Potential Impacts of the Dodd-Frank Act. Report to Congressional Requesters GAO-13-180. https : //www.gao.gov/ assets/660/651322.pdf. Gorton G. The Panic of NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Holtz-Eakin D. The Growth Consequences of Dodd-Frank. American Action Forum. https : //www.americanactionforum.org/research/ the-growth-consequences-of-dodd-frank/. Hopt K. Corporate Governance of Banks and Other Financial Institutions after the Financial Crisis. Journal of Corporate Law Studies part : Hoskins S. and M. Labonte. An Analysis of the Regulatory Burden on Small Banks. Congressional Research Service. https : //fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R43999. pdf. Hughes J. J. Jagtiani L. Mester and C. Moon. Does Scale Matter in Community Bank Performance ? Evidence Obtained by Applying Several New Measures of Performance. Working paper Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. https : // www.philadelphiafed.org/-/media/research-and-data/publications/workingpapers/2018/wp18-11.pdf. IMF ( International Monetary Fund ) Global Financial Stability Report : Containing Systemic Risks and Restoring Financial Soundness. Washington : IMF. http : // www.imf.org/External/Pubs/FT/GFSR/2008/01/pdf/text.pdf. Financial System Stability Assessment. Washington : IMF. https : //www.imf. org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2010/cr10247.pdf. Ligon J. and W. Beach. The Housing Market Without Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac : Economic Effects of Eliminating Government-Sponsored Enterprises in Housing. Washington : Heritage Foundation. https : //www.heritage.org/housing/report/ | References housing-market-without-fannie-mae-and-freddie-mac-economic-effectseliminating. Lincoln T. Regulators Failure to Heed Warnings Allowed Subprime Mortgage Lending to Spin of Control. Public Citizen. https : //www.citizen.org/sites/ default/files/chapter-one-regulators-failure-to-heed-warnings.pdf. Luttrell D. T. Atkinson and H. Rosenblum. Assessing the Costs and Consequences of the Financial Crisis and Its Aftermath. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Economic Letter no. : McLaughlin P. D. Francis and O. Sherouse. Dodd-Frank Is One of the Biggest Regulatory Events Ever. Mercatus Center at George Mason University. https : // www.mercatus.org/publications/ dodd-frank-one-biggest-regulatory-events-ever. McLaughlin P. and O. Sherouse. The McLaughlin-Sherouse List : The MostRegulated Industries of Mercatus Center at George Mason University. https : //www.mercatus.org/publication/ mclaughlin-sherouse-list-10-most-regulated-industries-2014. Passmore W. S. Sherlund and G. Burgess. The Effect of Housing GovernmentSponsored Enterprises on Mortgage Rates. Real Estate Economics no. : Peirce H. I. Robinson and T. Stratmann. How Are Small Banks Faring Under Dodd-Frank ? Working Paper Arlington VA : Mercatus Center at George Mason University. Perkins D. Tailoring Bank Regulations : Differences in Bank Size Activities and Capital Levels. Congressional Research Service. https : //fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/ R45051.pdf. Pinto E. Triggers of the Financial Crisis. American Enterprise Institute. http : // www.aei.org/paper/100174. Reinhart C. and K. Rogoff. This Time Is Different : Eight Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. Roberts D. A. Sarkar and O. Shachar. Bank Liquidity Provision and Basel Liquidity Regulations. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports no. Sunstein C. Financial Regulation and Cost-Benefit Analysis. Yale Law Journal Forum no. : U.S. Department of the Treasury. A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities : Banks and Credit Unions. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. https : //www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/ Documents/A % 20Financial % 20System.pdf. Viscusi W. and T. Gayer. Behavioral Public Choice : The Behavioral Paradox of Government Policy. Harvard Journal of Law & Public Policy no. : References | Wallison P. Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission Report Dissenting Statement. American Enterprise Institute. http : //fcic-static.law.stanford.edu/cdn_media/ fcic-reports/fcic_final_report_wallison_dissent.pdf. Chapter Abel D. J. Salvatier A. Stuhlmuller and O. Evans. Agent-Agnostic Human-in-theLoop Reinforcement Learning. Cornell University. https : //arxiv.org/ abs/1701.04079. Acemoglu D. and D. Autor. Skills Tasks and Technologies : Implications for Employment and Earnings. In Handbook of Labor Economics Volume Part B edited by O. Ashenfelter and D. Card. Amsterdam : Elsevier. Acemoglu D. D. Dorn G. Hanson and B. Price. Return of the Solow Paradox ? IT Productivity and Employment in U.S. Manufacturing. American Economic Review no. : Acemoglu D. and P. Restrepo. The Race between Man and Machine : Implications of Technology for Growth Factor Shares and Employment. American Economic Review no. : Aghion P. B. Jones and C. Jones. Artificial Intelligence and Economic Growth. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Agrawal A. J. Gans and A. Goldfarb. Economic Policy for Artificial Intelligence. Innovation Policy and the Economy : American Technology Council. Report to the President on Federal IT Modernization. https : //itmodernization.cio.gov/assets/report/Report % to % 20the % 20President % 20on % 20IT % 20Modernization % % 20Final.pdf. Arai N. T. Matsuzaki H. Iwane and H. Anai. Mathematics by Machine. In ISSAC : Proceedings of the 39th International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation. New York : ACM. Arel I. D. Rose and T. Karnowski. Deep Machine Learning : A New Frontier in Artificial Intelligence. IEEE Computational Intelligence Magazine no. : Artificial Intelligence Index. Artificial Intelligence Index : Annual Report. http : // cdn.aiindex.org/2017-report.pdf. Autor D. Why Are There Still So Many Jobs ? The History and Future of Workplace Automation. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Autor D. L. Katz and A. Krueger. Computing Inequality : Have Computers Changed the Labor Market ? Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Autor D. F. Levy and R. Murnane. The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change : An Empirical Exploration. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : | References Bailey A. N. Vaduganathan T. Henry R. Laverdiere and L. Pugliese. Making Digital Learning Work : Success Strategies from Six Leading Universities and Community Colleges. Boston Consulting Group and Arizona State University. https : //edplus.asu.edu/sites/default/files/BCG-Making-Digital-LearningWork-Apr-2018 % 20.pdf. Beaudry P. D. Green and B. Sand. The Great Reversal in the Demand for Skill and Cognitive Tasks. Journal of Labor Economics no. : S199 S247. Becker G. and K. Murphy. The Division of Labor Coordination Costs and Knowledge. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Begenau J. M. Farboodi and L. Veldkamp. Big Data in Finance and the Growth of Large Firms. Journal of Monetary Economics : Bessen J. The Policy Challenge of Artificial Intelligence. CPI Antitrust Chronicle June. https : //www.competitionpolicyinternational.com/wp-content/ uploads/2018/06/CPI-Bessen.pdf. Bisogni F. Proving Limits of State Data Breach Notification Laws : Is a Federal Law the Most Adequate Solution ? Journal of Information Policy : Bisogni F. H. Asghari and M. Van Eeten. Estimating the Size of the Iceberg from Its Tip : An Investigation into Unreported Data Breach Notifications. Paper prepared for Workshop on the Economics of Information Security. https : // weis2017.econinfosec.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2017/05/WEIS_2017_ paper_54.pdf. Bloom N. B. Eifert A. Mahajan D. McKenzie and J. Roberts. Does Management Matter ? Evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Bonhomme S. T. Lamadon and E Manresa. Discretizing Unobserved Heterogeneity. Working paper. http : //www.lamadon.com/paper/ BonhommeLamadonManresa2017.pdf. Borio C. E. Kharroubi C. Upper and F. Zampini. Labour Reallocation and Productivity Dynamics : Financial Causes Real Consequences. Working paper Bank for International Settlements. https : //www.bis.org/publ/ work534.pdf. Bowe H. Report of the National Commission on Technology Automation and Economic Progress Volume Washington : U.S. Government Printing Office. Bresnahan T. E. Brynjolfsson and L. Hitt. Information Technology Workplace Organization and the Demand for Skilled Labor : Firm-Level Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Brynjolfsson E. F. Eggers and A. Gannamaneni. Using Massive Online Choice Experiments to Measure Changes in Well-Being. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Brynjolfsson E. and A. McAfee. The Second Machine Age : Work Progress and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. New York : W. W. Norton. Brynjolfsson E. and K. McElheran. Data in Action : Data-Driven Decision Making in U.S. Manufacturing. Working paper U.S. Census Bureau. https : //www2. census.gov/ces/wp/2016/CES-WP-16-06.pdf. References | Brynjolfsson E. and T. Mitchell. What Can Machine Learning Do ? Workforce Implications. Science no. : Brynjolfsson E. D. Rock and T. Mitchell. What Can Machines Learn and What Does It Mean for Occupations and the Economy ? American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings : Brynjolfsson E. D. Rock and C. Syverson. Artificial Intelligence and the Modern Productivity Paradox : A Clash of Expectations and Statistics. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Burkner H. A. Bhattacharya T. Lewis and V. Rastogi. How Business Leaders Can Rebuild Trust and Renew the Social Contract. Boston Consulting Group. https : //www.bcg.com/en-us/publications/2017/globalization-leadershiptalent-business-leaders-rebuild-trust-renew-social-contract.aspx. Burning Glass. How Big Is the Skills Gap ? Blog Burning Glass Technologies. https : //www.burning-glass.com/blog/how-big-is-the-skills-gap/. Byrne D. C. Corrado and D. Sichel. The Rise of Cloud Computing : Minding Your P s Q s and K s. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Byrne D. S. Oliner and D. Sichel. Is the Information Technology Revolution Over ? International Productivity Monitor : How Fast Are Semiconductor Prices Falling ? Working paper Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Caselli F. and J. Feyrer. The Marginal Product of Capital. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Cashell B. W. Jackson M. Jickling and B. Webel. The Economic Impact of Cyber-Attacks. Congressional Research Service Report for Congress. https : // fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL32331.pdf. CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Productivity Growth in the Advanced Economies : The Past the Present and Lessons for the Future. https : // obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/docs/20150709_ productivity_advanced_economies_piie.pdf. Artificial Intelligence Automation and the Economy. https : // obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/documents/ Artificial-Intelligence-Automation-Economy.pdf. 2018a. Addressing America s Reskilling Challenge. Washington : White House. 2018b. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. 2018c. How Much Are Workers Getting Paid ? A Primer on Wage Measurement. Washington : White House. Chen M. J. Chevalier P. Rossi and E. Oehlsen. Forthcoming. The Value of Flexible Work : Evidence from Uber Drivers. Journal of Political Economy. | References Cohen P. R. Hahn J. Hall S. Levitt and R. Metcalfe. Using Big Data to Estimate Consumer Surplus : The Case of Uber. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Colciago A. and F. Etro. Cloud Computing Structural Change and Job Creation. In Broadband in Latin America : Beyond Connectivity edited by V. Jordan H. Galperin and W. Peres. Santiago : United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean. Comin D. D. Lashkari and M. Mestieri. Structural Change with Long-Run Income and Price Effects. Working paper. https : //www.dartmouth. edu/ ~ dcomin/Publications_files/CLM_rev_10_2017.pdf. Cramer J. and A. Krueger. Disruptive Change in the Taxi Business : The Case of Uber. American Economic Review no. : CSAIL ( Computer Science & Artificial Intelligence Lab ) Fooling Google s ImageRecognition AI 1000x Faster. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. https : // www.csail.mit.edu/news/fooling-googles-image-recognition-ai-1000x-faster. Cukier K. and V. Mayer-Schoenberger. The Rise of Big Data : How It s Changing the Way We Think About the World. Foreign Affairs no. : Culkin R. and S. Das. Machine Learning in Finance : The Case of Deep Learning for Option Pricing. Working paper Santa Clara University. https : //srdas. github.io/Papers/BlackScholesNN.pdf. CyberSeek. Cybersecurity Supply/Demand Heat Map. https : //www.cyberseek. org/heatmap.html. Czosseck C. R. Ottis and A. Talih rm. Estonia after the Cyber Attacks : Legal Strategic and Organisational Changes in Cybersecurity. International Journal of Cyber Warfare and Terrorism : https : //ccdcoe.org/ articles/2011/czosseck_ottis_taliharm_estonia_after_the_2007_cyber_ attacks.pdf. DARPA ( Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ) Mayhem Declared Preliminary Winner of Historic Cyber Grand Challenge. DARPA News and Events August https : //www.darpa.mil/news-events/2016-08-04. 2018a. AI Next Campaign. https : //www.darpa.mil/work-with-us/ ai-next-campaign. 2018b. Computers and Humans Exploring Software Security ( CHESS ) https : // www.darpa.mil/program/ computers-and-humans-exploring-software-security. 2018c. DARPA Announces $ Billion Campaign to Develop Next Wave of AI Technologies. https : //www.darpa.mil/news-events/2018-09-07 Davenport J. and M. England. Recent Advances in Real Geometric Reasoning. In Automated Deduction in Geometry edited by F. Botana and P. Quaresma. Berlin : Springer-Verlag. David P. The Dynamo and the Computer : An Historical Perspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox. American Economic Review no. : References | Deloitte. Bullish on the Business Value of Cognitive : Leaders in Cognitive and AI Weigh In on What s Working and What s Next. The Deloitte State of Cognitive Survey. https : //www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/ Documents/deloitte-analytics/us-da-2017-deloitte-state-of-cognitive-survey. pdf. de Zwart P. B. van Leeuwen and J. van Leeuwen-Li. Real Wages since In How Was Life ? Global Well-Being since edited by J. van Zanden et al. Paris : OECD Publishing. DOE ( U.S. Department of Energy ) DOE and VA Team Up to Improve Healthcare for Veterans. https : //www.energy.gov/articles/ doe-and-va-team-improve-healthcare-veterans. Einav L. and J. Levin. Economics in the Age of Big Data. Science no. Elsevier. Artificial Intelligence : How Knowledge Is Created Transferred and Used Trends in China Europe and the United States. Amsterdam : Elsevier Artificial Intelligence Resource Center. https : //p.widencdn.net/jj2lej/ ACAD-RL-AS-RE-ai-report-WEB. Escueta M. V Quan A. Nickow and P. Oreopoulos. Education Technology : An Evidence-Based Review. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. ESPN Analytics. Charting the Patriots Incredible Super Bowl LI Comeback. http : //www.espn.com/blog/statsinfo/post/_/id/128369/ the-2016-nfl-playoffs-viewed-through-win-probability. Estonia. E-Estonia : Public Safety. https : //e-estonia.com/ # Estonia Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications. Digital Agenda for Estonia. https : //www.mkm.ee/sites/default/files/digital_agenda_2020_ estonia_engf.pdf. FAO ( Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ) Measuring Sustainability in Cotton Farming Systems : Towards a Guidance Framework. http : //www.fao.org/3/a-i4170e.pdf. FBI ( U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation ) Incidents Identified by Sector Activity and Actor Type. Feldman R. S. Govindaraj J. Livnat and B. Segal. Management s Tone Change Post Earnings Announcement Drift and Accruals. Review of Accounting Studies : Fisk D. American Labor in the 20th Century. Compensation and Working Conditions ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Fall. https : //www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/ cwc/american-labor-in-the-20th-century.pdf. Forman C. A. Goldfarb and S. Greenstein. The Internet and Local Wages : A Puzzle. American Economic Review no. : Frey C. and M. Osborne. The Future of Employment : How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerisation ? Technological Forecasting and Social Change : | References Gallipoli G. and C. Makridis. Structural Transformation and the Rise of Information Technology. Journal of Monetary Economics : Gal-Or E. and A. Ghose. The Economic Incentives for Sharing Security Information. Information Systems Research no. : Galor O. and D. Weil. Population Technology and Growth : From Malthusian Stagnation to the Demographic Transition and Beyond. American Economic Review no. : Gibbs S. AlphaZero AI Beats Champion in Chess Program After Teaching Itself in Four Hours. The Guardian December https : //www.theguardian.com/ technology/2017/dec/07/ alphazero-google-deepmind-ai-beats-champion-program-teaching-itself-toplay-four-hours. Goldfarb A. and C. Tucker. Forthcoming. Digital Economics. Journal of Economic Literature. Gordon L. M. Loeb W. Lucyshyn and L. Zhou. Increasing Cybersecurity Investments in Private Firms. Journal of Cybersecurity no. : Gordon R. Does the New Economy Measure Up to the Great Inventions of the Past ? Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Why Has Economic Growth Slowed When Innovation Appears to Be Accelerating ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Graetz G. and G. Michaels. Robots at Work. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Hall J. and A. Krueger. An Analysis of the Labor Market for Uber s DriverPartners in the United States. ILR Review no. : Hall R. and C. JonesI. The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Hansen G. and E. Prescott. Malthus to Solow. American Economic Review no. : Hastie T. R. Tibshirani and J. Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning : Data Mining Inference and Prediction 2nd Edition. New York : Springer. Heritage Foundation. Index of Economic Freedom. https : //www.heritage. org/international-economies/commentary/2018-index-economic-freedom. Herrendorf B. C. Herrington and A. Valentinyi. Sectoral Technology and Structural Transformation. American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics no. : Herrendorf B. R. Rogerson and A. Valentinyi. Growth and Structural Transformation. In Handbook of Economic Growth Volume 2B edited by P. Aghion and S. Durlauf. Amsterdam : Elsevier. Hicks J. The Theory of Wages. 2nd ed. London : Macmillan. Hiscox. 2018a. Hiscox Cyber Readiness Report. https : //www.hiscox.com/sites/ default/files/content/2018-Hiscox-Cyber-Readiness-Report.pdf. References | 2018b. Hiscox Small Business Cyber Risk Report. https : //www.hiscox. com/documents/2018-Hiscox-Small-Business-Cyber-Risk-Report.pdf. Hoadley D. and N. Lucas. Artificial Intelligence and National Security. Congressional Research Service. https : //fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/R45178.pdf. Hoffman F. Hybrid Warfare and Challenges. Small Wars Journal : Holmstrom B. and P. Milgrom. Multitask Principal Agent Analyses : Incentive Contracts Asset Ownership and Job Design. Journal of Law Economics & Organization : Horowitz M. The Algorithms of August. Foreign Policy September https : // foreignpolicy.com/2018/09/12/ will-the-united-states-lose-the-artificial-intelligence-arms-race/. ISC ( International Information System Security Certification Consortium ) Cybersecurity Professionals Focus on Developing New Skills as Workforce Gap Widens. https : //www.isc2.org/-/media/ISC2/Research/2018-ISC2Cybersecurity-Workforce-Study.ashx ? la = en&hash = 4E09681D0FB51698D9BA6 BF13EEABFA48BD17DB0. ITRC ( Identity Theft Resource Center ) ITRC Multi-Year Data Breach Chart Jan. Dec. https : //www.idtheftcenter.org/wp-content/ uploads/2019/02/Multi-Year-Chart.pdf. Jaffe S. R. Minton C. Mulligan and K. Murphy. Chicago Price Theory. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. Forthcoming. Jha S. and E. Topol. Adapting to Artificial Intelligence : Radiologists and Pathologists as Information Specialists. Journal of the American Medical Association no. : Jones C. The Facts of Economic Growth. In Handbook of Macroeconomics Volume 2A edited by J. Taylor and H. Uhlig. Amsterdam : Elsevier. Jorgensen D. Accounting for Growth in the Information Age. In Handbook of Economic Growth Volume 1A edited by P. Aghion and S. Durlauf. Amsterdam : Elsevier. Jorgensen D. and K. Stiroh. U.S. Economic Growth in the New Millennium. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : Jorgenson D. K. Stiroh R. Gordon and D. Sichel. Raising the Speed Limit : U.S. Economic Growth in the Information Age. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : JPMorgan Chase. The Online Platform Economy in : Drivers Workers Sellers and Lessors. https : //www.jpmorganchase.com/corporate/institute/ report-ope-2018.htm. Juhn C. K. Murphy and B. Pierce. Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns to Skill. Journal of Political Economy no. : Kaldor N. Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth. In The Theory of Capital edited by D. Hague. Proceedings of a conference held by International Economic Association. London : Palgrave Macmillan. | References Karabarbounis L. and B. Neiman. The Global Decline of the Labor Share. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Katz L. and A. Krueger. The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in the United States Industrial and Labor Relations Review in press. Understanding Trends in Alternative Work Arrangements in the United States. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Katz L. and K. Murphy. Changes in Relative Wages : Supply and Demand Factors. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Kerber M. C. Lange and C. Rowat. An Introduction to Mechanized Reasoning. Journal of Mathematical Economics : Kleinberg J. J. Ludwig S. Mullainathan and A. Rambachan. Algorithmic Fairness. American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings : Kleinberg J. S. Mullainathan and M. Raghavan. Inherent Trade-Offs in the Fair Determination of Risk Scores. Working paper ArXiv. https : //arxiv.org/ pdf/1609.05807.pdf. Kott A. and C. Arnold. The Promises and Challenges of Continuous Monitoring and Risk Scoring. IEEE Security & Privacy no. : Koustas D. What Do Big Data Tell Us About Why People Take Gig Economy Jobs ? American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings forthcoming. Koza J. F. Bennett D. Andre and M. Keane. Automated Design of Both the Topology and Sizing of Analog Electrical Circuits Using Genetic Programming. In Artificial Intelligence in Design edited by J. Gero and F. Sudweeks. Dordrecht : Springer. Krusell P. L. Ohanian J. Rios-Rull and G. Violante. Capital Skill Complementarity and Inequality : A Macroeconomic Analysis. Econometrica no. : Lagakos D. and M. Waugh. Selection Agriculture and Cross-Country Productivity Differences. American Economic Review no. : Lee K. and P. Triolo. China s Artificial Intelligence Revolution : Understanding Beijing s Structural Advantages. Eurasia Group. https : //www.eurasiagroup. net/files/upload/China_Embraces_AI.pdf. Lee W. Yahoo Breach : Over Billion Accounts Had Data Stolen. Government Technology. http : //www.govtech.com/security/2013-YahooBreach-Over-1-Billion-Accounts-Had-Data-Stolen.html. Makridis C. and B. Dean. Measuring the Economic Effects of Data Breaches on Firm Outcomes : Challenges and Opportunities. Journal of Economic and Social Measurement nos. : Makridis C. and Y. Paik. Valuing the Welfare Gains of Uber. Unpublished paper. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm ? abstract_id = References | Makridis C. and M. Smeets. Determinants of Cyber Readiness. Journal of Cyber Policy forthcoming. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers. cfm ? abstract_id = Malwarebytes. White Hat Black Hat and the Emergence of the Gray Hat : The True Cost of Cybercrime. https : //go.malwarebytes.com/ OstermanCostofCybercrimeQ3FY19_GLOBAL_Press.html. Marshall A. Principles of Economics. 1st ed. London : Macmillan. Mokyr J. C. Vickers and N. Ziebarth. The History of Technological Anxiety and the Future of Economic Growth : Is This Time Different ? Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Moore G. Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits Electronics April Mulligan C. J. Davenport and M. England. TheoryGuru : A Mathematica Package to Apply Quantifier Elimination Technology to Economics. In Mathematical Software : ICMS edited by J. Davenport et al. New York : Springer International. Mulligan C. and L. Threinen. The Marginal Products of Residential and Non-Residential Capital through NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. National Academies. Information Technology and the U.S. Workforce : Where Are We and Where Do We Go from Here ? Report of National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine Committee on Information Technology Automation and the U.S. Workforce. Washington : National Academies Press. Naylor C. On the Prospects for a ( Deep ) Learning Health Care System. Journal of the American Medical Association August http : //www.fsk.it/attach/ Content/News/6636/o/jama_naylor_2018.pdf. Nedelkoska L. and G. Quintini. Automation Skills Use and Training. OECD Social Employment and Migration Working Paper Paris : OECD Publishing. http : //dx.doi.org/10.1787/2e2f4eea-en. Ngai L. and C. Pissarides. Structural Change in a Multisector Model of Growth. American Economic Review no. : NIST ( National Institute of Standards and Technology ) Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity Version February https : //www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/cyberframework/ cybersecurity-framework-021214.pdf. Nitschke G. M. Schut and A. Eiben. Evolving Behavioral Specialization in Robot Teams to Solve a Collective Construction Task. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation : Nordhaus W. Are We Approaching an Economic Singularity ? Information Technology and the Future of Economic Growth. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //ideas.repec. org/p/nbr/nberwo/21547.html. | References Oliner S. and D. Sichel. The Resurgence of Growth in the Late 1990s : Is the Information Technology the Story ? Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Oltsik J. Research Suggests Cybersecurity Skills Shortage is Getting Worse. CSO Online. https : //www.csoonline.com/article/3247708/security/researchsuggests-cybersecurity-skills-shortage-is-getting-worse.html. OMB ( Office of Management and Budget ) M-08-05 : Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies. https : //georgewbush-whitehouse. archives.gov/omb/memoranda/fy2008/m08-05.pdf. 2018a. Federal Cybersecurity Risk Determination Report and Action Plan. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/CybersecurityRisk-Determination-Report-FINAL_May-2018-Release.pdf. 2018b. President s Management Agenda. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Presidents-Management-Agenda.pdf. 2018c. Update to the Trusted Internet Connections ( TIC ) Initiative. https : // policy.cio.gov/tic-draft/. Opportunity America. Work Skills Community : Restoring Opportunity for the Working Class. Report of study group convened by Opportunity America cosponsored by American Enterprise Institute and Brookings Institution. https : //www.aei.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/Work-Skills-CommunityFINAL-PDF.pdf. OSTP ( Office of Science and Technology Policy ) Summary of the White House Summit on Artificial Intelligence for American Industry. https : //www. whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Summary-Report-of-WhiteHouse-AI-Summit.pdf. Page L. and H. Gehlbach. How an Artificially Intelligent Virtual Assistant Helps Students Navigate the Road to College. AERA Open no. : Polson N. and J. Scott. AIQ : How Artificial Intelligence Works and How We Can Harness Its Power for a Better World. London : Transworld. PwC ( PricewaterhouseCoopers ) 2018a. Five Trends Transforming the Automotive Industry. https : //www.pwc.at/de/publikationen/branchen-undwirtschaftsstudien/ eascy-five-trends-transforming-the-automotive-industry_2018.pdf. Accessed January 2018b. The Strategy & Digital Auto Report. https : //www.strategyand.pwc. com/media/file/Digital-Auto-Report-2018.pdf. Accessed January Rapid7. Industry Cyber-Exposure Report : Fortune https : //www.rapid7.com/ info/industry-cyber-exposure-report-fortune-500/. Rasmussen W. The Mechanization of Agriculture. Scientific American no. : Rid T. and B. Buchanan. Attributing Cyber Attacks. Journal of Strategic Studies nos. : References | Rognlie M. Deciphering the Fall and Rise in the Net Capital Share : Accumulation or Scarcity ? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : Romer D. Advanced Macroeconomics. New York : McGraw-Hill Education. Russakovsky O. J. Deng H. Su J. Krause S. Satheesh S. Ma Z. Huang A. Karpathy A. Khosla M. Bernstein A. Berg and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet Large Scale Visual Recognition Challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision no. : Russell S. and P. Norvig. Artificial Intelligence : A Modern Approach 3rd Edition. London : Pearson. Salfer J. M. Endres W. Lazarus K. Minegishi and B. Berning. Dairy Robotic Milking Systems : What Are the Economics ? Extension. https : //articles. extension.org/pages/73995/ dairy-robotic-milking-systems-what-are-the-economics. Schimmelpfennig D. Farm Profits and Adoption of Precision Agriculture. USDA Economic Research Service Report Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. https : //www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/publications/80326/ err-217.pdf ? v = Seamans R. Artificial Intelligence and Big Data : Good For Innovation ? Forbes September https : //www.forbes.com/sites/washingtonbytes/2017/09/07/ artificial-intelligence-and-big-data-good-for-innovation/ # 29576acf4ddb. SEC ( U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ) CF Disclosure Guidance : Topic No. https : //www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/guidance/cfguidance-topic2. htm. Statement on Commission Statement and Guidance on Public Company Cybersecurity Disclosures. https : //www.sec.gov/news/public-statement/ statement-stein-2018-02-21. Sedgewick A. M. Souppaya and K. Scarfone. Guide to Application Whitelisting. NIST Special Publication https : //nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ specialpublications/nist.sp.800-167.pdf. Shapiro C. and H. Varian. Information Rules : A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. Boston : Harvard Business Press. Solow R. Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Stanford University. Policy and Legal Considerations. In Report on One Hundred Year Study of Artificial Intelligence. https : //ai100.stanford.edu/2016-report/ section-iii-prospects-and-recommendations-public-policy/ai-policy-nowand-future/policy. Stiroh K. Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival : What Do the Industry Data Say ? American Economic Review no. : Sykes L. Mechanization and Labor Reduction : A History of U.S. Flue-Cured Tobacco Production to Tobacco Science Fall https : //www. tobaccoscienceonline.org/doi/full/10.3381/sp1. | References Syverson C. Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the U.S. Productivity Slowdown. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Taddeo M. Regulate Artificial Intelligence to Avert Cyber Race. Nature April https : //www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-04602-6. Tax Foundation. Estonia Has the Most Competitive Tax System in the OECD. https : //taxfoundation.org/estonia-has-most-competitive-tax-system-oecd/. Triplett J. High-Tech Industry Productivity and Hedonic Price Indices. In OECD Proceedings : Industry Productivity International Comparison and Measurement Issues. Paris : OECD Publishing. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Current Employment Statistics Establishment Survey. Retrieved from FRED Federal Reserve Bank of Saint. Louis. https : // fred.stlouisfed.org/series/CES4300000001. USTR ( Office of the U.S. Trade Representative ) United States Mexico Canada Trade Fact Sheet : Modernizing NAFTA into a 21st Century Trade Agreement. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/fact-sheets/2018/ october/united-states % E2 % % 93mexico % E2 % % 93canada-trade-fa-1. Vainsalu H. How Do Estonians Save Annually Years of Work Without Much Effort ? https : //e-estonia.com/how-save-annually-820-years-of-work/. Valletta R. Recent Flattening in the Higher Education Wage Premium : Polarization Skill Downgrading or Both ? In Education Skills and Technical Change : Implications for Future U.S. Growth edited by C. Hulten and V. Ramey. Chicago : University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research. Vargas M. and A. Bonato. Tobacco Growing Family Farmers and Diversification Strategies in Brazil : Current Prospects and Future Potential for Alternative Crops. Study Commissioned by Ministry of Agrarian Development of Brazil and conduced as a technical document for Second Section of Conference of Parties to the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. https : //www. who.int/tobacco/framework/cop/events/2007/brazil_study.pdf. Varian H. Artificial Intelligence Economics and Industrial Organization. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Vassil K. Estonian e-Government Ecosystem : Foundation Applications Outcomes. Background Paper for World Development Report : Digital Dividends. http : //pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/165711456838073531/WDR16BP-Estonian-eGov-ecosystem-Vassil.pdf. Wang S. P. Heisey D. Schimmelpfennig and E. Ball. Agricultural Productivity Growth in the United States : Measurement Trends and Drivers. Economic Research Report U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. Weinbaum C. and J. Shanahan. Intelligence in a Data-Driven Age. Joint Force Quarterly : References | West D. Saving Money Through Cloud Computing. Brooking Institution. https : // www.brookings.edu/research/saving-money-through-cloud-computing/. White House. 2017a. National Security Strategy. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf. 2017b. President Trump Signs Memorandum for STEM Education Funding. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/articles/ president-trump-signs-memorandum-stem-education-funding/. 2018a. Executive Order Establishing the President s National Council for the American Worker. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/ executive-order-establishing-presidents-national-council-american-worker/. 2018b. National Cyber Strategy of the United States of America. https : //www. whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/National-Cyber-Strategy.pdf. 2018c. Presidential Executive Order on Streamlining and Expediting Requests to Locate Broadband Facilities in Rural America. https : //www.whitehouse. gov/presidential-actions/ presidential-executive-order-streamlining-expediting-requests-locatebroadband-facilities-rural-america/. 2018d. Space Policy Directive-2 Streamlining Regulations on Commercial Use of Space. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/ space-policy-directive-2-streamlining-regulations-commercial-use-space/. Executive Order on Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/ executive-order-maintaining-american-leadership-artificial-intelligence/. World Economic Forum. The Future of Jobs Report Centre for the New Economy and Society. Geneva : World Economic Forum. http : //www3. weforum.org/docs/WEF_Future_of_Jobs_2018.pdf. Zeira J. Workers Machines and Economic Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Chapter Abramitzky R. L. Boustan and K. Eriksson. Europe s Tired Poor Huddled Masses : Self-Selection and Economic Outcomes in the Age of Mass Migration. American Economic Review no. : Acemoglu D. and J. Robinson. The Rise and Decline of General Laws of Capitalism. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Alesina A. and G. Angeletos. Fairness and Redistribution. American Economic Review no. : Alhadeff S. Venezuela Emigration Explained. Washington : Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. Andersen T. B. Holmstr m S. Honkapohja S. Korkman H. S derstr m and J. Vartiainen. The Nordic Model : Embracing Globalization and Sharing Risks. ETLA B Research Institute of the Finnish Economy no. | References Anell A. A. Glenng rd and S. Merkur. Sweden : Health System Review. Health Systems in Transition no. : Applebaum A. How Stalin Hid Ukraine s Famine from the World. The Atlantic October. https : //www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2017/10/ red-famine-anne-applebaum-ukraine-soviet-union/542610/. Barzel Y. Economic Analysis of Property Rights. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. Basu K. The Enigma of India s Arrival : A Review of Arvind Virmani s Propelling India : From Socialist Stagnation to Global Power. Journal of Economic Literature no. : BEA ( U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis ) 2018a. Table : National Income by Type of Income. https : //apps.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm ? reqid = 19&step = # reqid = 19&step = 2&isuri = 1&1921 = survey. 2018b. Table : Government Current Receipts and Expenditures. https : // apps.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm ? reqid = 19&step = # reqid = 19&step = 2&isuri = 1& = survey. Becker G. and C. Mulligan. Deadweight Costs and the Size of Government. Journal of Law and Economics no. : Becker G. K. Murphy and M. Grossman. The Market for Illegal Goods : The Case of Drugs. Journal of Political Economy no. : Bergstr m F. and R. Gidehag. EU versus USA. Stockholm : Timbro. Bernhardt A. H. Boushey L. Dresser and C. Tilly. The Gloves-Off Economy : Workplace Standards at the Bottom of America s Labor Market. Ithaca NY : Cornell University Press. Birman I. From the Achieved Level. Soviet Studies no. : Blahous C. The Costs of a National Single-Payer Healthcare System. Mercatus Working Paper. Arlington VA : Mercatus Center at George Mason University. Boettke P. The Political Economy of Soviet Socialism : The Formative Years New York : Springer. Bollier J. Bernie Sanders Returns Saturday to Green Bay on Repeal the Trump Tax Tour. Green Bay Press Gazette February https : //www. greenbaypressgazette.com/story/news/2018/02/12/ bernie-sanders-returns-saturday-green-bay-repeal-trump-taxtour/359545002/. Borjas G. Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants. American Economic Review no. : Immigration and Self-Selection. In Immigration Trade and the Labor Market edited by J. Abowd and R. Freeman. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Brading R. Populism in Venezuela. New York : Routledge. Buera F. A. Monge-Naranjo and G. Primiceri. Learning the Wealth of Nations. Econometrica no. : References | Casey N. Venezuela Inflation Could Reach One Million Percent by Year s End. New York Times July https : //www.nytimes.com/2018/07/23/world/ americas/venezuela-inflation-crisis.html. CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) 2018a. The Opportunity Costs of Socialism. Washington : White House. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefingsstatements/cea-report-opportunity-costs-socialism/. 2018b. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. Cheremukhin A. M. Golosov S. Guriev and A. Tsyvinski. The Economy of the People s Republic of China from NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Chetty R. A. Guren D. Manoli and A. Weber. Are Micro and Macro Labor Supply Elasticities Consistent ? A Review of Evidence on the Intensive and Extensive Margins. American Economic Review no. : Cole A. and S. Greenberg. Details and Analysis of Senator Bernie Sanders s Tax Plan. Tax Foundation. https : //taxfoundation.org/ details-and-analysis-senator-bernie-sanders-s-tax-plan/. Collins S. B. Bosworth and M. Soto-Class. The Economy of Puerto Rico. Washington : Brookings Institution Press. Conquest R. The Harvest of Sorrow : Soviet Collectivization and the Terror-Famine. New York : Oxford University Press. The Dragons of Expectation : Reality and Delusion in the Course of History. New York : W. W. Norton. Cooper R. How to Pay for Medicare-for-All. The Week August http : // theweek.com/articles/792893/how-pay-medicareforall. Cotterell A. China : A History. New York : Random House. Courtois S. N. Werth J. Panne A. Paczkowski K. Bartosek J. Margolin. The Black Book of Communism. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. Dalrymple D. The Soviet Famine of Soviet Studies no. : Day M. 2018a. An Interview with Julia Salazar. Jacobin July https : //www. jacobinmag.com/2018/07/julia-salazar-interview-socialist-new-york-senate. 2018b. Democratic Socialism Explained by a Democratic Socialist. Vox August https : //www.vox.com/first-person/2018/8/1/17637028/ bernie-sanders-alexandria-ocasio-cortez-cynthia-nixon-democraticsocialism-jacobin-dsa. Deere C. M. Meurs and N. P rez. Toward a Periodization of the Cuban Collectivization Process : Changing Incentives and Peasant Response. Cuban Studies : De Haan J. S. Lundstr m and J. Sturm. Market-Oriented Institutions and Policies and Economic Growth : A Critical Survey. Journal of Economic Surveys no. : | References Dik tter F. Mao s Great Famine : The History of China s Most Devastating Catastrophe London : Bloomsbury. Dolot M. Execution by Hunger : The Hidden Holocaust. New York : W. W. Norton. Dube R. Doctors Flee Desperate Venezuela to Work in Safer Places. Wall Street Journal June https : //www.wsj.com/articles/ doctors-flee-desperate-venezuela-to-work-in-safer-places-1497303556. Easton S. and M. Walker. Income Growth and Economic Freedom. American Economic Review no. : Economist. How Ch vez and Maduro Have Impoverished Venezuela. April https : //www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2017/04/06/ how-chavez-and-maduro-have-impoverished-venezuela. Epstein R. Takings : Private Property and the Power of Eminent Domain. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. European Commission. Eurostat : Temporary Employees as Percentage of the Total Number of Employees. https : //ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/productsdatasets/-/tesem110. Fang L. and R. Rogerson. Product Market Regulation and Market Work : A Benchmark Analysis. American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics no. : Farrell J. and C. Shapiro. Horizontal Mergers : An Equilibrium Analysis. American Economic Review no. : Feldstein M. Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax. Review of Economic and Statistics no. : Feldstein M. and A. Samwick. Social Security Rules and Marginal Tax Rates. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Finkelstein A. and R. McKnight. What Did Medicare Do ? The Initial Impact of Medicare on Mortality and Out-of-Pocket Medical Spending. Journal of Public Economics no. : Finn E. Jr. and R. Sousa. What Lies Ahead for America s Children and Their Schools. Stanford CA : Hoover Institution Press. Fischel W. Regulatory Takings : Law Economics and Politics. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. Fischer S. R. Hall and J. Taylor. Relative Shocks Relative Price Variability and Inflation. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : Frank R. Why Single-Payer Health Care Saves Money. New York Times July https : //www.nytimes.com/2017/07/07/upshot/why-single-payer-health-caresaves-money.html. Fraser Institute. Economic Freedom of the World Vancouver : Fraser Institute. https : //www.fraserinstitute.org/sites/default/files/ EconomicFreedomoftheWorld1975-1995.pdf. Friedman M. and R. Friedman. Free to Choose : A Personal Statement. New York : Harcourt. References | Galbraith J. A Visit to Russia. New Yorker September https : //www.newyorker. com/magazine/1984/09/03/a-visit-to-russia. Gallen T. Using Participant Behavior to Measure the Value of Social Programs : The Case of Medicaid. PhD diss. University of Chicago. Ghanta P. List of Countries with Universal Healthcare. True Cost Blog. https : // truecostblog.com/2009/08/09/countries-with-universal-healthcare-by-date/. Glaeser E. and E. Luttmer. The Misallocation of Housing under Rent Control. American Economic Review no. : Globerman S. Select Cost Sharing in Universal Health Care Countries. Vancouver : Fraser Institute. https : //www.fraserinstitute.org/sites/default/files/selectcost-sharing-in-universal-health-care-countries.pdf. Goodkind D. L. West and P. Johnson. A Reassessment of Mortality in North Korea Paper presented at Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America Washington March April Goodspeed T. Microcredit and Adjustment to Environmental Shock : Evidence from the Great Famine in Ireland. Journal of Development Economics : Famine and Finance : Credit and the Great Famine of Ireland. London : Palgrave Macmillan. Gregory P. The Stalinist Command Economy. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science no. : The Political Economy of Stalinism : Evidence from the Soviet Secret Archives. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. Grosse-Tebbe S. and J. Figueras. Snapshots of Health Systems Copenhagen : World Health Organization. Gruber J. and D. Wise. Social Security and Retirement Around the World. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Gurley J. Capitalist and Maoist Economic Development. In America s Asia edited by E. Friedman and M. Selden. New York : Random House. 1976a. Challengers to Capitalism : Marx Lenin and Mao. San Francisco : San Francisco Book Company. 1976b. China s Economy and the Maoist Strategy. New York : Monthly Review Press. Gwartney J. R. Holcombe and R. Lawson. Institutions and the Impact of Investment on Growth. Kyklos no. : Gwartney J. R. Lawson and J. Hall. Economic Freedom of the World : Report. Vancouver : Fraser Institute. https : //www.fraserinstitute.org/sites/default/ files/economic-freedom-of-the-world-2017.pdf. Hall J. and A. Lawson. Economic Freedom of the World : An Accounting of the Literature. Contemporary Economic Policy no. : Hayek F. The Use of Knowledge in Society. American Economic Review no. : | References Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. Medicare Beneficiaries as a Percent of Total Population. https : //www.kff.org/medicare/state-indicator/medicarebeneficiaries-as-of-total-pop/ ? currentTimeframe = 0&sortModel = % 7B % 22colI d % : % 22Location % % 22sort % : % 22asc % % 7D. Hodge S. No Country Leans on Upper-Income Households as Much as U.S. Tax Foundation. https : //taxfoundation.org/ no-country-leans-upper-income-households-much-us/. Holmes L. Communism : A Very Short Introduction. Oxford : Oxford University Press. Jisheng Y. Tombstone : The Great Chinese Famine New York : Farrar Straus & Giroux. Johnson D. and K. Brooks. Prospects for Soviet Agriculture in the 1980s. Bloomington : Indiana University Press. Kirkeboen L. E. Leuven and M. Mogstad. Field of Study Earnings and SelfSelection. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Kleven H. How Can Scandinavians Tax So Much ? Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Kliff S. How Vermont s Single-Payer Health Care Dream Fell Apart. Vox December https : //www.vox.com/2014/12/22/7427117/ single-payer-vermont-shumlin. Konrad W. How Exactly Would Single-Payer Health Care Work ? CBS News. https : //www.cbsnews.com/news/is-single-payer-health-insurance-realistic/. Kornai J. The Socialist System : The Political Economy of Communism. Oxford : Oxford University Press. Krugman P. Three Legs Good No Legs Bad. New York Times July https : // www.nytimes.com/2017/07/10/opinion/obamacare-repeal.html. Kurmanaev A. The Tragedy of Venezuela. Wall Street Journal May https : // www.wsj.com/articles/the-tragedy-of-venezuela-1527177202. Lazarev V. and P. Gregory. Commissars and Cars : A Case Study in the Political Economy of Dictatorship. Journal of Comparative Economics no. : Lenin V. Organisation of Food Detachments. https : //www.marxists.org/archive/ lenin/works/1918/jun/27.htm. Woman in Society. In The Woman Question : Selections from the Writings of Marx Engels Lenin and Stalin. New York : International Publishers. Lin J. Rural Reforms and Agricultural Growth in China. American Economic Review no. : Marx K. Das Kapital Volume I. English edition of Critique of the Gotha Programme. Online edition. https : //www.marxists. org/archive/marx/works/1875/gotha/. Marx K. and F. Engels. Communist Manifesto. Online edition. https : //www. marxists.org/archive/marx/works/download/pdf/Manifesto.pdf. References | Matsuda R. The Japanese Health Care System. International Health Care System Profiles. http : //international.commonwealthfund.org. McCloskey D. Bourgeois Equality : How Ideas Not Capital or Institutions Enriched the World. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. McKenzie B. Increase in the Venezuelan VAT General Rate from % to % https : //www.lexology.com/library/detail. aspx ? g = 39ab8f59-1767-4d80-a55c-495276006fa3. Meng X. N. Qian and P. Yared. The Institutional Causes of China s Great Famine Review of Economic Studies no. : Mermin G. L. Burman and F. Sammartino. An Analysis of Senator Bernie Sanders s Tax Proposals. Tax Policy Center. Mesl F. and J. Vallin. Mortality and Causes of Death in 20th-Century Ukraine. New York : Springer Science & Business Media. Miller T. A. Kim and J. Roberts. Index of Economic Freedom. Heritage Foundation. https : //www.heritage.org/index/pdf/2018/book/index_2018.pdf. Monaldi F. The Death Spiral of Venezuela s Oil Sector and What Can Be Done About It. Forbes January https : //www.forbes.com/sites/ thebakersinstitute/2018/01/24/ the-death-spiral-of-venezuelas-oil-sector-what-if-anything-can-be-doneabout-it/ # 524226ea7e60. Mulligan C. The Redistribution Recession : How Labor Market Distortions Contracted the Economy. New York : Oxford University Press. Side Effects : The Economic Consequences of Healthcare Reform. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Mulligan C. and K. Tsui. The Upside-Down Economics of Regulated and Otherwise Rigid Prices. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Neal D. The Effect of Catholic Secondary Schooling on Educational Attainment. Journal of Labor Economics no. : What Have We Learned about the Benefits of Private Schooling ? Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review March. https : //pdfs. semanticscholar.org/7b95/7d60c0c988e1d32fe364acc36cb337b1623d.pdf. New York Times Company. New York Times Statement about Pulitzer Prize Awarded to Walter Duranty. New York Times website https : //www.nytco. com/ new-york-times-statement-about-1932-pulitzer-prize-awarded-to-walterduranty/. Nolan P. The Political Economy of Collective Farms : An Analysis of China s Post-Mao Rural Reforms. Cambridge : Polity Press. Norberg J. Progress : Ten Reasons to Look Forward to the Future. London : Oneworld. Nove A. The Economics of Feasible Socialism. New York : Routledge. | References O Connor J. Agrarian Reforms in Cuba Science & Society no. : OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) 2018a. Education at a Glance Paris : OECD Publishing. 2018b. General Government Spending ( Indicator ) https : //www.oecd-ilibrary. org/governance/general-government-spending/indicator/ english_a31cbf4d-en. 2018c. Table I.7 : Top Statutory Personal Tax Rate and Top Marginal Tax Rates for Employees. https : //stats.oecd.org/index.aspx ? DataSetCode = TABLE_I7. Gr da C. Black and Beyond : The Great Irish Famine in History Economy and Memory. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. Oil Sands Magazine. Why Venezuela Is Alberta s Biggest Competitor. February https : //www.oilsandsmagazine.com/news/2016/2/15/ why-venezuela-is-albertas-biggest-competitor. Olejaz M. A. Nielsen A. Rudkj bing H. Birk A. Krasnik and C. Hern ndez-Quevedo. Denmark : Health System Review. Health Systems in Transition no. Olsen E. Getting More from Low-Income Housing Assistance. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/research/ getting-more-from-low-income-housing-assistance/. Olson M. The Logic of Collective Action : Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. Pauly M. The Economics of Moral Hazard : Comment. American Economic Review : Piketty T. Capital in the 21st Century. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. Pinkovskiy M. and X. Sala-i-Martin. Parametric Estimations of the World Distribution of Income. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Pipes R. Communism : A History. New York : Modern Library. Potosky Emily. How High Are Capital Gains Taxes in Your State ? Tax Foundation July https : //taxfoundation.org/ how-high-are-capital-gains-taxes-your-state. Prescott E. Why Do Americans Work So Much More Than Europeans ? Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review no. : Pryor F. The Red and the Green : The Rise and Fall of Collectivized Agriculture in Marxist Regimes. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. Przeworski A. and J. Sprague. Paper Stones : A History of Electoral Socialism. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. PwC ( PricewaterhouseCoopers ) 2018a. Value-Added Tax ( VAT ) Rates. http : // taxsummaries.pwc.com/ID/Value-added-tax- ( VAT ) -rates. 2018b. Venezuela : Overview. http : //taxsummaries.pwc.com/ID/ Venezuela-Overview. References | Rasmussen L. Nordic Solutions and Challenges : A Danish Perspective. Institute of Politics of Harvard Kennedy School Cambridge MA. YouTube. https : // www.youtube.com/watch ? v = MgrJnXZ_WGo. Rector R. and K. Johnson. Understanding Poverty in America. Washington : Heritage Foundation. Rice T. W. Quentin A. Anell A. Barnes P. Rosenau L. Unruh and E. Van Ginneken. Revisiting Out-of-Pocket Requirements : Trends in Spending Financial Access Barriers and Policy in Ten High-Income Countries. BMC Health Services Research no. : Ringard A. A. Sagan I. Saunes and A. Lindahl. Norway : Health System Review. Health Systems in Transition no. Robinson J. and S. Adler. China : An Economic Perspective. Washington : Fabian Society. Roemer J. A Future for Socialism. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. A Future for Socialism. Theoria : A Journal of Social and Political Theory : Rogerson R. Understanding Differences in Hours Worked. Review of Economic Dynamics no. : Taxation and Market Work : Is Scandinavia an Outlier ? Economic Theory no. : Rosen S. Public Employment Taxes and the Welfare State in Sweden. In The Welfare State in Transition : Reforming the Swedish Model edited by R. Freeman R. Topel and B. Swedenborg. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Rummel R. Death by Government. New Brunswick NJ : Transaction. China s Bloody Century : Genocide and Mass Murder since New York : Transaction. Sala-i-Martin X. The World Distribution of Income : Falling Poverty and Convergence Period. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Salazar-Carrillo J. and A. Nodarse-Leon. Cuba : From Economic Take-Off to Collapse under Castro. New York : Transactions. Sammartino F. L. Burman J. Nunns J. Rosenberg and J. Rohaly. An Analysis of Senator Bernie Sanders s Tax Proposals. Tax Policy Center March https : // www.taxpolicycenter.org/sites/default/files/alfresco/publicationpdfs/2000639-an-analysis-of-senator-bernie-sanderss-tax-proposals.pdf. Samuelson P. Economics 10th Edition. New York : McGraw-Hill. Samuelson P. and W. Nordhaus. Economics 13th Edition. New York : McGraw-Hill. Sanandaji N. Scandinavian Unexceptionalism. London : Institute of Economic Affairs. Debunking Utopia : Exposing the Myth of Nordic Socialism. Washington : WND Books. | References Sanders B. Options to Finance Medicare for All. https : //www.sanders.senate. gov/download/options-to-finance-medicare-for-all ? inline = file. Disneyland Workers Face Ruthless Exploitation : Their Fight Is Our Fight. The Guardian June Schumpeter J. Capitalism Socialism and Democracy. New York : Harper Brothers. Shleifer A. State versus Private Ownership. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Shleifer A. and R. Vishny. Pervasive Shortages Under Socialism. RAND Journal of Economics no. : Sigurgeirsd ttir S. J. Waagfj r and A. Maresso. Iceland : Health System Review. Health Systems in Transition no. Starr P. Why Democrats Should Beware Sanders Socialism. Politico February https : //www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/02/ bernie-sanders-2016-socialism-213667. State Council of the People s Republic of China. China s Progress in Poverty Reduction and Human Rights. http : //english.gov.cn/policies/latest_ releases/2016/10/17/content_281475468533275.htm. Stenkula M. D. Johansson and G. Du Rietz. Marginal Taxation on Labour Income in Sweden from to Scandinavian Economic History Review no. : Sturny Isabell. The Swiss Health Care System. International Health Care System Profiles. http : //international.commonwealthfund.org. Sunstein C. Trump Is Right to Warn Democrats about Socialism. Bloomberg Opinion February Svalund J. Labor Market Institutions Mobility and Dualization in the Nordic Countries. Nordic Journal of Working Life Studies no. : Thatcher M. Interview for Thames TV This Week. https : //www. margaretthatcher.org/document/102953. Transparency International. The Bolivarian Project Enlarged the Platform of State-Owned Enterprises to Increase Economic Political and Social Control. https : //transparencia.org.ve/project/ the-bolivarian-project-enlarged-the-platform-of-state-owned-enterprises-toincrease-economic-political-and-social-control/. Turner J. Social Security Privatization Around the World. Washington : AARP Public Policy Institute. U.S. Energy Information Administration. International Energy Statistics. https : // www.eia.gov/beta/international/data/browser/ # / ? pa = 000000000000000vg&f = M&c = 000000002&ct = 0&tl_id = 5-M&vs = INTL.53-1-CAN-TBPD. M ~ ~ INTL.53-1-VEN-TBPD.M&vo = 0&v = T&start = 199401&end = References | USTR ( Office of the U.S. Trade Representative ) Venezuela. http : //www.sice.oas. org/ctyindex/USA/USTR_Reports/2013/NTE/2013 % 20NTE % 20Venezuela % Final.pdf. Vallin J. F. Mesl S. Adamets and S. Pyrozkov. The Crisis of the 1930s. In Mortality and Causes of Death in 20th-Century Ukraine edited by F. Mesl and J. Vallin. New York : Springer. Von Mises L. Economic Calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth. Translated from the German by S. Alder. Auburn AL : Ludwig Von Mises Institute. ( Orig. pub. ) Vuorenkoski L. P. Mladovsky and E. Mossialos. Finland : Health System Review. Health Systems in Transition no. Walker K. Planning in Chinese Agriculture : Socialisation and the Private Sector New York : Psychology Press. Walters R. Soviet Economic Aid to Cuba : International Affairs no. : Wammes J. et al. The Dutch Health Care System. International Health Care System Profiles. http : //international.commonwealthfund.org. Weisbart E. A Single-Payer System Would Reduce U.S. Health Care Costs. Virtual Monitor no. : Westhoff W. R. Rodriguez C. Cousins and R. McDermott. Cuban Healthcare Providers in Venezuela : A Case Study. Public Health no. : Whinston M. Lectures on Antitrust Economics. Cambridge MA : MIT Press. Williamson O. Economies as an Antitrust Defense : The Welfare Trade-Offs. American Economic Review no. : Wilson P. The Collapse of Ch vezcare. Foreign Policy April https : // foreignpolicy.com/2015/04/27/chavez-maduro-healthcare-venezuela-cuba/. Winston C. Last Exit : Privatization and Deregulation of the U.S. Transportation System. Washington : Brookings Institution Press. Woodman J. Patients Beyond Borders : Everybody s Guide to Affordable WorldClass Medical Travel. Chapel Hill NC : Healthy Travel Media. Yin W. Market Incentives and Pharmaceutical Innovation. Journal of Health Economics no. : Zaleski E. Stalinist Planning for Economic Growth Chapel Hill : University of North Carolina Press. Zhou K. How the Farmers Changed China : The Power of the People. Boulder CO : Westview Press. Zimbalist A. and S. Eckstein. Patterns of Cuban Development : The First TwentyFive Years. World Development no. : | References Chapter Abraham K. and R. Haskins. The Promise of Evidence-Based Policymaking : Report of the Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking. Washington : Commission on Evidence-Based Policymaking. https : //www.cep.gov/report/cep-finalreport.pdf. Arkansas Department of Human Services. 2018a. Arkansas Works Program : October Report. 2018b. Monthly Enrollment and Expenditures Report : Calendar Year Armour P. R. Burkhauser and J. Larrimore. Deconstructing Income and Income Inequality Measures : A Crosswalk from Market Income to Comprehensive Income. American Economic Review : Papers and Proceedings no. : Baicker K. A. Finkelstein J. Song and S. Taubman. The Impact of Medicaid on Labor Market Activity and Program Participation : Evidence from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. American Economic Review no. : Bauer L. D. Schanzenbach and J. Shambaugh. Work Requirements and Safety Net Programs. Hamilton Project October. Berndt E. The Boskin Commission Report After a Decade : After-life or Requiem ? International Productivity Monitor Centre for the Study of Living Standards : Besharov D. and K. Couch. European Measures of Income Poverty and Social Exclusion : Recent Developments and Lessons for U.S. Poverty Measurement. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : Counting the Poor : New Thinking About European Poverty Measures and Lessons for the United States. New York : Oxford University Press. Blinder A. Comment : Measuring Income What Kind Should Be In ? In Proceedings of the Bureau of the Census Conference on the Measurement of Noncash Benefits. Washington : U.S. Department of Commerce. Bloom D. and C. Michalopoulos. How Welfare and Work Policies Affect Employment and Income : A Synthesis of Research. New York : Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation. Boskin M. E. Dulberger R. Gordon Z. Griliches and D. Jorgenson. Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living : Final Report to the Senate Finance Committee from the Advisory Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index. Burkhauser R. Deconstructing European Poverty Measures : What Relative and Absolute Scales Measure. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : Burkhauser R. K. Corinth J. Elwell and J. Larrimore. Evaluating the Success of President Johnson s War on Poverty : Revisiting the Historical Record Using a Full Income Poverty Measure. Working paper. References | Burkhauser R. N. H rault S. Jenkins and R. Wilkins. Top Incomes and Inequality in the U.K. : Reconciling Estimates from Household Survey and Tax Return Data. Oxford Economic Papers no. : Burkhauser R. J. Larrimore and S. Lyons. Measuring Health Insurance Benefits : The Case of People with Disabilities. Contemporary Economic Policy no. : Burkhauser R. J. Larrimore and K. Simon. A Second Opinion on the Economic Health of the American Middle Class. National Tax Journal no. : Measuring the Impact of Valuing Health Insurance on Levels and Trends in Inequality and How the Affordable Care Act of Could Affect Them. Contemporary Economic Policy no. : Burkhauser R. T. Smeeding and J. Merz. Relative Inequality and Poverty in Germany and the United States Using Alternative Equivalence Scales. Review of Income and Wealth no. : Burtless G. and C. Pulliam. Income Data from the Census May Not Tell Full Story on Middle-Class Trends. Brookings Institution September Canberra Group. Handbook on Household Income Statistics 2nd ed. Geneva : United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. CBO ( Congressional Budget Office ) The Distribution of Household Income and Federal Taxes https : //www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/113thcongress-2013-2014/reports/44604-averagetaxrates.pdf. CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) The Problem of Poverty in America. In Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Printing Office. The War on Poverty Years Later : A Progress Report. In Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. Expanding Work Requirements in Non-Cash Welfare Programs. Washington : White House. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/ Expanding-Work-Requirements-in-Non-Cash-Welfare-Programs.pdf. Chetty R. J. Friedman and J. Rockoff. New Evidence on the Long-Term Impacts of Tax Credits. Proceedings : Annual Conference on Taxation and Minutes of the Annual Meeting of the National Tax Association : Chetty R. J. Friedman and E. Saez. Using Differences in Knowledge across Neighborhoods to Uncover the Impacts of the EITC on Earnings. American Economic Review no. : ChildCare Aware of America. The U.S. and the High Cost of Childcare : A Review of Prices and Proposed Solutions for a Broken System. http : //usa. childcareaware.org/advocacy-public-policy/resources/research/costofcare/. Citro C. and R. Michael. Measuring Poverty : A New Approach. Report for National Research Council. Washington : National Academies Press. | References CMS ( Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ) 2018a. CMS Fast Facts. Available at https : //www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/StatisticsTrends-and-Reports/CMS-Fast-Facts/index.html 2018b. Re : Opportunities to Promote Work and Community Engagement among Medicaid Beneficiaries. SMD U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Coleman-Jensen A. M. Rabbitt C. Gregory and A. Singh. Household Food Security in the United States in Report ER-256. U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Collinson R. I. Ellen and J. Ludwig. Low-Income Housing Policy. In Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States Volume edited by R. Moffitt. Chicago : University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research. Dague L. T. DeLeire and L. Leininger. The Effect of Public Insurance Coverage for Childless Adults on Labor Supply. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Dahl G. and L. Lochner. The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement : Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Review no. : The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement : Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit : Reply. American Economic Review no. : Dave D. S. Decker R. Kaestner and K. Simon. The Effect of Medicaid Expansions in the Late 1980s and Early 1990s on the Labor Supply of Pregnant Women. American Journal of Health Economics no. : Duncan G. P. Morris and C. Rodrigues. Does Money Really Matter ? Estimating Impacts of Family Income on Young Children s Achievement with Data from Random-Assignment Experiments. Developmental Psychology no. : East C. Immigrants Labor Supply Response to Food Stamp Access. Labour Economics : Eberstadt N. Men Without Work : America s Invisible Crisis. West Conshohocken PA : Templeton Press. Eissa N. and H. Hoynes. Taxes and the Labor Market Participation of Married Couples : The Earned Income Tax Credit. Journal of Public Economics : Eissa N. and J. Liebman. Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Ellwood D. The Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit and Social Policy Reforms on Work Marriage and Living Arrangements. National Tax Journal no. : References | Elwell J. and R. Burkhauser. Income Growth and Its Distribution from Eisenhower to Obama : The Growing Importance of In-Kind Transfers. Working paper. Fang H. and M. Keane. Assessing the Impact of Welfare Reform on Single Mothers. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : Finkelstein A. N. Hendren and E. Luttmer. Forthcoming. The Value of Medicaid : Interpreting Results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. Journal of Political Economy November Fitzpatrick M. Preschoolers Enrolled and Mothers at Work ? The Effects of Universal Prekindergarten. Journal of Labor Economics no. : Flood S. M. King R. Rodgers S. Ruggles and R. Warren. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series Current Population Survey : Version Current Population Survey. https : //cps.ipums.org/cps. Forster M. and M. D Ercole. The OECD Approach to Measuring Income Distribution and Poverty. In Counting the Poor : New Thinking About European Poverty Measures and Lessons for the United States edited by D. Besharov and K. Couch. New York : Oxford University Press. Fox L. C. Wimer I. Garfinkel N. Kaushal and J. Waldfogel. Waging War on Poverty : Poverty Trends Using a Historical Supplemental Poverty Measure. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : Fry R. and D. Cohn. Living Together : The Economics of Cohabitation. Pew Research Center Washington. Gallen T. Using Participant Behavior to Measure the Value of Social Programs : The Case of Medicaid. Proceedings : Annual Conference on Taxation and Minutes of the Annual Meeting of the National Tax Association : Garthwaite C. T. Gross and M. Notowidigdo. Public Health Insurance Labor Supply and Employment Lock. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Gillette M. Launching the War on Poverty : An Oral History. New York : Oxford University Press. Gordon R. The Boskin Commission Report : A Retrospective One Decade Later. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Gottschalk P. and T. Smeeding. Cross-National Comparisons of Earnings and Income Inequality. Journal of Economic Literature no. : Grogger J. The Effects of Time Limits the EITC and Other Policy Changes on Welfare Use Work and Income Among Female-Headed Families. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Gubits D. M. Shinn S. Bell M. Wood S. Dastrup C. Solari S. Brown L. Dunton W. Lin D. McInnis J. Rodriguez G. Savidge and B. Spellman. Family Options Study : Short-Term Impacts of Housing and Services Interventions for Homeless Families. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Office of Policy Development and Research. | References Gubits D. M. Shinn M. Wood S. Bell S. Dastrup C. Solari S. Brown D. McInnis T. McCall and U. Kattel. Family Options Study : 3-Year Impacts of Housing and Services Interventions for Homeless Families. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Office of Policy Development and Research. Hamilton G. S. Freedman L. Gennetian C. Michalopoulos J. Walter D. AdamsCiardullo A. Gassman-Pines S. McGroder M. Zaslow J. Brooks S. Ahluwalia E. Small and B. Ricchetti. National Evaluation of Welfare-to-Work Strategies : How Effective Are Different Welfare-to-Work Approaches ? Five-Year Adult and Child Impacts for Eleven Programs. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Education. Hartley R. S. Collyer J. Waldfogel and C. Wimer. Recent Trends in Food Stamp Usage and Implications for Increased Work Requirements. Poverty and Social Policy Briefs no. : Haskins R. Work over Welfare : The Inside Story of the Welfare Reform Law. Washington : Brookings Institution Press. Hausman J. Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the Consumer Price Index. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : HHS ( U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ) Reasons for Measuring Poverty in the United States in the Context of Public Policy : A Historical Review TANF & SSP : Total Number of Recipients : Fiscal and Calendar Year Average Monthly Number Families : October through December Office of Family Assistance. Administration for Children and Families. Hoynes H. D. Miller and D. Simon. Income the Earned Income Tax Credit and Infant Health. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Hoynes H. and D. Schanzenbach. Work Incentives and the Food Stamp Program. Journal of Public Economics nos. : HUD ( U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development ) Monitoring of the Community Service and Self-Sufficiency Requirement. Office of Public and Indian Housing. Audit Report 2015-KC-001. https : //www.hudoig.gov/sites/ default/files/documents/2015-KC-0001.pdf. Assisted Housing : National and Local : Picture of Subsidized Households. https : //www.huduser.gov/portal/datasets/assthsg.html # 2009-2017_query. IRS ( Internal Revenue Service ) Statistics of Income : Individual Income Tax Returns. https : //www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p1304.pdf. Jacob B. M. Kapustin and J. Ludwig. The Impact of Housing Assistance on Child Outcomes : Evidence from a Randomized Housing Lottery. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Jacob B. and J. Ludwig. The Effects of Housing Assistance on Labor Supply : Evidence from a Voucher Lottery. American Economic Review no. : References | Johnson L. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States : Lyndon B. Johnson : Containing the Public Messages Speeches and Statements of the President ( in Two Books ) Washington : U.S. Government Printing Office. Kaestner R. and D. Lubotsky. Health Insurance and Income Inequality. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Kaiser Family Foundation. Medicaid Waiver Tracker : Approved and Pending Section Waivers by State. December https : //www.kff.org/medicaid/ issue-brief/ medicaid-waiver-tracker-approved-and-pending-section-1115-waivers-bystate/. Lampman R. Ends and Means of Reducing Income Poverty. Institute for Research on Poverty Monograph Series. Chicago : Markham. Larrimore J. R. Burkhauser and P. Armour. Accounting for Income Changes over the Great Recession Relative to Previous Recessions : The Impact of Taxes and Transfers. National Tax Journal no. : Larrimore J. and D. Splinter. How Much Does Health Insurance Cost ? Comparison of Premiums in Administrative and Survey Data. Economics Letters : Levy D. L. Edmonds and J. Simington. Work Requirements in Public Housing Authorities : Experiences to Date and Knowledge Gaps. January. Urban Institute Washington. Long S. G. Kirby R. Kurka and S. Boots. Child Care Assistance Under Welfare Reform : Early Responses by the States. Assessing the New Federalism Occasional Paper Washington : Urban Institute. Manoli D. and N. Turner. Cash-on-Hand and College Enrollment : Evidence from Population Tax Data and the Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Mead L. Overselling the Earned Income Tax Credit. National Affairs Fall. Meyer B. and D. Rosenbaum. Welfare the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Meyer B. and J. Sullivan. Measuring the Well-Being of the Poor Using Income and Consumption. Journal of Human Services : The Effects of Welfare and Tax Reform : The Material Well-Being of Single Mothers in the 1980s and 1990s. Journal of Public Economics : Changes in the Consumption Income and Well-Being of Single-MotherHeaded Families. American Economic Review no. : 2012a. Identifying the Disadvantaged : Official Poverty Consumption Poverty and the New Supplemental Poverty Measure. Journal of Economic Perspectives Summer | References 2012b. Winning the War : Poverty from the Great Society to the Great Recession. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Fall Winning the War : Poverty from the Great Society to the Great Recession. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. 2017a. Annual Report on U.S. Consumption Poverty : Washington : American Enterprise Institute. 2017b. Creating a Comprehensive Income Dataset. Report under Computational Social Science Grant. Russell Sage Foundation New York. Annual Report on U.S. Consumption Poverty : Washington : American Enterprise Institute. Meyer B. N. Mittag and R. Goerge. Errors in Survey Reporting and Imputation and Their Effects on Estimates of Food Stamp Program Participation. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Meyer B. W. Mok and J. Sullivan. Household Surveys in Crisis. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Michelmore K. and J. Bastian. The Long-Term Impact of the Earned Income Tax Credit on Children s Education and Employment Outcomes. Journal of Labor Economics no. : Miller C. L. Katz G. Azurdia A. Isen C. Schultz and K. Alosi. Boosting the Earned Income Tax Credit for Singles : Final Impact Findings from the Paycheck Plus Demonstration in New York City. Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation New York. Mills G. D. Gubits L. Orr D. Long J. Feins B. Kaul M. Wood and A. Jones. Effects of Housing Vouchers on Welfare Families. Report by Cloudburst Consulting and QED Group for U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Office of Policy Development and Research. Morris P. A. Huston G. Duncan D. Crosby and J. Bos. How Welfare and Work Policies Affect Children : A Synthesis of Research. Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation New York. Morrissey T. Child Care and Parent Labor Force Participation : A Review of the Research Literature. Review of Economics of the Household no. : Mulligan C. The Redistribution Recession : How Labor Market Distortions Contracted the Economy. New York : Oxford University Press. NBER ( National Bureau of Economic Research ) U.S. Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions. http : //www.nber.org/cycles.html. Nichols A and J. Rothstein. The Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) In Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States Volume edited by R. Moffitt. Chicago : University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research. References | Open Source Policy Center. No date. Tax-Calculator. Analysis by C. Kalleen. https : // github.com/PSLmodels/Tax-Calculator. Orshansky M. Counting the Poor : Another Look at the Poverty Profile. Social Security Bulletin. Passell P. Obituary : Robert Lampman Economist Who Helped in War on Poverty. New York Times March Rachidi A. Child Care Assistance and Nonstandard Work Schedules. Children and Youth Services Review : Rudowitz R. M. Musumeci and C. Hall. A Look at October State Data for Medicaid Work Requirements in Arkansas. Kaiser Family Foundation November Truffer C. J. Klemm C. Wolfe K. Rennie and J. Shuff. Actuarial Report on the Financial Outlook for Medicaid. Office of the Actuary Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Truffer C. C. Wolfe and K. Rennie. Actuarial Report on the Financial Outlook for Medicaid. Office of the Actuary Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Urban Institute. Welfare Rules Database Project. http : //wrd.urban.org/wrd/ query/query.cfm. U.S. Census Bureau. The Extent of Poverty in the United States : to Current Population Reports Series P-20 No. Washington : U.S. Government Printing Office. Poverty in the United States : to Current Population Reports Series P-60 No. Washington : U.S. Government Printing Office. Various dates. Current Population Survey. https : //www.census.gov/programssurveys/cps.html. Various dates. Survey of Income and Program Participation. https : //www. census.gov/sipp/. USDA ( U.S. Department of Agriculture ) Status of State Able-Bodied Adult without Dependents Time Limit Wavers in Fiscal Year 1st Quarter. https : //fns-prod.azureedge.net/sites/default/files/snap/FY-2016-1st-QuarterABAWD-Time-Limit-Waiver-Status.pdf. 2018a. Re : SNAP : California Request to Wave Able-Bodied Adults without Dependents Time Limit Approval. July 2018b. Status of State Able-Bodied Adult with Dependents ( ABAWD ) Time Limit Waivers : Fiscal year 4th Quarter. https : //fns-prod.azureedge.net/sites/ default/files/snap/FY18-Quarter % % 20Revised-ABAWD-Waiver-Status.pdf. 2018c. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) : National Level Annual Summary : Participation and Costs Food and Nutrition Service. https : //www.fns.usda.gov/pd/ supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap. | References 2018d. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) : National- and/or State-Level Monthly and/or Annual Data FY15 through FY18 National View Summary. Food and Nutrition Service. https : //www.fns.usda.gov/pd/ supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap. Wimer C. L. Fox I. Garfinkel N. Kaushal J. Laird J. Nam L. Nolan J. Pac and J. Waldfogel. Historical Supplemental Poverty Measure Data. Columbia Population Research Center. https : //www.povertycenter.columbia.edu/. Wimer C. L. Fox I. Garfinkel N. Kaushal and J. Waldfogel. Progress on Poverty ? New Estimates of Historical Trends Using an Anchored Supplemental Poverty Measure. Demography no. : Winship S. Poverty After Welfare Reform. Manhattan Institute. Ziliak J. Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. In Economics of MeansTested Transfer Programs in the United States Volume edited by R. Moffitt. Chicago : University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Research. Chapter Anderson M. A. Perrin and J. Jiang. % of Americans Don t Have Access to the Internet. Who Are They ? Pew Research. http : //www.pewresearch.org/facttank/2018/03/05/some-americans-dont-use-the-internet-who-are-they/. Arita S. L. Mitchell and J. Beckman. Estimating the Effects of Selected Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures and Technical Barriers to Trade on U.S.-EU Agricultural Trade ( No. ) U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. Bank of Japan. Statement on Monetary Policy. December Barro R. and C. Redlick. Macroeconomic Effects from Governmental Purchases and Taxes. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Barrot J. E. Loualiche M. Plosser and J. Sauvagnat. Import Competition and Household Debt. Staff Report New York : Federal Reserve Bank of New York. https : //www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/staff_ reports/sr821.pdf. Barrot J. E. Loualiche and J. Sauvagnat. The Globalization Risk Premium. Journal of Finance forthcoming. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers. cfm ? abstract_id = BEA ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Improved Estimates of the National Income and Product Accounts. September. https : //apps.bea.gov/scb/2018/09september/pdf/0918-nipa-update.pdf. Bolt J. R. Inklaar H. de Jong and J. Luiten van Zanden. Rebasing Maddison : New Income Comparisons and the Shape of Long-Run Economic Development. GGDC Research Memorandum University of Gronigen. https : //www.rug.nl/ggdc/html_publications/memorandum/gd174.pdf. References | Brynjolfsson E. F. Eggers and A. Gannameneni. Using Massive Online Choice Experiments to Measure Changes in Well-Being. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber. org/papers/w24514. Caliendo L. and F. Parro. Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA. Review of Economic Studies no. : CBO ( Congressional Budget Office ) The Effects of the Partial Shutdown Ending in January https : //www.cbo.gov/system/files ? file = 2019-01/54937PartialShutdownEffects.pdf. CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) 2018a. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. 2018b. How Much Are Workers Getting Paid ? A Primer on Wage Measurement. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/ cea-report-much-workers-getting-paid-primer-wage-measurement/. Conconi P. M. Garc a-Santana L. Puccio and R. Venturini. From Final Goods to Inputs : The Protectionist Effect of Rules of Origin. American Economic Review no. : Copenhagen Economics. Terminal Dues : Impact on Financial Transfers Among Designated Postal Operators of the Universal Postal Union Cycle Agreements. Report prepared for U.S. Postal Regulatory Commission. https : //www.prc.gov/sites/default/files/reports/Terminal % 20Dues_ Impact % 20on % 20financial % 20transfers_FINAL % % 20September % 2017.pdf Dolfen P. L. Einav P. Klenow B. Klopack J. Levin L. Levin and W. Best. Assessing the Gains from E-Commerce. Working paper. https : //web. stanford.edu/ ~ bklopack/assessing-gains-ecommerce.pdf. Dowd T. R. McClelland and A. Muthitacharoen. New Evidence on the Tax Elasticity of Capital Gains : A Joint Working Paper of the Staff of the Joint Committee on Taxation and the Congressional Budget Office. https : //www. jct.gov/publications.html ? func = startdown&id = ECB ( European Central Bank ) 2018a. Monetary Policy Decisions. June https : // www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2018/html/ecb.mp180614.en.html 2018b. Monetary Policy Decisions. December https : //www.ecb.europa.eu/ press/pr/date/2018/html/ecb.mp181213.en.html Ehrlich I. D. Li and Z. Liu. The Role of Entrepreneurial Human Capital as a Driver of Endogenous Economic Growth. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. Ellison G. and S. Ellison. Search Obfuscation and Price Elasticities on the Internet. Econometrica no. : Federal Reserve. Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement. Press release December https : //www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/ monetary20161214a.htm. | References 2017a. Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Board Members and Federal Reserve Bank Presidents under Their Individual Assessments of Projected Appropriate Monetary Policy December Press release December https : //www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20171213. pdf. 2017b. FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans. Press release June https : //www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/ pressreleases/monetary20170614c.htm 2018a. Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank Presidents under Their Individual Assessments of Projected Appropriate Monetary Policy December December https : //www. federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20181219.pdf. 2018b. Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement. Press release May https : // www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20180502a1.pdf. 2018c. Transcript of Chairman Powell s Press Conference. December https : //www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20181219. pdf. Fernald J. R. Hall J. Stock and M. Watson. The Disappointing Recovery of Output after Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring Fountain N. and K. Malone. The Postal Illuminati. National Public Radio. https : //www.npr.org/templates/transcript/transcript.php ? storyId = Gruber J. and E. Saez. The Elasticity of Taxable Income : Evidence and Implications. Journal of Public Economics no. : Hakobyan S. and J. McLaren. Looking for Local Labor Market Effects of NAFTA. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Hirschman A. Exit Voice and Loyalty : Responses to Decline in Firms Organizations and States. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. IMF ( International Monetary Fund ) World Economic Outlook : A Weakening Global Expansion. Washington : IMF. International Postal Corporation. Cross Border E-Commerce Shopper Survey : Key Findings. https : //www.ipc.be/services/markets-and-regulations/ cross-border-shopper-survey. Irwin D. Clashing Over Commerce : A History of U.S. Trade Policy. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. Jones C. Misallocation Economic Growth and Input-Output Economics. In Advances in Economics and Econometrics vol. edited by D. Acemoglu M. Arellano and E. Dekel. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. https : //web. stanford.edu/ ~ chadj/JonesMisallocationIO2013.pdf. Mulligan C. The Redistribution Recession : How Labor Market Distortions Contracted the Economy. New York : Oxford University Press. References | Navarro P. Global Postal Rates Give Chinese Companies an Unfair Advantage. Financial Times. https : //www.ft.com/ content/876bc3ec-aadb-11e8-8253-48106866cd8a. OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) OECD Economic Surveys : United States. https : //read.oecd-ilibrary.org/economics/ oecd-economic-surveys-united-states-2018_eco_surveys-usa-2018en # page7. Postal Union of the Americas Spain and Portugal. Situaci n de los Estados Unidos de Am rica en relaci n al Sistema de Remuneraci n Integrada de la UPU. Original document and translation from the original Spanish provided by the U.S. Postal Service. Reagan R. Letter to the Honorable Albert Casey Postmaster General of the United States. May Restuccia D. and R. Rogerson. The Causes and Costs of Misallocation. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : SEC ( Securities and Exchange Commission ) 2018a. Notice of Designation of a Longer Period for Commission Action on Proceedings to Determine Whether to Approve or Disapprove a Proposed Rule Change to List and Trade Shares of SolidX Bitcoin Shares Issued by the VanEck SolidX Bitcoin Trust. https : // www.sec.gov/rules/sro/cboebzx/2018/34-84731.pdf. 2018b. Release No. ; File No. SR-CboeBZX-2018-040. https : //www.sec. gov/rules/sro/cboebzx/2018/34-84731.pdf. Shoag D. and S. Veuger. 2018a. Shops and the City : Evidence on Local Externalities and Local Government Policy from Big-Box Bankruptcies. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : USDA ( U.S. Department of Agriculture ) 2018a. Market Facilitation Program Fact Sheet. https : //www.fsa.usda.gov/Assets/USDA-FSA-Public/usdafiles/ FactSheets/2018/Market_Facilitation_Program_Fact_Sheet_ September_2018C.pdf. 2018b. Trade Mitigation Programs. https : //www.ams.usda.gov/selling-food-tousda/trade-mitigation-programs. USTR ( Office of the U.S. Trade Representative ) 2018a. Annual Report. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. https : //ustr.gov/sites/default/files/files/Press/ Reports/2018/AR/2018 % 20Annual % 20Report % 20I.pdf. 2018b. Report. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. https : //ustr. gov/sites/default/files/Section % % 20FINAL.PDF. | References x Appendix A Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During x Letter of Transmittal Council of Economic Advisers Washington December Mr. President : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely yours Kevin A. Hassett Chairman Richard V. Burkhauser Member Tomas J. Philipson Member Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L. Smith Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L. Seevers William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel Charles L. Schultze William D. Nordhaus Lyle E. Gramley George C. Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L. Weidenbaum William A. Niskanen Jerry L. Jordan Martin Feldstein Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July October | Appendix A November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July July Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date William Poole Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore Michael L. Mussa Michael J. Boskin John B. Taylor Richard L. Schmalensee David F. Bradford Paul Wonnacott Laura D Andrea Tyson Alan S. Blinder Joseph E. Stiglitz Martin N. Baily Alicia H. Munnell Janet L. Yellen Jeffrey A. Frankel Rebecca M. Blank Martin N. Baily Robert Z. Lawrence Kathryn L. Shaw R. Glenn Hubbard Mark B. McClellan Randall S. Kroszner N. Gregory Mankiw Kristin J. Forbes Harvey S. Rosen Ben S. Bernanke Katherine Baicker Matthew J. Slaughter Edward P. Lazear Donald B. Marron Christina D. Romer Austan D. Goolsbee Cecilia Elena Rouse Katharine G. Abraham Carl Shapiro Alan B. Krueger James H. Stock Jason Furman Betsey Stevenson Maurice Obstfeld Sandra E. Black Jay C. Shambaugh Kevin A. Hassett Richard V. Burkhauser Tomas J. Philipson Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chair Member Member Chairman Member Member Chair Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Chair Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member December April July August February June October November November February July July June June January February April October August August May May July November May November November February June November November February July January March September March April April November February August August July August August September September August January January May September January August June January January April June February August August August March July January January January February November July February June June January July March January January September August February April May August May January August August January January Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Employment Act of established the Council of Economic Advisers to provide the President with objective economic analysis on the development and implementation of policy for the full range of domestic and international economic issues that can affect the United States. Governed by a Chairman who is appointed by the President and confirmed by the United States Senate the Council has two additional Members who are also appointed by the President. The Chairman of the Council Kevin A. Hassett was confirmed by the U.S. Senate on September and was sworn in as the 29th Chairman on September Before becoming Chairman of the CEA he was an economist for almost years at the American Enterprise Institute. His most recent positions at AEI included James Q. Wilson Chair in American Culture and Politics and Director of Research for Domestic Policy. He also served as Director of Economic Policy Studies and Resident Scholar from through Before joining AEI he was a senior economist for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and an associate professor of economics and finance at Columbia University s Graduate School of Business. He has also served as a visiting professor at New York University s Law School as a consultant to the U.S. Treasury Department and as an adviser to presidential campaigns. A noted expert in the field of public finance he has written peer-reviewed articles for leading economics journals and has served as a columnist for leading media outlets. He received his B.A. from Swarthmore College and his Ph.D. in economics from the University of Pennsylvania. The Members of the Council Richard V. Burkhauser is Emeritus Sarah Gibson Blanding Professor of Policy Analysis and Management at Cornell University. Before coming to Cornell he was a tenured professor in the Department of Economics at Syracuse University and at Vanderbilt University. Most recently before joining the CEA he was a professorial research fellow at the Melbourne Institute of Applied Economic and Social Research and a senior research fellow at the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas at Austin. He is a former Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | president of the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management. His professional career has focused on how public policies affect the economic behavior and well-being of vulnerable populations. He has published widely in peer-reviewed economics and policy analysis journals. He received degrees in economics from St. Vincent College ( B.A. ) Rutgers University ( M.A. ) and the University of Chicago ( Ph.D. ) Tomas J. Philipson is on leave from his position as Daniel Levin Professor of Public Policy Studies at the University of Chicago s Harris School of Public Policy and from serving as the Director of the Health Economics Program of the Becker Friedman Institute at the University. With a research focus on health economics he has twice won the highest honor in his field the Kenneth Arrow Award of the International Health Economics Association and he has published extensively in many leading academic journals. He founded the consulting firm Precision Health Economics LLC and has held senior positions at the Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. In addition he was appointed to the Key Indicator Commission created by the Affordable Care Act served as an adviser to Congress on the 21st Century Cures legislation and was on the steering committee of the Biden Foundation s Cancer Moon Shot Initiative. He received his B.S. in mathematics from Uppsala University in Sweden and his M.A. and Ph.D. in economics from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. Areas of Activity Macroeconomic Policies Throughout fulfilling its mandate from the Employment Act of the Council continued to gather timely and authoritative information concerning economic developments and economic trends both current and prospective. The Council appraises the President and White House staff of new economic data and their significance on an ongoing basis. As core products of the Council these regular appraisals include written memoranda. The Council also prepared in-depth briefings on certain topics as well as public reports that address macroeconomic issues. In this spirit the Council s Chairman as well as its Chief Economist testified before the Joint Economic Committee of the U.S. Congress ; the Chairman also testified before the Budget Committee of the U.S. Senate. These testimonies addressed a range of macroeconomic trends. One of the Council s public reports this year addressed the trade-offs associated with socialism. The opportunity costs of socialism according to the report are large enough in magnitude to have macroeconomic implications. On employment and the labor market the Council actively disseminated analyses to the public. These addressed challenges facing the measurement of wage growth as well as the challenges associated with ensuring America s | Appendix A workers have the skills that firms demand. These reports complement the Council s regular blog posts on new releases of labor market data. Working alongside the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget the Council participates in the troika process that generates the macroeconomic forecasts that underlie the Administration s budget proposals. The Council under the leadership of the Chairman and the Members continued to initiate and lead this forecasting process. The Chairman and Members maintained the Council s tradition of meeting regularly with the Chairman and Members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to exchange views on the economy. Microeconomic Policies The Council participated in discussions internal to the Federal government as well as external on a range of issues in microeconomic policy. Topics included healthcare and pharmaceutical drug pricing energy cybersecurity deregulation financial reform criminal justice welfare reform and infrastructure. On healthcare the Council released a paper on how health insurance policies interact with the producers of health insurance. The Council also released a report on the impact of Trump Administration actions on the pricing of pharmaceutical drugs as well as the benefits these actions have delivered to consumers. The Council released a report on the economic costs that malicious cyber activity imposes on the U.S. economy. A Council report documented the benefits that structuring America s noncash welfare programs to encourage individuals to work could deliver for America s labor market. Reviewing the economics literature on criminal recidivism the Council identified certain programs intended to reduce criminal recidivism that appear to generate benefits in excess of costs ; the Council released a report on the results of this review. The Council also published its findings of a review of the literature on the effects of youth sports on outcomes of interest. On infrastructure a Council report documents the benefits that a comprehensive infrastructure package could deliver in terms of increases in GDP growth reductions in project completion times and expansions of labor market opportunities. International Economics The Council participated in the analysis of numerous issues in the area of international economics. The Council engages with a number of international organizations. The Council is a leading participant in the activities of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) a forum for facilitating economic coordination and cooperation among the world s Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | high-income countries. Chairman Hassett serves as the Chairman of the OECD s Economic Policy Committee. Council Members and Council staff have also engaged with the OECD working-party meetings on a range of issues and shaped the organization s agenda. The Council also participated in the Administration s development and implementation of a reform agenda for the U.S. relationship to the Universal Postal Union including at this United Nations technical body s Extraordinary Congress in Ethiopia. In addition the Council analyzed a number of proposals and scenarios in the area of international trade and investment. These included generating estimates of the benefits as well as any trade-offs of prospective trade agreements as well as revisions to existing agreements. The Council continues to actively monitor the U.S. international trade and investment position and to engage with emerging issues in international economics such as malicious cyber activity. The Council looks forward to continuing to analyze the United States international economic position. | Appendix A The Staff of the Council of Economic Advisers Executive Office DJ Nordquist Chief of Staff Joel M. Zinberg General Counsel and Senior Economist Paige F. Willey Associate Chief of Staff Joseph W. Sullivan Special Adviser to the Chairman and Staff Economist Bridget F. Visconti Executive Office Coordinator Grayson R. Wiles Staff Assistant Chief Economists Casey B. Mulligan Chief Economist Kevin C. Corinth Chief Economist for Domestic Policy Timothy Fitzgerald Chief International Economist Tyler B. Goodspeed Chief Economist for Macroeconomic Policy Research Staff Alexander C. Abajian Research Economist ; Energy Environment and Trade Colin S. Baker Senior Economist ; Health Andre J. Barbe Senior Economist ; Trade Andrew M. Baxter Staff Economist ; Macroeconomics and Tax Steven N. Braun Director of Macroeconomic Forecasting A. Blake Brown Senior Economist ; Agriculture Richard A. Brown Senior Economist ; Banking and Finance Cale A. Clingenpeel Research Economist ; Energy Macroeconomics and Tax William O. Ensor Staff Economist ; Macroeconomics Trade and Tax Donald S. Kenkel Senior Economist ; Healthcare and Deregulation Nicole P. Korkos Research Economist ; Labor Poverty and Tax Jeff H. Larrimore Senior Economist ; Education Labor and Poverty Caroline J. Liang Research Assistant ; Health and Deregulation Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | Christos A. Makridis Economist ; Labor Emerging technology Cybersecurity Brett Matsumoto Senior Economist ; Healthcare and Labor Nicholas D. Paulson Senior Economist ; Agriculture Melissa A. Poczatek Research Economist ; Banking Finance and Macroeconomics Anna D. Scherbina Senior Economist ; Cybersecurity Finance and Financial Technology Hershil Shah Research Economist ; Finance Domestic and International Macroeconomics Julia A. Tavlas Staff Economist ; Education Labor and Poverty Jeremy G. Weber Senior Economist ; Energy and Environment James H. Williams Staff Economist ; Health Tax and Regulation Joshua R. York Research Economist ; Trade Statistical Office Brian A. Amorosi Director of Statistical Office Administrative Office Doris S. Searles Operations Manager Interns Student interns provide invaluable help with research projects day-to-day operations and fact-checking. Interns during the previous year were Brittany Amano Jackson Bailey Rana Bansal Christian Brown Lydia Byrom John Cleese Alexis Cirrotti Jesse Dennis Mackenzie Dickhudt Adam Donoho Troy Durie Michael Everett Isabelle Holland Wesley Huang J. T. Hutt Kathryn Janeway Mostafa Kamel Ayesha Karnik David Laszcz John Leo Eugene Liu Kacey Manlove Aunt May Kevin Nguyen Katherine Olsson Sarah Park Peter Parker Pragya Parthasarathy Arjun Ramani Kriyana Reddy Steve Rogers Jake Rosen Joshua Siegel John Snow Nirali Trivedi Bruce Wayne Amanda Wilcox and Jacob Ziemba. ERP Production Alfred F. Imhoff Editor | Appendix A x Appendix B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO INCOME EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION Contents National Income or Expenditure B Percent changes in real gross domestic product  B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product  B Gross domestic product  B Percentage shares of gross domestic product  B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product  B Gross value added by sector  B Real gross value added by sector  B Gross domestic product ( GDP ) by industry value added in current dollars and as a percentage of GDP  B Real gross domestic product by industry value added and percent changes  B Personal consumption expenditures  B Real personal consumption expenditures  B Private fixed investment by type  B Real private fixed investment by type  B Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts  B Real exports and imports of goods and services  B Sources of personal income  B Disposition of personal income  B Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures and per capita gross domestic product in current and real dollars  B Gross saving and investment  B Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and people by race  B Real farm income  Contents | Labor Market Indicators B Civilian labor force  B Civilian employment by sex age and demographic characteristic  B Unemployment by sex age and demographic characteristic  B Civilian labor force participation rate  B Civilian employment/population ratio  B Civilian unemployment rate  B Unemployment by duration and reason  B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry  B Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries  B Employment cost index private industry  B Productivity and related data business and nonfarm business sectors  B Changes in productivity and related data business and nonfarm business sectors  Production and Business Activity B Industrial production indexes major industry divisions  B Capacity utilization rates  B New private housing units started authorized and completed and houses sold  B Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories  Prices B Changes in consumer price indexes  B Price indexes for personal consumption expenditures and percent changes  | Appendix B Money Stock Credit and Finance B Money stock and debt measures  B Consumer credit outstanding  B Bond yields and interest rates  B Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing  B Mortgage debt outstanding by holder  Government Finance B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years  B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years  B Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years  B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years  B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) basis  B State and local government revenues and expenditures fiscal years  B U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation  B Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities  Corporate Profits and Finance B Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments  B Corporate profits by industry  B Historical stock prices and yields  B Common stock prices and yields  Contents | International Statistics B U.S. international transactions  B U.S. international trade in goods on balance of payments ( BOP ) and Census basis and trade in services on BOP basis  B U.S. international trade in goods and services by area and country  B Foreign exchange rates  B-61. Growth rates in real gross domestic product by area and country  | Appendix B General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals due to rounding. Because of the formula used for calculating real gross domestic product ( GDP ) the chained ( ) dollar estimates for the detailed components do not add to the chained-dollar value of GDP or to any intermediate aggregate. The Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) no longer publishes chained-dollar estimates prior to except for selected series. Because of the method used for seasonal adjustment the sum or average of seasonally adjusted monthly values generally will not equal annual totals based on unadjusted values. Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars. Symbols used : p Preliminary. Not available ( also not applicable ) NSA Not seasonally adjusted. Data in these tables reflect revisions made by source agencies through March Excel versions of these tables are available at www.gpo.gov/erp. General Notes | National Income or Expenditure Table B Percent changes in real gross domestic product [ Percent change fourth quarter over fourth quarter ; quarterly changes at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  See next page for continuation of table. | Appendix B Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential Change in private inventories                                                                    Table B Percent changes in real gross domestic product Continued [ Percent change fourth quarter over fourth quarter ; quarterly changes at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Exports Imports                                                                    Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local Final Final Gross sales to Gross sales of domestic private domestic Average of GDP domestic pur- domestic income and GDI product chases pur ( GDI ) chasers     Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services. Personal consumption expenditures plus gross private fixed investment. Gross domestic income is deflated by the implicit price deflator for GDP. Note : Percent changes based on unrounded GDP quantity indexes. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product [ Percentage points except as noted ; annual average to annual average quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product ( percent change ) Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential Change in private inventories                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  See next page for continuation of table. | Appendix B Table B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product Continued [ Percentage points except as noted ; annual average to annual average quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Net exports Exports Total Goods Imports Services Total Goods Federal Services Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local Final sales of domestic product Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Gross domestic product [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential Change in private inventories Billions of dollars                p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p                 p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  See next page for continuation of table. Billions of chained ( ) dollars | Appendix B Table B Gross domestic product Continued [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local Final Final Gross sales to Gross sales of domestic private domestic Average of GDP domestic pur- domestic income and GDI product chases pur ( GDI ) chasers Billions of dollars                p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p          Billions of chained ( ) dollars                p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services. Personal consumption expenditures plus gross private fixed investment. For chained dollar measures gross domestic income is deflated by the implicit price deflator for GDP. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Percentage shares of gross domestic product [ Percent of nominal GDP ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product ( percent ) Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total See next page for continuation of table. | Appendix B Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential Change in private inventories Table B Percentage shares of gross domestic product Continued [ Percent of nominal GDP ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Net exports Exports Total Goods Imports Services Total Goods Federal Services Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product Nonresidential Total See next page for continuation of table. | Appendix B Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential Table B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports and imports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Year or quarter Exports Imports Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Personal consumption Final expenGross sales of ditures domestic Gross domestic excludpurproduct ing chases domestic product food and energy Percent change Personal consumption expenditures Total Gross domestic Excludpuring chases food and energy Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services. Quarterly percent changes are at annual rates. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Gross value added by sector [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product Total Nonfarm Households and institutions Farm Total Households Nonprofit institutions serving households General government Total Federal State and local Addendum : Gross housing value added Gross domestic business value added equals gross domestic product excluding gross value added of households and institutions and of general government. Nonfarm value added equals gross domestic business value added excluding gross farm value added. Equals compensation of employees of nonprofit institutions the rental value of nonresidential fixed assets owned and used by nonprofit institutions serving households and rental income of persons for tenant-occupied housing owned by nonprofit institutions. Equals compensation of general government employees plus general government consumption of fixed capital. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Table B Real gross value added by sector [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product Total Nonfarm Households and institutions Farm Total Households Nonprofit institutions serving households General government Total Federal State and local Addendum : Gross housing value added Gross domestic business value added equals gross domestic product excluding gross value added of households and institutions and of general government. Nonfarm value added equals gross domestic business value added excluding gross farm value added. Equals compensation of employees of nonprofit institutions the rental value of nonresidential fixed assets owned and used by nonprofit institutions serving households and rental income of persons for tenant-occupied housing owned by nonprofit institutions. Equals compensation of general government employees plus general government consumption of fixed capital. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Gross domestic product ( GDP ) by industry value added in current dollars and as a percentage of GDP [ Billions of dollars ; except as noted ] Private industries Year Gross domestic product Total private industries Agriculture forestry fishing and hunting Manufacturing Construction Mining Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Utilities Wholesale trade Retail trade Value added                      Percent                      Industry value added as a percentage of GDP ( percent ) Consists of agriculture forestry fishing and hunting ; mining ; construction ; and manufacturing. Consists of utilities ; wholesale trade ; retail trade ; transportation and warehousing ; information ; finance insurance real estate rental and leasing ; professional and business services ; educational services health care and social assistance ; arts entertainment recreation accommodation and food services ; and other services except government. Note : Data shown in Tables B and B are consistent with the annual revision of the industry accounts released in July For details see Survey of Current Business December See next page for continuation of table. | Appendix B Table B Gross domestic product ( GDP ) by industry value added in current dollars and as a percentage of GDP Continued [ Billions of dollars ; except as noted ] Private industries Continued Year Transportation and warehousing Finance insurance real estate Information rental and leasing Professional and business services Arts Educational entertainservices ment health recreation care accommoand dation social food assistance and services Other services except government Government Private Private goodsservicesproducing producing industries industries Value added                      Industry value added as a percentage of GDP ( percent )                      Note ( cont d ) : Value added is the contribution of each private industry and of government to GDP. Value added is equal to an industry s gross output minus its intermediate inputs. Current-dollar value added is calculated as the sum of distributions by an industry to its labor and capital which are derived from the components of gross domestic income. Value added industry data shown in Tables B and B are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Real gross domestic product by industry value added and percent changes Private industries Year Gross domestic product Total private industries Agriculture forestry fishing and hunting Manufacturing Mining Construction Total manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Utilities Wholesale trade Retail trade Chain-type quantity indexes for value added ( = )                      Percent change from year earlier                                 Consists of agriculture forestry fishing and hunting ; mining ; construction ; and manufacturing. Consists of utilities ; wholesale trade ; retail trade ; transportation and warehousing ; information ; finance insurance real estate rental and leasing ; professional and business services ; educational services health care and social assistance ; arts entertainment recreation accommodation and food services ; and other services except government. See next page for continuation of table. | Appendix B Table B Real gross domestic product by industry value added and percent changes Continued Private industries Continued Year Transportation and warehousing Finance insurance estate Information realrental and leasing Arts Educational entertainservices ment health recreation care accommoand dation social food assistance and services Professional and business services Other services except government Government Private Private goodsservicesproducing producing industries industries Chain-type quantity indexes for value added ( = )                      Percent change from year earlier                                Note : Data are based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) See Note Table B Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Personal consumption expenditures Durable Total Services Nondurable Total Motor vehicles and parts Total Food and beverages Gasoline purchased and for offother premises energy congoods sumption Addendum : Personal consumption expendiFinancial tures excluding Health services and food care insurand ance energy Household consumption expenditures Total Total Housing and utilities Includes other items not shown separately. Food consists of food and beverages purchased for off-premises consumption ; food services which include purchased meals and beverages are not classified as food. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Table B Real personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Goods Year or quarter                 p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Personal consumption expenditures Durable Total Total Services Nondurable Motor vehicles and parts Total Food and beverages Gasoline purchased and for offother premises energy congoods sumption Addendum : Personal consumption expendiFinancial tures excluding Health services and food care insurand ance energy Household consumption expenditures Total Total Housing and utilities Includes other items not shown separately. Food consists of food and beverages purchased for off-premises consumption ; food services which include purchased meals and beverages are not classified as food. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Private fixed investment by type [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonresidential Residential Intellectual property products Equipment Private fixed Year or quarter investment                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Total nonresidential Structures Information processing equipment Total Computers and Total peripheral Other equipment Includes other items not shown separately. Research and development investment includes expenditures for software. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Indus- Transtrial portation equip- equip- Total ment ment Structures Total resiResearch denSoftand tial ware development Total Single family Table B Real private fixed investment by type [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Nonresidential Residential Intellectual property products Equipment Private fixed Year or quarter investment Total non- Strucresi- tures dential Information processing equipment Total Total                 p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Computers and peripheral Other equipment Indus- Transtrial portation equip- equip- Total ment ment Structures Total resiResearch denSoftand tial ware development Total Single family Because computers exhibit rapid changes in prices relative to other prices in the economy the chained-dollar estimates should not be used to measure the component s relative importance or its contribution to the growth rate of more aggregate series. The quantity index for computers can be used to accurately measure the real growth rate of this series. For information on this component see Survey of Current Business Table ( for growth rates ) Table ( for contributions ) and Table ( for quantity indexes ) Includes other items not shown separately. Research and development investment includes expenditures for software. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Current receipts from rest of the world Current payments to rest of the world Exports of goods and services Year or quarter Total ServTotal Goods ices                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p    Imports of goods and services Income receipts Total     ServTotal Goods ices Income payments   Current taxes and transfer payments to rest of the world ( net ) Total From persons ( net ) From government ( net ) From business ( net ) Balance on current account NIPA   Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services. Beginning with repairs and alterations of equipment were reclassified from goods to services. National income and product accounts ( NIPA ) Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Table B Real exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Exports of goods and services Year or quarter                 p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Imports of goods and services Goods Total Total Goods Durable goods Nondurable goods Nonagricultural goods Services Total Total Durable goods NonNon- Services durable petroleum goods goods Certain goods primarily military equipment purchased and sold by the Federal Government are included in services. Repairs and alterations of equipment are also included in services. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Sources of personal income [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Proprietors income with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Compensation of employees Wages and salaries Year or quarter Personal income Total Total                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Supplements to wages and salaries See next page for continuation of table. | Appendix B Private Governindustries ment Total Employer Employer contribu- contributions for for employee tions pension government and social insurinsurance ance funds Total Farm Rental income of persons with capital conNonfarm sumption adjustment Table B Sources of personal income Continued [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal income receipts on assets Personal current transfer receipts Government social benefits to persons Year or quarter Total                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Personal Personal interest dividend income income Total Total UnemploySocial ment security Medicare Medicaid insurance Other Other current transfer receipts from business ( net ) Less : Contributions for government social insurance domestic Includes Veterans benefits not shown seperately. Includes old-age survivors and disability insurance benefits that are distributed from the federal old-age and survivors insurance trust fund and the disability insurance trust fund. Includes hospital and supplementary medical insurance benefits that are distributed from the federal hospital insurance trust fund and the supplementary medical insurance trust fund. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Percent of disposable personal income Less : Personal outlays Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Personal income Less : Personal current taxes Equals : Disposable personal income Total Consists of nonmortgage interest paid by households. Percents based on data in millions of dollars. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Personal consumption expenditures Personal interest payments Personal current transfer payments Equals : Personal saving Personal outlays Total Personal consumption expenditures Personal saving Table B Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures and per capita gross domestic product in current and real dollars [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates except as noted ] Disposable personal income Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Total ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Personal consumption expenditures Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Total ( billions of dollars ) Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Gross domestic product per capita ( dollars ) Current dollars Chained ( ) dollars Population ( thousands ) Population of the United States including Armed Forces overseas. Annual data are averages of quarterly data. Quarterly data are averages for the period. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau of the Census ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Gross saving and investment [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross saving Net saving Year or quarter Total gross saving Net private saving Total net saving Total                                                   p     : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p     Personal saving | Appendix B Total Federal State and local         With inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments. See next page for continuation of table. Undistributed corporate profits Consumption of fixed capital Net government saving Total Private Government Table B Gross saving and investment Continued [ Billions of dollars except as noted ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Gross domestic investment capital account transactions and net lending NIPA Addenda : Gross domestic investment Year or quarter Total                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p    Total StatisNet Capital lending tical Gross Gross account or net discrep- Gross private trans- borrow- ancy private domes- governing saving ment actions tic ( net ) ( ) investinvest- ment NIPA ment Gross government saving Total            Federal State and local     Net domestic investment Gross saving as a percent of gross national income Net saving as a percent of gross national income     National income and product accounts ( NIPA ) Consists of capital transfers and the acquisition and disposal of nonproduced nonfinancial assets. Prior to equals the balance on current account NIPA. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure | Table B Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and people by race Families People below poverty level Below poverty level Race Hispanic origin and year TOTAL ( all races )           WHITE non-Hispanic           BLACK           ASIAN           HISPANIC ( any race )           Number ( millions ) Median Female money householder Total income no husband ( in present Number ( milPercent dollions ) Number lars ) Number ( milPercent ( milPercent lions ) lions ) Median money income ( in dollars ) of people years old and over with income Males All people Yearround full-time workers Females All people Yearround full-time workers $ $ $ $ $ The term family refers to a group of two or more persons related by birth marriage or adoption and residing together. Every family must include a reference person. Poverty thresholds are updated each year to reflect changes in the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( CPI-U ) Adjusted by consumer price index research series ( CPI-U-RS ) Data for American Indians and Alaska natives native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders and those reporting two or more races are included in the total but not shown separately. Reflects implementation of Census 2010-based population controls comparable to succeeding years. The Current Population Survey ( CPS ) Annual Social and Economic Supplement ( ASEC ) included redesigned income questions which were implemented to a subsample of the addresses using a probability split panel design. These data are based on the ASEC sample of addresses that received income questions similar to those used in the ASEC and are consistent with data in earlier years. These data are based on the ASEC sample of addresses that received redesigned income questions and are consistent with data in later years. The CPS allows respondents to choose more than one race. Data shown are for white alone non-Hispanic black alone and Asian alone race categories. ( Black is also black or African American. ) Family race and Hispanic origin are based on the reference person. Note : For details see Income and Poverty in the United States in publication Series P on the CPS ASEC. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) | Appendix B Table B Real farm income [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ] Income of farm operators from farming Gross farm income Year Value of agricultural sector production Total                                                                 p  Total Crops Animals and animal products Farm-related income Direct Federal Government payments Production expenses Net farm income The GDP chain-type price index is used to convert the current-dollar statistics to = equivalents. Crop receipts include proceeds received from commodities placed under Commodity Credit Corporation loans. The value of production equates to the sum of cash receipts home consumption and the value of the change in inventories. Includes income from forest products sold the gross imputed rental value of farm dwellings machine hire and custom work and other sources of farm income such as commodity insurance indemnities. Note : Data for are forecasts. Source : Department of Agriculture ( Economic Research Service ) National Income or Expenditure | Labor Market Indicators Table B Civilian labor force [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Employment Total Total NonAgricultural agricultural Not in labor force Civilian labor force participation rate Civilian employment/ population ratio                                  Unemployment Thousands of persons years of age and over                                                                          Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent Thousands of persons years of age and over Not seasonally adjusted. Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population. Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population. Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force. See next page for continuation of table. | Appendix B Table B Civilian labor force Continued [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted except as noted ] Year or month Civilian noninstitutional population Civilian labor force Employment Total Total NonAgricultural agricultural Unemployment Not in labor force Civilian labor force participation rate Thousands of persons years of age and over                              : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Civilian employment/ population ratio Unemployment rate civilian workers Percent Beginning in data for agricultural employment are for agricultural and related industries ; data for this series and for nonagricultural employment are not strictly comparable with data for earlier years. Because of independent seasonal adjustment for these two series monthly data will not add to total civilian employment. Note : Labor force data in Tables B through B are based on household interviews and usually relate to the calendar week that includes the 12th of the month. Historical comparability is affected by revisions to population controls changes in occupational and industry classification and other changes to the survey. In recent years updated population controls have been introduced annually with the release of January data so data are not strictly comparable with earlier periods. Particularly notable changes were introduced for data in the years and For definitions of terms area samples used historical comparability of the data comparability with other series etc. see Employment and Earnings or concepts and methodology of the CPS at http : //www.bls.gov/cps/documentation.htm # concepts. Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Civilian employment by sex age and demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] By race or ethnicity By sex and age Year or month                                             : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  All civilian workers Men years and over Women Both years sexes and over White Black or African American Asian Hispanic or Latino ethnicity Men years and over Total Total Men years and over                          Total Men years and over Women years and over Total Women years and over Women years and over Beginning in persons who selected this race group only. Persons whose ethnicity is identified as Hispanic or Latino may be of any race. Prior to persons who selected more than one race were included in the group they identified as the main race. Data for black or African American were for black prior to See Employment and Earnings or concepts and methodology of the Current Population Survey ( CPS ) at http : //www.bls.gov/cps/documentation. htm # concepts for details. Note : Detail will not sum to total because data for all race groups are not shown here. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) | Appendix B Table B Unemployment by sex age and demographic characteristic [ Thousands of persons years of age and over except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] By race or ethnicity By sex and age Year or month                                             : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  All civilian workers Men years and over Women Both years sexes and over White Total Men years and over Women years and over Black or African American Asian Hispanic or Latino ethnicity Men years and over Total Total Total Women years and over                          Men years and over Women years and over See footnote and Note Table B Note : See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Civilian labor force participation rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Men Year or month                                             : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  All civilian workers years and over Women years years years and over years and over years years Civilian labor force as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified. See footnote Table B Note : Data relate to persons years of age and over except as noted. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) | Appendix B years and over By race or ethnicity Both sexes years White Black or African American Asian                          Hispanic or Latino ethnicity Table B Civilian employment/population ratio [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Men Year or month                                             : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  All civilian workers years and over Women years years years and over years and over years years years and over By race or ethnicity Both sexes years White Black or African American Asian                          Hispanic or Latino ethnicity Civilian employment as percent of civilian noninstitutional population in group specified. See footnote Table B Note : Data relate to persons years of age and over except as noted. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Civilian unemployment rate [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] By race or ethnicity By sex and age Year or month                                             : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  All civilian workers Men years and over Women years and over Both sexes White Black or African American Asian                          By educational attainment ( years & over ) U-6 measure of labor HisLess High Some Bachpanic or underthan school college elor s Latino utilizaa high gradu- or asdegree ethnic- tion school ates no sociate and ity diploma college degree higher                                                                                        Unemployed as percent of civilian labor force in group specified. See footnote Table B Total unemployed plus all persons marginally attached to the labor force plus total employed part time for economic reasons as a percent of the civilian labor force plus all persons marginally attached to the labor force. Includes persons with bachelor s master s professional and doctoral degrees. Note : Data relate to persons years of age and over except as noted. See Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) | Appendix B Table B Unemployment by duration and reason [ Thousands of persons except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Duration of unemployment Year or month                                             : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Unemployment Less than weeks weeks weeks weeks and over Reason for unemployment Average Median ( mean ) duration duration ( weeks ) ( weeks ) Job losers Total On layoff Other Job ReNew leavers entrants entrants Because of independent seasonal adjustment of the various series detail will not sum to totals. Beginning with includes unemployment durations of up to years ; prior data are for up to years. Beginning with job losers and persons who completed temporary jobs. Note : Data relate to persons years of age and over. See Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry [ Thousands of jobs ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Private industries Year or month                                            p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec p  Total nonagricultural employment Goods-producing industries Total private Total Mining and logging Private service-providing industries Trade transportation and utilities Manufacturing Construction Total Durable goods Nondurable goods Total Total Retail trade Includes wholesale trade transportation and warehousing and utilities not shown separately. Note : Data in Tables B and B are based on reports from employing establishments and relate to full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who received pay for any part of the pay period that includes the 12th of the month. Not comparable with labor force data ( Tables B through B ) which include proprietors self-employed persons unpaid family workers and private household workers ; which count persons as See next page for continuation of table. | Appendix B Table B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry Continued [ Thousands of jobs ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Private industries Continued Government Private service-providing industries Continued Year or month Information                                            p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec p  Financial activities Professional and business services Education and health services Leisure and hospitality Other services Total Federal State Local Note ( cont d ) : employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather etc. even if they are not paid for the time off ; which are based on a sample of the working-age population ; and which count persons only once as employed unemployed or not in the labor force. In the data shown here persons who work at more than one job are counted each time they appear on a payroll. Establishment data for employment hours and earnings are classified based on the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) For further description and details see Employment and Earnings. Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries [ Monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Production and nonsupervisory employees All employees Year or month Average weekly hours                                            p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec p                                  Average weekly earnings Average hourly earnings Percent change Average Percent change Level Level from year earlier weekly from year earlier hours Current Current Current Current Current Current dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars dollars Average hourly earnings                                 $                                 $ Average weekly earnings                                 $                                 $                                                                   $ $ $ $ Production employees in goods-producing industries and nonsupervisory employees in service-providing industries. These groups account for four-fifths of the total employment on private nonfarm payrolls. Current dollars divided by the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( CPI-U ) on a = base. Current dollars divided by the consumer price index for urban wage earners and clerical workers ( CPI-W ) on a = base. Note : See Note Table B Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) | Appendix B Table B Employment cost index private industry Total private Year and month Total compensation Wages and salaries Service-providing Goods-producing Total Benefits compensation Wages and salaries Total Benefits compensation Wages and salaries Manufacturing Total Benefits compensation Wages and salaries Benefits Indexes on NAICS basis December = ; not seasonally adjusted December :                   : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  Indexes on NAICS basis December = ; seasonally adjusted Percent change from months earlier not seasonally adjusted December :                   : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  Percent change from months earlier seasonally adjusted On Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) basis data are for service-producing industries. Employer costs for employee benefits. Data on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) basis available beginning with ; not strictly comparable with earlier data on SIC basis. Note : Changes effective with the release of March data ( in April ) include changing industry classification to NAICS from SIC and rebasing data to December = Historical SIC data are available through December Data exclude farm and household workers. Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Table B Productivity and related data business and nonfarm business sectors [ Index numbers = ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Labor productivity ( output per hour ) Year or quarter Output Hours of all persons Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator Nonfarm Nonfarm Nonfarm Nonfarm Nonfarm Business Nonfarm Business Nonfarm business Business business Business business Business business Business business Business business sector business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector                                                 p      : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p                      Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector. Hours at work of all persons engaged in sector including hours of employees proprietors and unpaid family workers. Estimates based primarily on establishment data. Wages and salaries of employees plus employers contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed. Hourly compensation divided by consumer price series. The trend for is based on the consumer price index research series ( CPI-U-RS ) The change for prior years and recent quarters is based on the consumer price index for all urban consumers ( CPI-U ) Current dollar output divided by the output index. Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) | Appendix B Table B Changes in productivity and related data business and nonfarm business sectors [ Percent change from preceding period ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Output per hour of all persons Year or quarter Output Hours of all persons Compensation per hour Real compensation per hour Unit labor costs Implicit price deflator Nonfarm Nonfarm Nonfarm Nonfarm Nonfarm Business Nonfarm Business Nonfarm business Business business Business business Business business Business business Business business sector business sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector sector                                                 p      : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  p IV                      Output refers to real gross domestic product in the sector. Hours at work of all persons engaged in the sector. See footnote Table B Wages and salaries of employees plus employers contributions for social insurance and private benefit plans. Also includes an estimate of wages salaries and supplemental payments for the self-employed. Hourly compensation divided by a consumer price index. See footnote Table B Current dollar output divided by the output index. Note : Percent changes are calculated using index numbers to three decimal places and may differ slightly from percent changes based on indexes in Table B which are rounded to one decimal place. Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Labor Market Indicators | Production and Business Activity Table B Industrial production indexes major industry divisions [ = except as noted ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Total industrial production Year or month                                             p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept p  Oct p  Nov p  Dec p  Index = Percent change from year earlier Manufacturing Total Percent change from year earlier Durable Nondurable Other ( non-NAICS ) Mining Utilities Total industry and total manufacturing series include manufacturing as defined in the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) plus those industries logging and newspaper periodical book and directory publishing that have traditionally been considered to be manufacturing and included in the industrial sector. Percent changes based on unrounded indexes. Note : Data based on NAICS ; see footnote Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. | Appendix B Table B Capacity utilization rates [ Percent ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Manufacturing Year or month                                             p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept p  Oct p  Nov p  Dec p  Total industry Total Durable goods Stage-of-process Nondurable Other goods ( non-NAICS ) Mining Utilities Crude Primary and semifinished Finished Output as percent of capacity. See footnote and Note Table B Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Production and Business Activity | Table B New private housing units started authorized and completed and houses sold [ Thousands ; monthly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or month Total                                            p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov p  Dec p  New housing units started New housing units authorized Type of structure Type of structure unit to units                         units or more Total unit to units units or more New housing units completed New houses sold   Authorized by issuance of local building permits in permit-issuing places : places beginning with ; for ; for ; for ; for ; and for Monthly data do not meet publication standards because tests for identifiable and stable seasonality do not meet reliability standards. Note : One-unit estimates prior to for new housing units started and completed and for new houses sold include an upward adjustment of percent to account for structures in permit-issuing areas that did not have permit authorization. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) | Appendix B Table B Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories [ Amounts in millions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Year or month SIC :                NAICS :                           p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov p  Dec p  Total manufacturing and trade Sales Inventories Merchant wholesalers Manufacturing Sales Inventories Ratio Retail trade Sales Inventories                Ratio Ratio Sales Inventories Retail and food services sales Ratio Excludes manufacturers sales branches and offices. Annual data are averages of monthly not seasonally adjusted figures. Seasonally adjusted end of period. Inventories beginning with January for manufacturing and December for wholesale and retail trade are not comparable with earlier periods. Inventory/sales ratio. Monthly inventories are inventories at the end of the month to sales for the month. Annual data beginning with are the average of monthly ratios for the year. Annual data for are the ratio of December inventories to monthly average sales for the year. Food services included on Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) basis and excluded on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) basis. See last column for retail and food services sales. Effective in data classified based on NAICS. Data on NAICS basis available beginning with Earlier data based on SIC. Data on both NAICS and SIC basis include semiconductors. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Production and Business Activity | Prices Table B Changes in consumer price indexes [ For all urban consumers ; percent change ] Year or month All items less food and energy All items Total Energy Food Shelter Medical care Apparel New vehicles Total At home Away from Total Gasoline home C-CPI-U December to December NSA                                             : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec                           Change from year earlier NSA Includes other items not shown separately. Data beginning with incorporate a rental equivalence measure for homeowners costs. Commodities and services. Household energy--electricity utility ( piped ) gas service fuel oil etc.--and motor fuel. Chained consumer price index ( C-CPI-U ) introduced in Reflects the effect of substitution that consumers make across item categories in response to changes in relative prices. Data for are subject to revision. Source : Department of Labor ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) | Appendix B Table B Price indexes for personal consumption expenditures and percent changes [ Chain-type price index numbers = ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures ( PCE ) Year or month                                               p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct p  Nov p  Dec p  Total Goods Services Food Percent change from year earlier Energy PCE goods less and food and services energy Total Goods Services Food Energy PCE goods less and food and services energy Food consists of food and beverages purchased for off-premises consumption ; food services which include purchased meals and beverages are not classified as food. Consists of gasoline and other energy goods and of electricity and gas services. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Prices | Money Stock Credit and Finance Table B Money stock and debt measures [ Averages of daily figures except debt end-of-period basis ; billions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Year and month M1 M2 Debt Sum of currency demand deposits travelers checks and other checkable deposits M1 plus savings deposits retail MMMF balances and small time deposits Debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors December :                                       p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec p                    Percent change From year or months earlier M1 M2 From previous period Debt                   Money market mutual fund ( MMMF ) Savings deposits include money market deposit accounts. Consists of outstanding debt securities and loans of the U.S. Government State and local governments and private nonfinancial sectors. Quarterly data shown in last month of quarter. End-of-year data are for fourth quarter. Annual changes are from December to December ; monthly changes are from six months earlier at an annual rate. Debt growth of domestic nonfinancial sectors is the seasonally adjusted borrowing flow divided by the seasonally adjusted level of debt outstanding in the previous period. Annual changes are from fourth quarter to fourth quarter ; quarterly changes are from previous quarter at an annual rate. Note : For further information on the composition of M1 and M2 see the H.6 release. For further information on the debt of domestic nonfinancial sectors and the derivation of debt growth see the Z.1 release. Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. | Appendix B Table B Consumer credit outstanding [ Amount outstanding ( end of month ) ; millions of dollars seasonally adjusted ] Year and month December :                                                 p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec p  Total consumer credit Nonrevolving Revolving Covers most short- and intermediate-term credit extended to individuals. Credit secured by real estate is excluded. Includes automobile loans and all other loans not included in revolving credit such as loans for mobile homes education boats trailers or vacations. These loans may be secured or unsecured. Beginning with includes student loans extended by the Federal Government and by SLM Holding Corporation. Data newly available in January result in breaks in these series between December and subsequent months. Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Money Stock Credit and Finance | Table B Bond yields and interest rates [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year Bills ( at auction ) 3-month 6-month 3-year                                                                                   Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Constant maturities      10-year 30-year                                      Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal Newhome bonds ( Stan- mortgage yields dard & Poor s ) Prime rate charged by banks Discount window ( Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) Primary Adjustment credit credit                                                                                       Federal funds rate        High bill rate at auction issue date within period bank-discount basis. On or after October data are stop yields from uniform-price auctions. Before that date they are weighted average yields from multiple-price auctions. See next page for continuation of table. | Appendix B Table B Bond yields and interest rates Continued [ Percent per annum ] U.S. Treasury securities Year and month Bills ( at auction ) 3-month 6-month 3-year : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Corporate bonds ( Moody s ) Constant maturities 10-year 30-year Aaa Baa Highgrade municipal Newhome bonds ( Stan- mortgage yields dard & Poor s ) Prime rate charged by banks Discount window ( Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) Primary Adjustment credit credit High-low High-low High-low                                                             Federal funds rate Yields on the more actively traded issues adjusted to constant maturities by the Department of the Treasury. The 30-year Treasury constant maturity series was discontinued on February and reintroduced on February Beginning with December data for corporate Aaa series are industrial bonds only. Effective rate ( in the primary market ) on conventional mortgages reflecting fees and charges as well as contract rate and assuming on the average repayment at end of years. Rates beginning with January not strictly comparable with prior rates. For monthly data high and low for the period. Prime rate for are ranges of the rate in effect during the period. Primary credit replaced adjustment credit as the Federal Reserve s principal discount window lending program effective January Beginning March the daily effective federal funds rate is a volume-weighted median of transaction-level data collected from depository institutions in the Report of Selected Money Market Rates ( FR ) Between July and February the daily effective rate was a volume-weighted mean of rates on brokered trades. Prior to that the daily effective rate was the rate considered most representative of the day s transactions usually the one at which most transactions occurred. Sources : Department of the Treasury Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Federal Housing Finance Agency Moody s Investors Service Bloomberg and Standard & Poor s. Money Stock Credit and Finance | Table B Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing [ Billions of dollars ] Nonfarm properties End of year or quarter                                                           : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III p  All properties Farm properties Nonfarm properties by type of mortgage Total to 4family houses Multifamily properties Commercial properties to 4-family houses Total Total FHAinsured VAguaranteed Includes Federal Housing Administration ( FHA ) insured multi-family properties not shown separately. Derived figures. Total includes multi-family and commercial properties with conventional mortgages not shown separately. Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations. | Appendix B Conventional Government underwritten Total to 4family houses Table B Mortgage debt outstanding by holder [ Billions of dollars ] Major financial institutions End of year or quarter                                                           : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III p  Total Total Depository Institutions Other holders Life insurance companies Federal and related agencies Mortgage pools or trusts Individuals and others Includes savings banks and savings and loan associations. Data reported by Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation insured institutions include loans in process for and exclude loans in process beginning with Includes loans held by nondeposit trust companies but not loans held by bank trust departments. Includes Government National Mortgage Association ( GNMA or Ginnie Mae ) Federal Housing Administration Veterans Administration Farmers Home Administration ( FmHA ) Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Resolution Trust Corporation ( through ) and in earlier years Reconstruction Finance Corporation Homeowners Loan Corporation Federal Farm Mortgage Corporation and Public Housing Administration. Also includes U.S.-sponsored agencies such as Federal National Mortgage Association ( FNMA or Fannie Mae ) Federal Land Banks Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation ( FHLMC or Freddie Mac ) Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation ( Farmer Mac beginning ) Federal Home Loan Banks ( beginning ) and mortgage pass-through securities issued or guaranteed by GNMA FHLMC FNMA FmHA or Farmer Mac. Other U.S. agencies ( amounts small or current separate data not readily available ) included with individuals and others. Includes private mortgage pools. Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System based on data from various Government and private organizations. Money Stock Credit and Finance | Government Finance Table B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Total Fiscal year or period                         Transition quarter                                            ( estimates )  ( estimates )  Receipts Outlays On-budget Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Federal debt ( end of period ) Off-budget Surplus or deficit ( ) Receipts Outlays Surplus or deficit ( ) Gross Federal Held by the public Addendum : Gross domestic product Note : Fiscal years through were on a July June basis ; beginning with October ( fiscal year ) the fiscal year is on an October September basis. The transition quarter is the three-month period from July through September See Budget of the United States Government Fiscal Year for additional information. Sources : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget. | Appendix B Table B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years [ Percent ; fiscal years ] Outlays Fiscal year or period                              Transition quarter                                            ( estimates )  ( estimates )  Receipts Total Federal debt ( end of period ) Surplus or deficit ( ) National defense Gross Federal Held by public Note : See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget. Government Finance | Table B Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years [ Billions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Receipts ( on-budget and off-budget ) Fiscal year or period                         Transition quarter                                            ( estimates )  ( estimates )  Social insurIndi- Corpo- ance vidual ration and Other Total income income retiretaxes taxes ment receipts Outlays ( on-budget and off-budget ) National defense Total De- InterpartnaMedi- Income Social ment tional Health care secu- security rity of affairs Defense military          Total Note : See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget. | Appendix B              Net interest Surplus or deficit ( ) ( onOther budget and offbudget ) Table B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ; fiscal years ] Description RECEIPTS OUTLAYS AND SURPLUS OR DEFICIT Total : Receipts  Outlays  Surplus or deficit ( )  On-budget : Receipts  Outlays  Surplus or deficit ( )  Off-budget : Receipts  Outlays  Surplus or deficit ( )  OUTSTANDING DEBT END OF PERIOD Gross Federal debt  Held by Federal Government accounts  Held by the public  Federal Reserve System  Other  Actual Estimates     RECEIPTS BY SOURCE Total : On-budget and off-budget  Individual income taxes  Corporation income taxes  Social insurance and retirement receipts  On-budget  Off-budget  Excise taxes  Estate and gift taxes  Customs duties and fees  Miscellaneous receipts  Deposits of earnings by Federal Reserve System  All other  Legislative proposals       OUTLAYS BY FUNCTION Total : On-budget and off-budget  National defense  International affairs  General science space and technology  Energy  Natural resources and environment  Agriculture  Commerce and housing credit  On-budget  Off-budget  Transportation  Community and regional development  Education training employment and social services  Health  Medicare  Income security  Social security  On-budget  Off-budget  Veterans benefits and services  Administration of justice  General government  Net interest  On-budget  Off-budget  Allowances      Undistributed offsetting receipts  On-budget  Off-budget  Includes undistributed allowance for empowering States and consumers to reform healthcare. Note : See Note Table B Sources : Department of the Treasury and Office of Management and Budget. Government Finance | Table B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) basis [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Total government Year or quarter Current receipts                                                   p   : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p   Current expenditures Federal Government Net government saving ( NIPA ) Current receipts     Current expenditures State and local government Net Federal Government saving ( NIPA ) Current receipts     Current expenditures Net State and local government saving ( NIPA ) Addendum : Grantsin-aid to State and local governments   Note : Federal grants-in-aid to State and local governments are reflected in Federal current expenditures and State and local current receipts. Total government current receipts and expenditures have been adjusted to eliminate this duplication. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Table B State and local government revenues and expenditures fiscal years [ Millions of dollars ] General revenues by source Fiscal year                                                              Total Property taxes General expenditures by function Sales Corpora- Revenue and Individual tion from gross income net Federal receipts taxes income Governtaxes taxes ment All other Total Education Highways Public welfare All other Fiscal years not the same for all governments. See Note. Excludes revenues or expenditures of publicly owned utilities and liquor stores and of insurance-trust activities. Intergovernmental receipts and payments between State and local governments are also excluded. Includes motor vehicle license taxes other taxes and charges and miscellaneous revenues. Includes intergovernmental payments to the Federal Government. Includes expenditures for libraries hospitals health employment security administration veterans services air transportation sea and inland port facilities parking facilities police protection fire protection correction protective inspection and regulation sewerage natural resources parks and recreation housing and community development solid waste management financial administration judicial and legal general public buildings other government administration interest on general debt and other general expenditures not elsewhere classified. Note : Except for States listed data for fiscal years listed from to are the aggregation of data for government fiscal years that ended in the 12-month period from July to June of those years ; Texas used August and Alabama and Michigan used September as end dates. Data for and earlier years include data for government fiscal years ending during that particular calendar year. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census ) Government Finance | Table B U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation [ Billions of dollars ] End of fiscal year or month                                        : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Total Treasury securities outstanding Marketable Total Treasury Treasury Treasury bills notes bonds Nonmarketable Treasury inflation-protected securities Total Notes Bonds                                                     Total U.S. savings securities Foreign series Government account series Other Data beginning with January are interest-bearing and non-interest-bearing securities ; prior data are interest-bearing securities only. Data from to and forward include Federal Financing Bank securities not shown separately. Beginning with data for January includes Floating Rate Notes not shown separately. Through series is U.S. savings bonds. Beginning includes U.S. retirement plan bonds U.S. individual retirement bonds and U.S. savings notes previously included in other nonmarketable securities. Nonmarketable certificates of indebtedness notes bonds and bills in the Treasury foreign series of dollar-denominated and foreign-currency-denominated issues. Includes depository bonds ; retirement plan bonds through ; Rural Electrification Administration bonds ; State and local bonds ; special issues held only by U.S. Government agencies and trust funds and the Federal home loan banks ; for the period July through February depositary compensation securities ; and for the period August through April Hope bonds for the HOPE For Homeowners Program. Note : The fiscal year is on an October September basis. Source : Department of the Treasury. | Appendix B Table B Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities [ Billions of dollars ] End of month : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  : Mar  June  Sept  Dec  Total public debt Federal Reserve and IntragovernTotal mental privately holdheld ings Held by private investors Pension funds Depository institutions  U.S. savings bonds Private State and local governments Insurance companies Mutual funds State and local governments      Foreign and international Other investors  Face value. Federal Reserve holdings exclude Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements. Includes U.S. chartered depository institutions foreign banking offices in U.S. banks in U.S. affiliated areas credit unions and bank holding companies. Current accrual value includes myRA. Includes Treasury securities held by the Federal Employees Retirement System Thrift Savings Plan G Fund. Includes money market mutual funds mutual funds and closed-end investment companies. Includes nonmarketable foreign series Treasury securities and Treasury deposit funds. Excludes Treasury securities held under repurchase agreements in custody accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Estimates reflect benchmarks to this series at differing intervals ; for further detail see Treasury Bulletin and http : //www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/pages/index.aspx. Includes individuals Government-sponsored enterprises brokers and dealers bank personal trusts and estates corporate and noncorporate businesses and other investors. Source : Department of the Treasury. Government Finance | Corporate Profits and Finance Table B Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Year or quarter Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Taxes on corporate income Corporate profits after tax with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments Total                                                   p     : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p     Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Net dividends Undistributed profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments   Table B Corporate profits by industry [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Corporate profits with inventory valuation adjustment and without capital consumption adjustment Domestic industries Year or quarter SIC :                                  NAICS :                     : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  Total Financial Total Total Federal Reserve banks Nonfinancial Other Total Manufacturing TransWholeporta- Utilities sale tion trade Retail trade Information Other Rest of the world                                                                   Data on Standard Industrial Classification ( SIC ) basis include transportation and public utilities. Those on North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) basis include transporation and warehousing. Utilities classified separately in NAICS ( as shown beginning ) SIC-based industry data use the SIC for data beginning in and the SIC for prior data. NAICS-based data use NAICS. Note : Industry data on SIC basis and NAICS basis are not necessarily the same and are not strictly comparable. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Corporate Profits and Finance | Table B Historical stock prices and yields Common stock yields ( Standard & Poor s ) ( percent ) Common stock prices ( end of period ) New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) indexes End of year December = Composite ( Dec. = Transpor- Utility ) Composite Industrial tation                                                                                                                               Finance                  Standard Nasdaq Dow & Poor s composite DividendJones composite index price industrial index ( Feb. ratio average ( = ) = )                       Earningsprice ratio End of period. Includes stocks as follows : for NYSE all stocks listed ; for Dow Jones industrial average stocks ; for Standard & Poor s ( S&P ) composite index stocks ; and for Nasdaq composite index over The NYSE relaunched the composite index on January incorporating new definitions methodology and base value. ( The composite index based on December = was discontinued. ) Subset indexes on financial energy and health care were released by the NYSE on January ( see Table B ) NYSE indexes shown in this table for industrials utilities transportation and finance were discontinued. Effective April the NYSE doubled the value of the utility index to facilitate trading of options and futures on the index. Indexes prior to reflect the doubling. Based on stocks in the S&P composite index. Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures ; annual data are averages of monthly figures. Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for four quarters ending with particular quarter-to-price index for last day of that quarter. Annual data are averages of quarterly ratios. Sources : New York Stock Exchange Dow Jones & Co. Inc. Standard & Poor s and Nasdaq Stock Market. | Appendix B Table B Common stock prices and yields Common stock yields ( Standard & Poor s ) ( percent ) Common stock prices ( end of period ) End of year or month New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) indexes ( December = ) Composite                    : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  Financial Energy Dow Jones industrial average Health care       Standard Nasdaq & Poor s composite composite index index ( Feb. ( = ) = ) Dividendprice ratio Earningsprice ratio                           End of year or month. Includes stocks as follows : for NYSE all stocks listed ( in over ) ; for Dow Jones industrial average stocks ; for Standard & Poor s ( S&P ) composite index stocks ; and for Nasdaq composite index in over The NYSE relaunched the composite index on January incorporating new definitions methodology and base value. Subset indexes on financial energy and health care were released by the NYSE on January Based on stocks in the S&P composite index. Aggregate cash dividends ( based on latest known annual rate ) divided by aggregate market value based on Wednesday closing prices. Monthly data are averages of weekly figures annual data are averages of monthly figures. Quarterly data are ratio of earnings ( after taxes ) for four quarters ending with particular quarter-to-price index for last day of that quarter. Annual data are averages of quarterly ratios. Sources : New York Stock Exchange Dow Jones & Co. Inc. Standard & Poor s and Nasdaq Stock Market. Corporate Profits and Finance | International Statistics Table B U.S. international transactions [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Current Account Goods Year or quarter                                                   : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III p  Imports Balance on services Primary income receipts and payments Balance Balance on on goods Balance secondand ary Payon services Receipts ments primary Income income Services Exports Imports Balance on goods Exports Balance on current account Current account balance as a percentage of GDP Current and capital account statistics in the international transactions accounts differ slightly from statistics in the National Income and Product Accounts ( NIPAs ) because of adjustments made to convert the international statistics to national accounting concepts. A reconciliation can be found in NIPA table 4.3B. Adjusted from Census data to align with concepts and definitions used to prepare the international and national economic accounts. The adjustments are necessary to supplement coverage of Census data to eliminate duplication of transactions recorded elsewhere in the international accounts to value transactions according to a standard definition and for earlier years to record transactions in the appropriate period. See next page for continuation of table. | Appendix B Table B U.S. international transactions Continued [ Millions of dollars ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Financial account Year or quarter Balance on capital account Net U.S. acquisition of financial assets excluding financial derivatives [ net increase in assets / financial outflow ( ) ] Total                                                   : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III p                       Direct investment assets Portfolio investment assets Other investment assets Net U.S. incurrence of liabilities excluding financial derivatives Financial [ net increase in liabilities / financial inflow ( ) ] derivatives other than Portfolio Other inDirect inreserves Reserve Total vestment investvestment net transassets ment liabilities liabilities liabilities actions                                       Net lending ( ) or net Statistical borrow- discreping ( ) ancy from financial account transactions Includes U.S. government and private transfers such as U.S. government grants and pensions fines and penalties withholding taxes personal transfers insurance-related transfers and other current transfers. Consists of monetary gold special drawing rights ( SDRs ) the U.S. reserve position in the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) and other reserve assets including foreign currencies. Net lending means that U.S. residents are net suppliers of funds to foreign residents and net borrowing means the opposite. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) International Statistics | Table B U.S. international trade in goods on balance of payments ( BOP ) and Census basis and trade in services on BOP basis [ Billions of dollars ; monthly data seasonally adjusted ] Goods : Exports ( f.a.s. value ) Goods : Imports ( customs value ) Census basis ( by end-use category ) Year or month Total Foods Indus- Capital BOP Total feeds trial goods basis Census and supplies except and automobasis bev- materierages als tive                             p  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov  Dec  : Jan  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  June  July  Aug  Sept  Oct  Nov p  Dec p    Automotive vehicles parts and engines Services ( BOP basis ) Census basis ( by end-use category ) ConIndusAuto- Consumer Total Foods trial Capital motive sumer ExImgoods BOP Total feeds sup- goods vehi- goods ports ports ( non- basis Census and plies except cles ( nonfood ) food ) basis bevand automo- parts except except erages materi- tive and automoals engines automotive tive       Department of Defense shipments of grant-aid military supplies and equipment under the Military Assistance Program are excluded from total exports through and included beginning F.a.s. ( free alongside ship ) value basis at U.S. port of exportation for exports. Beginning with data for exports have been adjusted for undocumented exports to Canada and are included in the appropriate end-use categories. For prior years only total exports include this adjustment. Beginning with data for exports of goods under the U.S. Foreign Military Sales program and fuel purchases by foreign air and ocean carriers in U.S. ports are included in goods exports ( BOP basis ) and excluded from services exports. Beginning with data for imports of petroleum abroad by U.S. military agencies and fuel purchases by U.S. air and ocean carriers in foreign ports are included in goods imports ( BOP basis ) and excluded from services imports. Total includes other exports or imports not shown separately. Total arrivals of imported goods other than in-transit shipments. Total includes revisions not reflected in detail. Total exports are on a revised statistical month basis ; end-use categories are on a statistical month basis. Note : Goods on a Census basis are adjusted to a BOP basis by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in line with concepts and definitions used to prepare international and national accounts. The adjustments are necessary to supplement coverage of Census data to eliminate duplication of transactions recorded elsewhere in international accounts to value transactions according to a standard definition and for earlier years to record transactions in the appropriate period. Data include international trade of the U.S. Virgin Islands Puerto Rico and U.S. Foreign Trade Zones. Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of the Census and Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | Appendix B Table B U.S. international trade in goods and services by area and country [ Millions of dollars ] Item EXPORTS Total all countries  Europe  Euro area  France  Germany  Italy  United Kingdom  Canada  Latin America and Other Western Hemisphere  Brazil  Mexico  Venezuela  Asia and Pacific  China  India  Japan  Korea Republic of  Singapore  Taiwan  Middle East  Africa  Memorandum : Members of OPEC  IMPORTS Total all countries  Europe  Euro area  France  Germany  Italy  United Kingdom  Canada  Latin America and Other Western Hemisphere  Brazil  Mexico  Venezuela  Asia and Pacific  China  India  Japan  Korea Republic of  Singapore  Taiwan  Middle East  Africa  Memorandum : Members of OPEC  BALANCE ( excess of exports ) Total all countries  Europe  Euro area  France  Germany  Italy  United Kingdom  Canada  Latin America and Other Western Hemisphere  Brazil  Mexico  Venezuela  Asia and Pacific  China  India  Japan  Korea Republic of  Singapore  Taiwan  Middle East  Africa  Memorandum : Members of OPEC  Euro area consists of : Austria Belgium Cyprus ( beginning in ) Estonia ( beginning in ) Finland France Germany Greece ( beginning in ) Ireland Italy Luxembourg Malta ( beginning in ) Netherlands Portugal Slovakia ( beginning in ) Slovenia ( beginning in ) and Spain. Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries consisting of Algeria Angola ( beginning in ) Ecuador ( beginning in ) Indonesia ( ending in ) Iran Iraq Kuwait Libya Nigeria Qatar Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates and Venezuela. Note : Data are on a balance of payments basis. For further details and additional data by country see Survey of Current Business February Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) International Statistics | Table B Foreign exchange rates [ Foreign currency units per U.S. dollar except as noted ; certified noon buying rates in New York ] Period Australia ( dollar ) Brazil ( real ) Canada ( dollar ) China P.R. ( yuan ) EMU Members ( euro ) Japan ( yen ) Mexico ( peso ) March                       : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  India ( rupee ) South Korea ( won ) Sweden ( krona ) Switzerland ( franc ) United Kingdom ( pound ) Trade-weighted value of the U.S. dollar Real Nominal                    : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  Broad index ( January = ) Advanced foreign economies index ( January = ) Emerging market economies index ( January = ) Broad index ( January = ) Advanced foreign economies index ( January = ) Emerging market economies index ( January = )                                     U.S. dollars per foreign currency unit. European Economic and Monetary Union ( EMU ) members consists of Austria Belgium Cyprus ( beginning in ) Estonia ( beginning in ) Finland France Germany Greece ( beginning in ) Ireland Italy Luxembourg Malta ( beginning in ) Netherlands Portugal Slovakia ( beginning in ) Slovenia ( beginning in ) and Spain. Weighted average of the foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar against the currencies of a broad group of major U.S. trading partners. Subset of the broad index. Consists of currencies of the Euro area Australia Canada Japan Sweden Switzerland and the United Kingdom. Subset of the broad index currencies that are emerging market economies. For details see Revisions to the Federal Reserve Dollar Indexes January Adjusted for changes in consumer price indexes for the United States and other countries. Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. | Appendix B Table B-61. Growth rates in real gross domestic product by area and country [ Percent change ] Area and country World  Advanced economies  Of which : United States  Euro area  Germany  France  Italy  Spain  Japan  United Kingdom  Canada  Other advanced economies  Emerging market and developing economies  Regional groups : Commonwealth of Independent States  Russia  Excluding Russia  Emerging and Developing Asia  China  India  ASEAN-5  Emerging and Developing Europe  Latin America and the Caribbean  Brazil  Mexico  Middle East North Africa Afghanistan and Pakistan  Saudi Arabia  Sub-Saharan Africa  Nigeria  South Africa  annual average All figures are forecasts as published by the International Monetary Fund. For the United States initial estimates by the Department of Commerce show that real GDP rose percent in For includes data for : Austria Belgium Cyprus Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Portugal Slovak Republic Slovenia and Spain. Includes Georgia,Turkmenistan and Ukraine which are not members of the Commonwealth of Independent States but are included for reasons of geography and similarity in economic structure. Data and forecasts are presented on a fiscal year basis and output growth is based on GDP at market prices. Consists of Indonesia Malaysia Philippines Thailand and Vietnam. Note : For details on data shown in this table see World Economic Outlook October and World Economic Outlook Update January published by the International Monetary Fund. Sources : International Monetary Fund and Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) International Statistics | This pro-growth pro-opportunity agenda celebrates the irreplaceable value of America s working families and embraces the extraordinary possibilities for American ingenuity to improve the human condition. It is an economic agenda that lays the foundation for the future of American greatness. President Donald J. Trump