President Donald J. Trump Economic Report of the President Though the American economy is stronger than ever my Administration s work is not yet done With a continued focus on policies that increase economic growth promote opportunity and uplift our workers there is no limit on how great America can be Economic Report of the President February Together with The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers February 250-840_cover.indd 2/10/20 : AM Economic Report of the President Together with The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers February 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM x Contents Economic Report of the President. The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers.. Introduction Part I : The Longest Expansion on Record Chapter : The Great Expansion. Chapter : Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans. Chapter : Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy. Chapter : Energy : Innovation and Independence. Chapter : Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition. Part II : Evaluating and Addressing Threats to the Expansion Chapter : Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition. Chapter : Understanding the Opioid Crisis. Chapter : Expanding Affordable Housing. Part III : The Economic Outlook Chapter : The Outlook for a Continued Expansion. References Appendix A  Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During Appendix B  Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production.. ____________ * For a detailed table of contents of the Council s Report see page iii 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Economic Report of the President 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM x Economic Report of the President To the Congress of the United States : Over the past three years my Administration has championed policies to restore the United States economic strength propelling growth to levels far exceeding preelection expectations. These results did not come about by accident. Instead they were supported by our foundational pillars for economic growth that put Americans first including tax cuts deregulation energy independence and trade renegotiation. Our success has created a historically strong labor market and greater economic security for millions of American families The Transformative Power of Work My Administration s focus on economic growth comes from a deep appreciation of the power of work to drive the economy and transform lives. The truth is jobs do not just provide paychecks ; they give people meaning allow them to engage with their communities and help them reach their true potential. As we have shown the right policies offer Americans paths to self-reliance rather than trapping them in reliance on government programs The unemployment rate is percent the lowest it has been in years Since I came into office labor force participation is up and wages are growing fastest for historically disadvantaged workers reversing the trends seen under the previous administration. Under my Administration and for the first time on record job openings exceeded people looking for work with million more open jobs than job seekers at the end of Because of record-low unemployment rates across demographic categories and continued job creation people from all backgrounds can more easily find work build their skills and grow their incomes In today s tight labor market employers realize the vast potential of many individuals whom they may have previously overlooked. This includes those facing long-term unemployment balancing family responsibilities thinking they lack necessary job skills overcoming substance abuse returning from the justice system or living in poverty. It is also encouraging those individuals to put themselves back in the workforce. My Administration has placed a special focus on these forgotten Americans because every individual deserves to experience the dignity that comes through work In the fourth quarter of three quarters of workers entering employment came from outside the labor force rather than from unemployment the highest share in the series history. As paid parental leave spreads across the country including the expansion to Federal workers that I signed in December Economic Report of the President | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM parents will have more freedom to choose a balance between working outside the home and caring for their children. And in another encouraging sign that people previously on the sidelines will continue entering the workforce more than companies have signed the Pledge to America s Workers. These companies have pledged to create upward of million new job and training opportunities for current and future employees over the next five years Apprenticeships are one way for these companies to deliver on their pledges and expanding apprenticeships has been a top priority since I took office. During my presidency more than new apprenticeships have been created. To have a labor market that works for everyone the Federal Government must encourage a variety of paths for people to get the skills they need to build family-sustaining careers Although all sectors benefit from more apprenticeships my Administration knows that manufacturing is a pillar of the American economy. Manufacturing spurs innovation and fuels economic growth which is why I am so pleased that more than manufacturing jobs have been created since my election Rather than still shrinking American manufacturing is now growing again Critically wages for nonsupervisory and production workers are rising at an even higher rate than managers wages Renegotiated or new trade deals with Canada and Mexico China South Korea and Japan will modernize international trade and create freer fairer and more reciprocal trade between the United States and our largest trading partners allowing the manufacturing renaissance to continue. Trade deals are in development with the United Kingdom and the European Union among other countries that need access to the coveted United States market. These deals will both expand United States markets abroad and keep businesses here in America which means keeping jobs here in America I have the deepest respect for America s workers and job creators who have made this economic boom possible. That is why we are fighting back against other nations that have exploited the pioneering spirit of our country s entrepreneurs. Through combating intellectual property theft and unfair trade deals along with leading the way on 5G development and deployment my Administration is standing up to countries around the world to give American job creators the freedom to innovate and make life better for their fellow citizens. These proactive steps will benefit everyone from large companies that employ hundreds or thousands of Americans to budding entrepreneurs trying to turn their ideas into reality The labor market experiences that people are gaining today will change the trajectories of their lives and those of their children for years to come No matter their pasts people deserve agency over their own lives and my Administration will never tell Americans that they can not or do not deserve the ability to work and earn a living for themselves and their families | 250-840_text_.pdf Economic Report of the President 2/7/20 : PM Previously Forgotten Americans Are Forgotten No More America s labor market successes are also helping us defeat the opioid crisis While the causes of the crisis are multifaceted work must play an integral role in any solution. Research shows that holding a job is a key factor in helping people overcome drug addiction. Over the rest of my presidency I will continue to promote policies that beat back this deadly crisis and encourage work for Americans who are rebuilding their lives after struggling with addiction Because of my Administration s aggressive efforts to end the overprescription of opioids promote effective treatment and secure the border the tide is finally turning on the opioid crisis. Overdose deaths and first-time users are down but that does not mean the crisis is over. Failure is not an option when it comes to helping people avoid the pain and suffering caused by addiction Unfortunately the largest drug crisis in our history has left many people with criminal records. After someone leaves the justice system they face two options : find honest work and successfully reenter society or stay out of work and face the increased likelihood of committing another crime. Finding work is one of the top indicators of whether someone who commits a crime will turn his or her life around and live crime-free. This is why work is not just essential for reforming individuals ; it is also necessary for promoting public safety Beyond signing the landmark First Step Act to promote public safety and make America s justice system fairer my Administration is also putting substantial resources behind programs that improve employment outcomes for the formerly incarcerated. Likewise criminal justice reform that emphasizes work helps break the cycle of generational poverty In alone million Americans were lifted out of poverty and the poverty rate fell to its lowest level since For African Americans and Hispanic Americans poverty rates are at historic lows and the poverty rate for single mothers and children is falling much faster than the average. Since I took office food insecurity has fallen and nearly million people have been lifted off food stamps. Beneficiaries entering the labor market or increasing their incomes through work is likely driving falling enrollment in Medicaid TANF and disability insurance These Americans are not simply rising out of poverty ; they are building careers of which they and their families can be proud. Wages are rising fastest for people with the lowest incomes meaning people currently working in lower-paying jobs will not have low incomes for long. Getting that first job is critical because it serves as a foundation for progressively better jobs over a worker s career A commitment to the transformative power of work is why I signed an Executive Order instructing agencies to reduce dependence on welfare programs by encouraging work. Less than percent of people who work full time Economic Report of the President 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM live in poverty. Individuals will not be able to build the lives they want through welfare alone : Work is a necessary condition for upward mobility While strengthening and expanding work requirements for public assistance programs lead people to reenter the workforce and increase their household incomes work requirements are most effective when employers are hiring. This is one reason why my Administration emphasizes policies that lead to job creation Pro-Growth Policies Are Pro-Worker Policies One foundational policy that continues to drive job creation is tax reform. Since the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act the biggest package of tax cuts and tax reforms in our country s history took effect more than million jobs have been created and economic growth has beaten previous projections. America s outdated tax code drove away businesses and investment but tax reform has brought rates down and made the United States globally competitive again Many workers saw bonuses and raises immediately after tax reform and nearly million American families received an average benefit of $ in from doubling the child tax credit. Yet the biggest payoff is still to come Tax reform put an end to America s counterproductive policy of punishing business investments which means that workers will see even greater benefits once these investments pay off My Administration has also prioritized healthcare reforms that make the system more competitive and therefore more affordable. We are giving patients increased choice and control and protecting the high-quality care that Americans expect and deserve. Healthcare is a top priority because healthcare costs are among the top annual expenses for American families. Under my Administration the Food and Drug Administration has approved more generic drugs than ever before in United States history and enhanced its approval process for new lifesaving drugs. This past year prescription drug prices experienced the largest year-over-year decline in more than years Whether it is through reforms that bring choice to Veterans Administration care promote Health Reimbursement Arrangements or give terminally ill patients access to potentially lifesaving drugs among many other successes every healthcare reform that lowers costs and increases quality allows American workers to live longer healthier lives and keep more of their paychecks Tax cuts and healthcare reforms put more money in the hands of working families and job creators creating a virtuous cycle of even more jobs and even higher paychecks. On the other hand when regulations limit individuals ability to experience the dignity that comes through work those regulations deserve additional scrutiny. Over the previous decades the Federal Government has disproportionately regulated sectors of the economy like energy and manufacturing that offer fulfilling blue collar jobs for the majority of Americans who do not have a college degree. These misguided policy decisions imposed | 250-840_text_.pdf Economic Report of the President 2/7/20 : PM real-world costs that created barriers to success and prosperity for hardworking Americans. Those days are over American energy powers our cities and towns empowers innovators and ultimately drives our economy. Energy companies across the world are ready to build in our Nation and permitting reform that cuts red tape shows that we welcome their investments. My Administration continues to support the energy industry s growth by removing unnecessary regulations and unleashing America s vast natural and human resources. Through these actions the United States is now on track to be a net exporter of crude oil and natural gas for all of a major milestone not achieved in at least years. In addition to being the world s largest natural gas producer we also became the world s top crude oil producer in The positive records of our energy boom are widespread. Energy production has created jobs in areas of the United States where job opportunities were scarce. It also provides enormous benefits to families across the Nation by lowering energy prices. And it further distances us from geopolitical foes who wish to cause us harm. More jobs lower costs and American dominance these are the predictable results of our pro-growth policies Many pundits and Washington insiders laughed when I promised to cut two regulations for every new regulation. They were correct that two-for-one was the wrong goal. Instead the Federal Government has cut more than seven regulations for every significant new regulation. After only three years my Administration has already cut more regulations than any other in United States history and we have put the brakes on an endless assault of new costly actions by Federal agencies Our commitment to regulatory reform stems from the simple truth that the vast majority of business owners want to do the right thing comply with the law and treat their workers fairly. The Federal Government ignored this reality for far too long and abused its authority to go after businesses especially small businesses and entrepreneurs in ways that can only be described as arbitrary and abusive To promote regulatory fairness I signed two Executive Orders that will improve Federal agencies transparency and fairness while holding them accountable for their actions. Agencies will now need to give people fair notice and a chance to respond to any Federal complaint filed against them Furthermore the rules agencies enforce will no longer be secret because all agencies interpretations of rules will need to be made publicly accessible Additionally significant interpretations of rules will need to go through the public review process that is central to a flourishing democracy. Deregulation and increased transparency will save job creators money leading to more hiring and higher paychecks Every American no matter his or her background can share in the dignity of work. The era of putting American workers second and doubling down on Economic Report of the President | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM the failed Federal policies of the past is over. While job creation during my Presidency has surpassed expectations the credit belongs to the job creators and workers who risk everything and devote themselves to building a better future for themselves their families and their Nation. The Federal Government does not create jobs ; hardworking Americans create jobs. My Administration s role is to follow our foundational policy pillars and allow our job creators and workers to do what they do best As the following Report shows because of the strength resiliency and determination of the United States workforce which is the envy of the world my pro-growth policies continue producing unquestionably positive results for the economy. The Report also makes it clear that though the American economy is stronger than ever my Administration s work is not yet done. With a continued focus on policies that increase economic growth promote opportunity and uplift our workers there is no limit on how great America can be The White House February | 250-840_text_.pdf Economic Report of the President 2/7/20 : PM The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM x Letter of Transmittal Council of Economic Advisers Washington February Mr. President : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely yours Tomas J. Philipson Acting Chairman Tyler B. Goodspeed Member Economic Report of the President | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Introduction Three years into the Trump Administration the U.S. economy continues to outperform expectations across numerous metrics with growth in output employment and employee compensation all exceeding pre-2017 forecasts The evident success of the Administration s economic policy agenda demonstrates that its foundational policy pillars are enabling the U.S. economy to overcome structural trends that were previously suppressing growth During the four quarters of real gross domestic product grew percentage point faster than had been projected by the independent Congressional Budget Office s ( CBO ) August projections. As shown in figures I-1 and I-2 the U.S. labor market added million new jobs million more than projected in bringing the civilian unemployment rate down to percent which is its lowest level since ( and percentage points below CBO projections ) Higher pay accompanied abundant job vacancies as employee compensation rose to percent above the forecast implying an additional $ in compensation per household In July the current expansion of the U.S. economy became the longest on record. Contrary to expectations that the expansion would slow as it matured economic output has accelerated over the past years relative to the preceding years with output growth rising from to percent at a compound annual rate. In the first three quarters of U.S. economic growth was the highest among the Group of Seven countries Reflecting this outperformance of expectations in the first five chapters of this Report we present evidence that the Trump Administration s foundational policy pillars are continuing to deliver economic results. In particular we highlight the role of the Administration s prioritization of economic efficiency and pro-market reforms in the realms of tax labor regulation energy and healthcare in elevating the growth potential of the U.S. economy and increasing the well-being of those previously left behind during the current expansion In the subsequent three chapters we then identify several challenges to continued growth. Efforts to address these obstacles include ensuring that U.S markets remain economically fair and competitive combating the ongoing threat of widespread opioid addiction and addressing the overregulation of housing markets. We conclude by setting forth the Administration s long-run policy-inclusive economic projections and highlighting potential risks to the outlook We begin in chapter by documenting that despite strong headwinds from the global economy and several idiosyncratic adverse shocks Administration policies have helped to keep the U.S. economy resilient. As a result output has grown at the fastest rate among the Group of Seven In preparing this Economic Report of the President data available as of January were incorporated as publicly reported and are reflected in the chapters that follow Economic Report of the President 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    #    /0  '   ) ( ' * ( ) /    /  i )    $ *    -/ -.u.  / #   " 0./    /   / #      )        '  / $ * )     /0  '  " 0./           /0  ' Percent           *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $       * ) " $ * )  '    " /   ! ! $      Figure I-2. Actual Nonfarm Payrolls versus the August Payroll per the CBO  '  / $ * )      /0  '  " 0./           /0  ' Hundreds of thousands ( seasonally adjusted )           *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $       * ) " $ * )  '    " /   ! ! $             '  '  / $ * ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Economic Report of the President 2/7/20 : PM economies in the past year. During several macroeconomic indicators including consumer spending productivity and labor share of income grew at faster rates than preelection projections. The labor market also tightened further even after strong gains during the previous two years. During this Administration the unemployment rate hit a 50-year low and the number of job openings exceeded job seekers for the first time in recorded U.S. history which has helped to pull potential workers into the labor force and boost real wages. The stabilization of labor force participation after years of decline particularly among prime-age workers has also boosted long-term potential output We continue to evaluate the performance of the U.S. labor market in chapter paying particular attention to how the Administration s pro-growth agenda has disproportionately benefited those previously left behind during the current expansion. We document how in stark contrast to the expansion through policies that both raised labor demand and incentivized employers to invest more in their workers have resulted in wage gains for historically disadvantaged Americans. Average wage growth for workers now outpaces wage growth for supervisors ; wage growth for individuals at the 10th percentile of the income distribution now outpaces wage growth for individuals at the 90th percentile ; wage growth for those without a college degree now outpaces wage growth for those with a college degree ; and wage growth for African Americans now outpaces wage growth for white Americans. With monthly payroll employment growth outpacing that required to maintain a stable employment-to-population ratio we also document the extent to which the U.S. economy is pulling millions back into the labor force and out of poverty Looking ahead we outline the Administration s continued prioritization of initiatives aimed at promoting alternative paths to work supporting onthe-job training and reskilling reducing recidivism combating opioid abuse expanding access to affordable childcare and enabling economic growth that provides expanded employment opportunities for every American who seeks work In chapter we analyze the effects of the Administration s regulatory reform agenda. We estimate that after to years the Administration s approach to Federal regulation will have raised real incomes by $ per household per year with notable Federal deregulatory actions alone saving American consumers and businesses about $ billion per year once they go into full effect which will raise real incomes by about percent. We further calculate that the ongoing introduction of costly regulations had previously been subtracting percent a year from real incomes. By increasing competition productivity and wages and reducing the prices of consumer goods the Administration s approach to regulation is raising real incomes while maintaining regulatory protections for workers public health safety and the environment Economic Report of the President 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Continuing the focus on regulation in chapter we focus specifically on U.S. energy markets. By lowering prices the CEA estimates that the shale revolution saves the average family of four $ annually. Because low-income households spend a larger share of their income on energy bills they benefit disproportionately from lower energy prices : shale-driven savings represent a much larger percentage of income for the poorest fifth of households than for the richest fifth. At the same time shale-driven production growth has affected U.S. energy independence. This goal initiated by President Nixon and pursued by every subsequent Administration was finally achieved under the Trump Administration. In September the United States became a net exporter of petroleum and the United States is projected to remain a net exporter for all of for the first time since at least We estimate that from to the shale revolution in particular was responsible for reducing carbon dioxide emissions in the electric power sector by percent. Finally we demonstrate how by limiting unnecessary constraints on private innovation and investment the Administration s approach to eliminating excessive regulation of energy markets supports further unleashing of the country s abundant human and energy resources In chapter we identify government barriers to market competition in healthcare that increase prices reduce innovation and hinder improvements in quality. We also summarize the achievements and expected effects of the Administration s health policy initiatives to reduce these impediments and facilitate greater competition in healthcare markets. The Administration s reforms aim to foster a healthcare system that delivers high-quality services at affordable prices through greater choice competition and consumer-directed spending in contrast to government mandates that too often reduce consumer choice in healthcare markets and increase premiums. The Administration has addressed many of these problems through a series of Executive Orders regulatory reforms and legislation Turning to potential obstacles in chapter we analyze concerns about possible trends in market competition recognizing the vital role that competition plays in economic growth promoting innovation and entrepreneurship and serving consumers. We find that the best available evidence suggests there is no need to rewrite the Federal Government s antitrust rules. Because Federal enforcement agencies are already empowered with a flexible legal framework they possess the necessary tools to promote economic dynamism. Ongoing investigations and resolved cases show that these agencies are well equipped to handle the competition challenges posed by the changing U.S. economy. We conclude that in addition to vigorously combating anticompetitive behavior from companies using existing tools the Administration will focus on changing government policies that create an unfair playing field. As the recent historic regulatory reform across American industries has shown eliminating | 250-840_text_.pdf Economic Report of the President 2/7/20 : PM government-imposed barriers to innovation leads to increased competition stronger economic growth and a revitalized private sector In chapter we analyze the ongoing threat of widespread opioid addiction that since has been responsible for more than deaths. We find that actions taken by the Administration to lower the supply of opioids reduce new demand for opioids and treat those with current opioid use disorder may have contributed to a flattening in overdose deaths involving opioids. Recognizing that understanding the origins of the crisis is essential to effectively combating it we find that a first wave of the crisis from to was driven in large part by steep declines in out-of-pocket prescription opioid prices. Prices fell due to expanded government healthcare coverage as well as to the increased availability of prescription opioids due to pain management practices that encouraged liberalized dispensing practices by doctors. We then find that a second wave of the opioid crisis starting in likely began because of efforts to limit the supply of the powerful prescription opioid OxyContin an unintended consequence of which was the creation of a large illicit market for the development and sale of cheaper illegal substitutes In chapter we study the challenges posed by rising housing unaffordability in some U.S. real estate markets. We find that a key driver of the housing unaffordability problem is the overregulation of housing markets by State and local governments which limits supply. By driving up home prices overregulation adversely affects low-income Americans in particular who spend the largest share of their income on housing. Among particularly supplyconstrained metropolitan areas we estimate that regulatory reform would increase the housing supply and decrease rents enough to reduce homelessness by percent on average. In addition we find that overregulation of housing markets has broader negative effects on all Americans by reducing labor mobility and thus productivity growth amplifying inequality across regions and workers and harming the environment by forcing longer commutes. We conclude by documenting the Administration s actions to address the housing unaffordability challenge by incentivizing State and local governments to increase housing supply in supply-constrained areas and by establishing the White House Council on Eliminating Regulatory Barriers to Affordable Housing Finally in chapter we present the Trump Administration s full policyinclusive economic forecast for the next years including risks to the economic outlook. Overall assuming full implementation of the Administration s economic policy agenda we project that real U.S. economic output will grow at an average annual rate of percent between and We expect growth to moderate from percent in to percent in the latter half of the budget window as the capital-to-output ratio asymptotically approaches its new postcorporate tax reform steady state and as the near-term effects of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act s individual provisions on the rate of growth dissipate into a permanent-level effect. Partially offsetting this moderation are the Economic Report of the President | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM expected positive contributions to growth from enacting the Administration s infrastructure plan making permanent the individual provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act reforming the U.S. immigration system continuing deregulatory actions improving trade deals with international trading partners and incentivizing higher labor force participation through additional labor market reforms | 250-840_text_.pdf Economic Report of the President 2/7/20 : PM x Contents Part I : The Longest Expansion on Record. Chapter : The Great Expansion. Productivity. Wages and Income. Consumer Spending. Investment. Inflation. Price Inflation. Different Measures of Inflation : The CPI Chained CPI and PCE Price Index and Their Cores Hourly Compensation Inflation Productivity Growth and Stable Inflation Deregulation and Inflation. The Global Macroeconomic Situation.. The U.S. Dollar and Monetary Policy. Domestic Headwinds. Conclusion. Chapter : Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans. Shared Prosperity from Strong Economic Growth.. The Current State of the Labor Market. Demographic Change and Labor Force Statistics. Wage and Income Growth. Poverty and Inequality. Health Insurance and Medicaid. Full-Income Measures of Poverty. Supporting Further Economic Gains.. Making Sure That Workers Have the Skills to Succeed.. Limiting Geographic Frictions in the Labor Market. Reforming Occupational Licensing. Opportunity Zones : Matching People Communities and Capital.. Opportunity Zones : Evidence of Investor Interest and Activity. Expanding Opportunities for Ex-Offenders.. Supporting Working Families Combating the Opioid Crisis.. Conclusion. Economic Report of the President | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Chapter : Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy. Reversing the Regulatory Trend. Analyzing Regulatory Reform. Deregulatory Actions Considered. Consumer Savings on Internet Access. Consumer and Small Business Savings on Healthcare. Employment Regulations. Financial Regulations.. Additional Regulations. The Doubling Effect of Shifting from a Growing Regulatory State to a Deregulatory One. Regulations Before with Disproportionate Costs. Conclusion. Chapter : Energy : Innovation and Independence. Market Pricing Resource Access and Freedom to Innovate. The Effects of Innovation on Productivity Prices and Production.. The Impact on Productivity. The Impact on Prices and Production. The Impact of the Shale-Induced Decline in Energy Prices. Innovation-Driven Consumer Savings Energy Independence and Environmental Benefits. Consumer Savings Methods. Consumer Savings Findings. Energy Independence. Environmental Benefits. The Value of Deregulatory Energy Policy. Allowing Innovation to Flourish The Critical Role of Energy Infrastructure. Conclusion. Chapter : Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition.. Building a High-Quality Healthcare System. Creating More Choice in Health Insurance Markets Creating More Competition among Healthcare Providers.. Healthcare Accomplishments under the Trump Administration.. Increasing Choice. Increasing Competition. Increasing Access to Valuable Therapies. Conclusion. | Economic Report of the President 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Part II : Evaluating and Addressing Threats to the Expansion. Chapter : Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition. The Origin and Principles of Antitrust Policy. Economic Analysis at the Agencies. A Renewed Interest in Concentration and the State 0f Competition. Problems with the CEA s Report Problems with Related Research Connecting Concentration and Markups with Antitrust Law. Calls for a Broader Interpretation of Antitrust Policy.. Antitrust Enforcement for the Digital Economy. Background.. Proposals for Intervention Competition Policy to Reduce Entry Barriers. Other Government-Created Barriers to Entry.. Promoting Innovation through Sound Enforcement of Competition Law Conclusion. Chapter : Understanding the Opioid Crisis. The Supply-and-Demand Framework.. The First Wave of the Crisis : Prescription Opioids. Public Subsidies for Opioids. The Second Wave of the Crisis : Illicit Opioids.. Conclusion. Chapter : Expanding Affordable Housing. The Housing Affordability Problem.. The Role of Overregulation in the Housing Affordability Problem. Consequences of Overregulation of Housing. The Increased Cost of Attaining Homeownership and Higher Rents. Increased Homelessness.. Fewer People Are Served by Housing Assistance Programs.. Weakened Labor Mobility and Economic Growth. Reduced Opportunity for Children. Increased Traffic Congestion and Harm to the Environment.. Conclusion. Part III : The Economic Outlook. Chapter : The Outlook for a Continued Expansion. GDP Growth during the Next Three Years. GDP Growth over the Longer Term. Upside and Downside Forecast Risks. References.. Economic Report of the President | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Appendixes A Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During B Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production. I-1 The Actual Unemployment Rate in Various Quarters versus the August Rate per the BLS and CBO I-2 Actual Nonfarm Payrolls versus the August Payroll per the CBO Real GDP per Working-Age Population by Expansion Real GDP Growth Relative to Pre November Projections Actual versus Consensus Projections of Real Gross Domestic Product Length and Depth of U.S. Expansions and Contractions Average of Absolute Troika Forecasting Errors by Horizon and Administration. Nonfarm Business Sector Labor Productivity Growth Growth in Real GDP per Employed Person Among the Advanced Economies Actual versus Consensus Projections for Real Disposable Personal Income Growth of Real Disposable Personal Income per Household Labor Share of Income Cumulative Change in Nominal Household and Nonprofit Wealth Main Contributors to Real GDP Growth Consumption and Wealth Relative to Disposable Personal Income Personal Saving Rate Actual versus Preelection Projections for Nonresidential Private Fixed Investment Cumulative Change in Gross Fixed Private Capital Formation among the Group of Seven Member Countries : Q4 : Q4. The User Cost of Capital Average Annual Growth in Real Business Fixed Investment and Component Contributions Real Mining and Drilling Structures Investment versus Oil Rigs Operating in the United States Brent Crude Oil Prices versus Oil Rigs Operating in the United States Figures | 250-840_text_.pdf Economic Report of the President 2/7/20 : PM Predictions of an Investment Accelerator Model The Growth in Number of Private Establishments versus Small Business Optimism Inflation : GDP Price Index versus the PCE Price Index Import Prices versus GDP Price Index Consumer Price Inflation Core CPI Inflation and Inflation Expectations Price-Price Phillips Curve Scatter Diagram IMF Five-Year Real GDP Growth Forecasts for the World Forecast of Real GDP Growth. Composite Output Purchasing Manager s Index ( PMI ) China s Change in Automobile Sales German Vehicle and Car Engines Exported Central Bank Policy Rates Federal Reserve Trade-Weighted Broad Nominal versus Real Dollar Total Jobs versus Preelection Forecast Unemployment Rate versus Preelection Forecasts Number of Unemployed People versus Number of Job Openings Unemployment Rate by Race Multiple Jobholders as a Percentage of All Employed Demographically Adjusted Labor Force Participation for African Americans Demographically Adjusted Labor Force Participation Rate for Hispanics Nominal Weekly Wage Growth among All Adult Full-Time Wage and Salary Workers Average Hourly Earnings for Production and Nonsupervisory Workers and the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index 2-i Consumer Savings on Prescription Drugs and Internet Access by Household Income Quintile. Poverty Rates by Race and Ethnicity Number of Medicaid and CHIP Enrollees by Month in Expansion and Nonexpansion States Change in the Official Poverty Measure versus Other Poverty Measures and Number of Unemployed Workers per Job Openings Q2 : Share of U.S. Residents Who Moved Labor Force Participation Rate among Parents by Age of Youngest Child in Household and Sex of Adult Economic Report of the President | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 2-ii Female Labor Force Participation Rate by Selected OECD Country Significant Final Rules by Presidential Year Excluding Deregulatory Actions Regulatory Restrictions by All Agencies Regulatory Restrictions on Manufacturing Wireless and Wired Internet Service Provider Price Cuts Close to Congressional Review Act Nullification of Federal Communications Commission Rule Inflation-Adjusted CPI for Prescription Drugs Deregulation Creates More Growth Than a Regulatory Freeze 4-i U.S. Cellulosic Biofuel Statute and Final Volumes Innovation in Natural Gas Production. Productivity Gains : New-Well Production per Rig Oil and Natural Gas Gains in Productivity Lower Breakeven Prices Across Key Shale Formations Natural Gas Actual Production versus Projected Production Natural Gas Actual Prices versus Projected Prices U.S. Monthly Wholesale Electricity Price and Natural Gas U.S. Crude Oil Production Imported Oil Prices Shale Oil and Gas Consumer Savings per Year by Sector. Total Consumer Savings as a Share of Income by Quintile. U.S. Monthly Net Exports of Natural Gas U.S. Monthly Net Exports of Crude Oil and Petroleum Products Changes in Price of Oil ( Prior Month ) and Changes in the Goods Trade Balance and Actual versus Projected Carbon Dioxide Emissions Annual GHG Emission Reductions from Shale Innovation and Major Environmental Policies. U.S. versus EU GDP-Adjusted Carbon Dioxide Emissions U.S. versus EU GDP Adjusted Particulate Emission 4-ii Methane Production and Leakage Rates Citygate Natural Gas Prices in Michigan and New York Relative to National Average Prices Health Insurance Coverage by Type of Insurance Annual Change in Average Family Premium Including Employee and Employer Contributions | 250-840_text_.pdf Economic Report of the President 2/7/20 : PM Percentage of Covered Workers Enrolled in a Plan with a General Annual Deductible of $ or More for Single Coverage Average Annual Worker and Employer Premium Contributions for Single Coverage Average Annual Worker and Employer Premium Contributions for Family Coverage Ratio of State Average Price to National Average Price of Cataract Removal Distribution of Average State Price Relative to Average National Price of Care Bundles in Four States Health Insurance Enrollment across Employer Scenarios Revenue Impact from Expanding High-Deductible Health Plans Summary of Transactions by Fiscal Year 6-i New Entry of Hard Disk Drive Firms 6-ii Exit and Merger of Hard Disk Drive Firms Opioid-Involved Overdose Deaths Share of Potency-Adjusted Prescription Opioids by Primary Payer Opioid-Involved Overdose Death Rate by Presence of Prescription Opioids Effect of Supply Expansions and Government Subsidies on the Price and Quantity of Prescription Opioid Misuse Primary Market. Effect of Supply Expansions and Government Subsidies on the Price and Quantity of Prescription Opioid Misuse Secondary Market Effect of Demand Expansions on the Quantity and Price of Illicit Opioids. Effect of Supply Expansions on the Quantity and Price of Illicit Opioids Opioid Overdose Death and Unemployment Rate Real Supply Price and Real Out-of-Pocket Price Index of Potency-Adjusted Prescription Opioids Brand Share of Potency-Adjusted Prescription Opioids and Supply Price Potency-Adjusted Quantity ( MGEs ) of Prescription Opioids per Capita in the United States Proportion of Users Obtaining Misused Prescription Opioids by Most Recent Source Actual and Predicted Rates of Overdose Deaths Involving Prescription Opioids by the Price Elasticity of Demand for Misuse Share of Potency-Adjusted Prescription Opioids by Primary Payer Potency-Adjusted Prescription Opioids per Capita by Primary Payer Economic Report of the President | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Adults Receiving Social Security Disability Insurance and Supplemental Security Income and Opioid-Involved Drug Overdose Deaths per People Rate of Overdose Deaths Involving Synthetic Opioids Other Than Methadone and Fentanyl Reports in Forensic Labs per Population The Opioid-Involved Overdose Death Rate by the Presence of Illicit Opioids Real Price Index of Potency-Adjusted Illicit Opioids Homeownership Rates by Race and Ethnicity 8-i The Carpenter Index by CBSA The Effect of Regulation on Supply and Demand for Housing. Wharton Land Use Index by Metropolitan Statistical Area Ratio of Home Prices to Production Costs by CBSA Home Price Premium Resulting from Excessive Housing Regulation. Percentage Reduction in Homelessness by CBSA from Deregulating Housing Markets. Forecast of Growth Rate in Real GDP Tables Effects of Deregulation on Relative Price Increases on the Core CPI Unemployment Rates by Demographic Group. Change in the Number of People Age Years Old with Different Types of Insurance by Family Income Level Change in the Number of Children with Different Types of Insurance by Family Income Level Regulatory and Statutory Actions Annual Impact on Real Income Relative to a Regulatory Freeze by Sampling Strata. Variation in Knee Replacement Prices across MSAs within States Change in Market Concentration by Sector Estimates of the Price Elasticity of Demand for Heroin. Percentage of Renter Households Paying More Than Percent of Income on Housing by Income versus The Administration s Economic Forecast Supply-Side Components of Actual and Potential Real Output Growth Who Bears the Burden of Regulatory Costs ? The Federation of Advanced Manufacturing Education Boxes | 250-840_text_.pdf Economic Report of the President 2/7/20 : PM The Women s Global Development and Prosperity Initiative and Female Labor Force Participation Globally Looking Forward and Backward to Study Regulatory Reform. How Old Are Midnight Regulations ? The Limits of Energy Mandates to Induce Innovation. Economic Effects Linked to Drilling and Production. Innovation in Pipeline Leak Detection. Shale Development and Local Communities. The Consumer Price Index for Prescription Drugs Antitrust and Monopsony : George s Foods and Tyson Foods Measuring Concentration and the HHI Concentration Innovation and Competition The Effects of Deregulation within the Pharmaceutical Drug Market Opioid Crisis Lawsuits. Measuring the Housing Affordability Problem with the Carpenter Index Poor Substitutes for Regulatory Reform. Economic Report of the President | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM x Part I The Longest Expansion on Record 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM x Chapter The Great Expansion Two years since the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) was signed into law and buttressed by the Administration s probusiness deregulation policy and support for innovative energy infrastructure the U.S. economy continues expanding at a healthy pace as predicted by the and volumes of the Economic Report of the President. As of December the U.S. economic expansion reached its 127th month the longest in the Nation s history This chapter shows that despite headwinds from the global economy and the maturing length of the expansion the U.S. economy remains resilient As a result it grew at the fastest rate among the Group of Seven countries in the first three quarters of During several macroeconomic indicators including consumer spending productivity and labor shares of income continued to grow at faster rates than pre-TCJA projections. The labor market also tightened further even after strong gains in the previous two years. During the unemployment rate hit a 50-year low and for the first time on record job openings exceeded job seekers which have helped pull potential workers from the sidelines and into the labor force. Wages rose faster than inflation which ultimately boosted real middle-class incomes. After years of decline the labor force participation rate stabilized because of increased prime-age participation which also boosts long-term potential output The tepid recovery from the Great Recession prompted economic forecasters in to project historically modest growth into the future. Many observers concluded that low growth would persist indefinitely. However the experience of the first three years of the current Administration proves that a prolonged period of low growth was in fact far from inevitable. This increased growth 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM has coincided with Administration policies favoring lower taxes substantial deregulation and pro-innovation energy policy. The CEA forecasts that there is substantial additional room to grow given the historically strong labor market the potential for further deregulation and the supply-side impact of TCJA on long-term growth A fter growing briskly in and the U.S. economy continued to expand at a healthy pace in During the year s four quarters real gross domestic product ( GDP ) moderated to percent at an annual rate from its percent pace in This growth rate is notable considering the maturing length of the current expansion and that it was achieved despite headwinds from a slowing global economy. As of December the U.S. economy marked the 127th month and the 42nd consecutive quarter of expansion ( figure ) surpassing the longest U.S. expansion which ended in March after months or quarters The U.S. economy is currently operating with a strong labor market and subdued inflationary pressure. Evidence of the strength of the labor market can be observed across many indicators. The U.S. unemployment rate was percent as of December a 50-year low previously hit in September and November Nominal average hourly earnings increased percent during the months of but had been at or above percent for the prior consecutive months. The tightness of the labor market and rising demand for workers have continued to pull people from outside of the labor force into the labor market increasing the labor force participation rate to percent for the year as a whole up percentage point from a year earlier. Specifically the prime-age adult ( years ) participation rate increased to percent during these months the fourth year of increases after years of decline since During the months of the U.S. economy added million nonfarm jobs averaging jobs per month Despite the strong labor market core consumer price inflation was subdued at percent in ( as measured by the price index for core personal consumption expenditures PCE ) Because nominal disposable personal income grew faster than inflation real disposable personal income grew at a percent annual rate during the four quarters of For the median household real income rose by $ in the first months of reaching the highest level on record at about $ in dollars ( Green and Coder ) In addition to rising real income household wealth surged as stock market valuations rose to new heights in An increase in real household income and wealth has supported consumer spending which constitutes percent of GDP. In the four quarters of | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Real GDP per Working-Age Population by Expansion Period Index ( = real GDP per working-age population at the quarterly business-cycle trough ) Quarters after start of expansion Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; Census Bureau ; CEA calculations Note : The working-age population refers to those age years. Series are smoothed using a four-quarter centered moving average. Quarterly population estimates are interpolated from annual data real consumer spending maintained the percent pace of and accounted for nearly percent of real GDP growth. Government purchases have also supported aggregate demand rising percent during compared with percent in Although American consumers have sustained the U.S. expansion a general slowdown in the global economy has restrained U.S. growth. The Group of Seven ( G7 ) countries economies slowed sharply in the past year ; in particular real GDP growth in Germany and the United Kingdom contracted in : Q2 Major emerging market economies such as China and India also experienced slowdowns. These countries slowdowns reduced global aggregate demand which dampened U.S. economic growth Despite the headwinds from abroad the U.S. economy was the fastestgrowing in the G7 in the first three quarters of The United States was one of only two G7 countries ( the other being Japan where projected growth was a moribund percent ) that did not require the International Monetary Fund to make large downward revisions to its one-year-ahead growth projections for ( IMF 2019c ) whereas the other advanced countries saw large downward revisions Moreover growth in the U.S. economy for the third consecutive year exceeded the consensus real GDP growth projection made before the election as well as projections made before the TCJA. Three years ago a widespread belief among economic forecasters was that subpar growth in the The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Figure Real GDP Growth Relative to Pre November Projections FOMC CBO Actual Percent Sources : Congressional Budget Office August Baseline Forecast ; Federal Open Market Committee September ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : FOMC = Federal Open Market Committee ; CBO = Congressional Budget Office Q4-over-Q4 growth rates are used U.S. economy will be permanent with one of the more prominent explanations being secular stagnation.1 This pessimism was reflected in the modest growth projections by outside forecasters at the time. In the Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) forecast real GDP over the four quarters of to be percent while the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) forecast real GDP growth of just percent over the same period ( see figure ) The percent real GDP growth during surpassed these forecasts. Similarly actual real GDP growth in and surpassed preelection projections from the FOMC and the CBO. Relative to the real GDP projections by the Blue Chip panel of private professional forecasters the annual level of U.S. real GDP in was percent higher ( figure ) Although the strong growth was a surprise relative to pre-2017 forecasts by the FOMC the CBO and the Blue Chip consensus panel it was largely anticipated by the current Administration. In May the Administration forecasted average annualized growth over the three years to be percent ; subsequently the Administration revised and forecasts up to percent which was deemed optimistic and unrealistic compared with external forecasts. The optimism of the CEA s forecasts was grounded Hansen ( ) was the first to put forward this concept which was popularized by Summers ( ) and more recently by Rachel and Summers ( ) Specifically Summers argued that when neutral real interest rates fall to an abnormally low level because of decreasing propensity to invest but increasing propensity to save and are below nominal interest rates the resultant excessive savings would act as a persistent drag on demand and growth | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Actual versus Consensus Projections of Real Gross Domestic Product Index ( = ) Election Actual postelection Pre-TCJA projection consensus ( March ) Actual preelection Preelection consensus projection ( Oct. ) Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : Consensus forecasts from the October and March issues of Blue Chip Economic Indicators begin with growth for levels implied by year-over-year forecasts in the expectation that the Administration s tax policies and deregulatory policies would have a more positive effect than projected by others. In the Economic Report of the President the CEA drew on an extensive body of academic literature to predict that tax reform would raise real capital investment and the growth rate of output. In the Report we reviewed data through : Q3 showing that the U.S. economy s responses along multiple margins were consistent with predictions from that academic literature. Over the quarters through : Q4 the actual average annual growth rate of real GDP was percent slightly outpacing the May forecast and an increase compared with the percent average annual growth rate over the 26-quarter expansion period from : Q3 through : Q4 ( see figure ) As figure shows the average absolute errors of the ex-ante Administration forecasts under the current Administration were the lowest among those of the last five administrations The Trump Administration adopted structural reforms and policies that were designed to support continued U.S. economic growth. The TCJA which was enacted on December permanently reduced the statutory corporate tax rate from to percent sharply lowering the user cost of capital. It also enabled percent expensing of new equipment investment retroactive to September ( the date of the first draft of the proposed tax legislation that included the percent expensing provision from the House Ways and Means Committee ) The international provisions of the TCJA specifically The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Figure Length and Depth of U.S. Expansions and Contractions Annual growth rate ( percent ) : Q4 Current Administration so far Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; National Bureau of Economic Research ; CEA calculations Note : Values represent the change in real GDP as an annual growth rate for each quarterly expansion and contraction period as defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research Figure Average of Absolute Troika Forecasting Errors by Horizon and Administration Current-year error Two-year-ahead error One-year-ahead error Average error across horizons Forecasting errors ( percentage points ) George H. W. Bush Clinton George W. Bush Obama expansion Trump Sources : Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis ( FRED ) ; CEA calculations Note : Budget forecasts and Q4-over-Q4 growth rates were used to evaluate errors | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM the change in the tax treatment of earnings from foreign affiliates ( CEA 2019b ) led to repatriation of past overseas earnings of U.S. multinationals in low-tax jurisdictions as evidenced by the $ trillion capital inflows from direct investment income on equity from dividends and withdrawals since : Q4 The alterations in the tax treatment of foreign affiliates came in two parts : one for past earnings ( a one-time transition tax at a low rate on past earnings held overseas ) and one for future foreign-subsidiary earnings ( eliminating the tax on normal repatriated dividends ) Businesses responded to the lower user cost of capital and geographical incentives under the TCJA with an increase in domestic investment. This investment led to capital deepening increasing capital services per unit of labor input which raised labor productivity real wages and U.S. real output. In addition as discussed in more detail in chapter of this Report the Administration s deregulatory agenda also helped lower prices from Internet prices to drug prices and increased real income for American households The Bipartisan Budget Act also increased government spending raising aggregate demand. The combination of these factors lays the foundation for continued prosperity in the future As the current record expansion matures beyond the 42nd quarter some worry that the expansion will die of old age. But evidence suggests that expansions do not end simply because of their length. A study by Diebold and Rudebusch ( ) was among the first to find that in the postwar period the probability of an expansion coming to an end was not increasing in the age of the expansion. In a follow-up study Rudebusch ( ) provided empirical evidence that long expansions during the past years are no more likely to end than short ones. Australia s economy which has experienced the longest expansion of any advanced economy in modern history at years exemplifies how expansions can continue for decades. Old age does not kill expansions though bad policies and adverse shocks can lead to recessions The remainder of this chapter provides evidence on the strength of different areas of the U.S. economy in the recent past including : productivity wages and income consumer spending employment investment and subdued inflation. The chapter also discusses the impact of the global economic downturn monetary policy and domestic factors slowing U.S. growth Productivity Productivity growth is a key driver of long-term real output growth. Labor productivity in the post-TCJA period : Q1 : Q3 increased at an average annual pace of percent in particular it picked up to percent in the three quarters through : Q3 a faster pace than the average growth rate The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Figure Nonfarm Business Sector Labor Productivity Growth : Q3 : Q4 : Q1 : Q4 President Trump pre-TCJA : Q1 : Q4 President Trump post-TCJA : Q1 : Q3 Annual growth rate ( percent ) Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : The annual growth rate is calculated for real output per hour of all persons in the nonfarm business sector of percent in the pre-TCJA economic expansion period : Q3 : Q4 ( figure ) Academic research suggests at least two channels through which the current Administration s policies can increase labor productivity. The first is through deregulatory actions pursued since the end of that have increased competition and productivity ( CEA 2019a ) The second channel is through capital deepening in response to a lower cost of capital under the TCJA. By raising investment capital services per worker rises and as a result so does labor productivity ( CEA 2019b ) Since the passage of the TCJA capital services have grown faster than projected by outside forecasters.3 Comparing the performance of the U.S. economy with other advanced economies provides another instructive benchmark. Since the start of the current Administration and through : Q3 ( the latest quarter available for all G7 countries as of the date of writing ) U.S. productivity growth as measured by output per worker notably outperformed that of other countries ( figure ) Comparisons can be made with other subperiods in the past. Excluding the contractionary periods during the Great Recession labor productivity grew at just a percent compound annual rate during the period : Q3 : Q4 Actual capital services grew at an annual rate of percent over the two years after passage of the TCJA compared with percent as projected by Macroeconomic Advisers in October and percent projected by Blue Chip Econometric Detail in February With a slightly different accounting method the CBO also expected overall capital services to grow at percent compared with the actual annual growth rate of percent | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Growth in Real GDP per Employed Person among the Advanced Economies : Q3 : Q4 ( quarters ) Annual growth rate ( percent ) : Q1 : Q3 ( quarters ) Australia Canada France Germany Italy Japan United United Kingdom States Sources : Australian Bureau of Statistics ; Statistics Canada ; Institut national de la statistique et des tudes conomiques ; Deutsche Bundesbank ; Istituto Nazionale di Statistica ; Japan Cabinet Office ; U.K. Office for National Statistics ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Haver Analytics ; CEA calculations Note : Values represent an annual growth rate calculated over the given quarters. Growth rates are based on real GDP divided by seasonally adjusted employment. Employment includes goverment employees While U.S. labor productivity as measured by output per employed person for cross-country consistency grew at a compound annual rate of percent during this period the average growth rate among non-U.S. G7 member countries and Australia was just percent Another striking observation is that the United States is the only economy among this group of advanced economies to experience an acceleration in labor productivity. As noted in the Economic Report of the President from to all G7 countries experienced a sharp decline in labor productivity growth from the earlier years due to slowdowns in both capital deepening and total factor productivity ( CEA ) Figure shows the later of these periods with the inclusion of when labor productivity growth in the United States was similar to that in the other G7 countries ( plus Australia ) In the quarters since that period productivity growth has been flat or falling in all these advanced economies while productivity growth has risen in the United States Wages and Income In traditional economic models equilibrium in the labor market requires that nominal hourly compensation equals the marginal product of labor. Although real output per unit of labor is a measure of the average instead of the marginal product the measure is a convenient proxy for the marginal product The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Figure Actual versus Consensus Projections for Real Disposable Personal Income Index ( = ) Election Actual postelection Pre-TCJA projection consensus ( March ) Preelection consensus projection ( Oct. ) Actual preelection Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : Consensus forecasts from the October and March issues of Blue Chip Economic Indicators and begin with growth for levels implied by year-over-year forecasts Figure Growth of Real Disposable Personal Income per Household Annual growth rate ( percent )    * ./       *     * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $   )           '  '  / $ * )  * /    '0  ) /  " * 2/ #   /   )   ) )  '   /  *  / #  " $ )   -/  * # * '     (    ! * (  / #   )     # * $ ) "    /       / #    &   % 0./   / * /  '  ) (   * !  # * # * '  | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "     *   #   * !  )  * (  Labor share ( percent )   *     * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /   #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * )  The l   *  #   $    '  '  /     the / * /  '   * ( )  / $ * )  * !  ( ' *       ) /  "  * !  " *  * ( ./ $   $ )  * ( Coincident with the increase in labor productivity growth has been an increase in real average hourly earnings growth particularly for many disadvantaged groups ( see chapter of this Report ) Real average hourly earnings grew at an annual rate of percent during the post-TCJA period and percent for nonsupervisory workers compared with percent and percent respectively in the first seven and a half years of the expansion through : Q4. Real wage growth further picked up for nonsupervisory workers to percent in the four quarters of as the labor market continued to heat up The net tax savings from the TCJA from a combination of increasing standard deductions lowering marginal rates and doubling the child tax credit is also expected to boost real disposable income. In its pre-TCJA projections ( March ) the Blue Chip consensus panel forecasted that real disposable personal income would grow at an average of percent during and ; in actuality it grew at a percent rate ( figure ) well above the consensus forecast and well above the percent average annual growth rate over the period : Q3 : Q4. A similar pattern is observed on a perhousehold basis where real disposable personal income per household grew in the post-TCJA period at an annual average rate of percent outpacing the percent of the earlier period ( figure ) As income accelerates labor s share of gross domestic income ( GDI ) also continues on an upward trajectory. Measuring labor s share as total employee The Great Expansion | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Cumulative Change in Nominal Household and Nonprofit Wealth Stock market wealth Net housing wealth Other wealth Dollars ( trillions ) Total change : $ trillion Total change : $ trillion : Q1 : Q4 : Q1 : Q3 Sources : Federal Reserve Board ( Financial Accounts of the United States ) ; CEA calculations compensation as a percentage of GDI the series partially retraced a multidecade trend decline through During the quarters through : Q3 it rose a further percentage point to percent ( figure ) While labor s share of GDI and real disposable income growth has increased total household wealth has also increased. The cumulative change in nominal household and nonprofit-sector wealth as reported by the Federal Reserve s Financial Accounts of the United States in the first quarters through : Q3 exceeds the cumulative change in the preceding quarters by over $ trillion ( figure ) Consumer Spending A more productive workforce with greater disposable income has bolstered overall economic growth. Consumer spending as a share of nominal gross domestic product averaged percent during the years through Given this sizable share of GDP changes in consumer spending carry substantial contributions to overall real GDP growth. In real consumer spending grew by percent maintaining the same pace as in Since the TCJA s passage real consumer spending has grown percent at an annual rate higher than the percent pace during the years from : Q3 through : Q4 when real consumer spending contributed percentage points to real GDP growth. In the quarters through : Q4 real consumer spending | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Main Contributors to Real GDP Growth Contributor Government spending Gross private domestic investment Real GDP growth Contribution ( percentage points ) : Q4 Net exports Personal consumption expenditures : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis Figure Consumption and Wealth Relative to Disposable Personal Income Ratio to annual DPI Years of DPI : Q4 Total net wealth ( right axis ) Consumption ( left axis ) Stock market wealth ( right axis ) Net housing wealth ( right axis ) Sources : Federal Reserve ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : DPI = disposable personal income. Data for : Q4 values are estimated from the latest daily or monthly data. Shading denotes a recession The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    * )  '    $ ) "    /  Percent    /0  '  0'4    ) )  '  $ $ * )  *     * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /   #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * ) contributed on average percentage points to the quarterly real GDP growth rate ( figure ) Gains in household wealth ( also known as net worth ) have supported the solid growth of real consumer spending during the past three years ( figure ) with gains in stock-market wealth and other housing wealth accounting for the increase. Over long-periods gains in the wealth-to-income ratio are correlated with consumer spending ( Poterba ; Lettau and Ludvigson ) From that point of view the gains in the wealth-to-income ratio could have supported an even larger increase in consumer spending The prospect of future consumer spending supporting overall output growth is strong given the elevated levels of consumer confidence. The University of Michigan s Index of Consumer Sentiment rose to in : Q4 in the middle of the range in which it has fluctuated in the past three years and is currently points above its level. The Conference Board s version of consumer sentiment fell to in : Q4 toward the lower end of the range in which it has fluctuated in the past three years but is still points above These persistently strong readings for both measures indicate resilient consumer demand which represents a sizable portion of the U.S. economy and thus point to its continued support of growth Further personal saving as a share of disposable personal income remains elevated. After notable upward revisions by the Bureau of Economic Analysis in July as reported in chapter of the Economic Report of | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM the President the saving rate was further revised upward in the Bureau s July annual revision. The personal saving rate during of percent far exceeds the average of the last two decades ( figure ) The saving rate has been increasing in the past three years due to the faster increase in personal disposable income relative to the already robust growth in personal outlays The high saving rate together with elevated levels of household wealth leave some room for saving to buffer consumer spending against temporary adverse developments in income Investment In the past volumes of the Economic Report of the President the CEA projected that the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act would raise real capital investment on the basis that lowering the user cost of capital would increase the target steady-state flow of capital services ; and this projection was based on a substantial body of academic research. Chapter of the Economic Report of the President confirmed these anticipated positive effects with the then available data up through : Q3. The positive effect of the TCJA on investment was also corroborated by outside studies ( Kopp et al. ) During the 9-quarter post-TCJA period the annual rate of real private nonresidential fixed investment growth averaged percent with growth being faster in the first quarters ( percent ) than in the next quarters ( percent ) Some moderation of the investment growth rate was anticipated by most models which predicted that the positive effects on investment and overall economic activity would be front-loaded in ( CEA 2019b ; Mertens ) In particular standard neoclassical growth models suggest that during the transition to the new steady state the rate of growth in fixed investment would initially spike and would subsequently return to its pre-TCJA trend. Absent other exogenous shocks the level would then remain at a higher post-TCJA level with the capital-to-output ratio thereby asymptotically approaching its new higher steady-state level ( CEA 2019b ) Figure shows that the level of investment has been higher throughout the post-TCJA period than the consensus pre-TCJA projections ( the March Blue Chip consensus ) In as a whole investment was percent higher than the consensus projection. In even with the recent investment slowdown private nonresidential fixed investment was still percent higher than the pre-TCJA consensus projection. Also compared with other G7 countries the cumulative increase in investment or the cumulative addition Nine quarters are included in the post-TCJA period because the TCJA s allowance for full expensing of new equipment investment was retroactive to September ( the date of the first draft of the proposed tax legislation that included the full expensing provision from the House Ways and Means Committee ) The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Figure Actual versus Preelection Projections for Nonresidential Private Fixed Investment Index ( = ) Election Actual postelection Pre-TCJA projection consensus ( March ) Actual preelection Preelection consensus projection ( Oct. ) Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : Consensus forecasts from the October and March issues of Blue Chip Economic Indicators begin with growth for levels implied by year-over-year forecasts Figure Cumulative Change in Gross Fixed Private Capital Formation among the Group of Seven Member Countries : Q4 : Q3 Change ( percent ) United States France Germany Italy Japan United Canada Australia Kingdom Sources : Australian Bureau of Statistics ; Statistics Canada ; Institut national de la statistique et des tudes conomiques ; Deutsche Bundesbank ; Istituto Nazionale di Statistica ; Cabinet Office of Japan ; U.K. Office for National Statistics ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure The User Cost of Capital Percent Index ( : Q4 = ) : Q3 Top statutory corporate tax rate ( right axis ) User cost of capital ( left axis ) Source : CEA calculations to the capital stock since the TCJA s enactment has been one of the highest ( figure ) Outside the expected slowdown in investment growth other forces suppressed investment in One is the increase in the user cost of capital since : Q3. From the CEA s calculations the user cost of capital is measured by the Shiller cyclically adjusted Standard & Poor s price/earnings ratio in addition to a function of corporate tax rates and depreciation allowances. As seen in figure the user cost of capital fell sharply in : Q1 when the TCJA lowered the top statutory corporate tax rate from percent to percent but increased over the period : Q4 : Q3. A confluence of factors tighter domestic monetary policy and lower stock market valuations possibly due to a global growth slowdown all ultimately led to a tightening of financial conditions in : Q4 and thereafter raised the user cost of capital The imprints of weaker global factors on investment can be seen in a decomposition of nonresidential investment growth ( figure ) The slowdown in nonresidential investment in was mainly accounted for by business structures which shrank percent in and by equipment which decreased percent. Intellectual property products investment which is less exposed to fluctuations in global conditions grew at a robust pace of percent in The decline in structures investment was primarily because of a pullback in energy investment. Mining and wells investment fell percent in and were a factor in about percent of the slowdown in structures The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Figure Average Annual Growth in Real Business Fixed Investment and Component Contributions Structures Equipment Intellectual property Total Percent ( annualized ) Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : Average annual growth is measured on a Q4-over-Q4 basis for each year or multiyear period Figure Real Mining and Drilling Structures Investment versus Oil Rigs Operating in the United States Percent change ( annual rate ) Rigs Total rigs ( left axis ) : Q4 Business investment in mining and gas ( right axis ) Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Baker-Hughes ; CEA calculations | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Brent Crude Oil Prices versus Oil Rigs Operating in the United States Dollars per barrel Rigs Total rigs ( left axis ) : Q4 Brent crude oil ( right axis ) Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Baker-Hughes ; CEA calculations investment. As seen in figure investment in mining and wells started contracting in : Q3 when market concerns about global growth escalated and as oil prices fell to near the breakeven price for shale producers which is about $ a barrel. As oil prices approached or fell below the breakeven price for some producers they responded by slowing drilling or deciding to reduce the large inventory of drilled but not completed wells ( figure ) Indeed the U.S. rig count fell by in December compared with a year earlier Equipment investment also contracted by percent in compared with percent growth in Investment in equipment turned negative in the first quarter briefly bounced back in the second quarter and returned to negative in the third quarter. The two main equipment categories that most exacerbated the slowdown are information processing and transportation. As is discussed in more detail in the Global Macroeconomic Situation section of this chapter the transportation sector experienced a series of negative supply and demand shocks from economies abroad but by far the largest drag was the decrease in domestic sales at the aircraft supplier Boeing. Confirming the importance of global factors the CEA finds that an investment accelerator model augmented with foreign growth ( proxied by a weighted average of non-U.S. G7 growth ) can explain a sizable portion of the recent slowdown in equipment investment ( see figure ) compared with a fundamental version of the neoclassical model The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Figure Predictions of an Investment Accelerator Model Four-quarter change ( percent ) Out-of-sample forecast : Q3 Neoclassical model Model with foreign growth Actual Sources : Macroeconomic Advisers ; Robert Shiller ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Internal Revenue Service ; various national statistical offices ; CEA calculations Note : Foreign growth is a weighted average of Group of Seven country growth excluding the United States Figure The Growth in Number of Private Establishments versus Small Business Optimism Small business optimism index Four-quarter percent ( change ) : Q3 Private establishments ( left axis ) NFIB small business optimism index ( right axis ) Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; National Federation of Independent Business ; CEA calculations Note : A three-month moving average is used for the index from the National Federation of Independent Business ( NFIB ) Data for private establishments are only available through : Q2 | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM The decreases in both structures and equipment investment suggest that the slowdown in growth in the rest of world has constituted a strong headwind to U.S. investment. Indeed as figure shows the current slowdown in investment is similar to the slowdown in a period that also experienced an investment slowdown precipitated by weakening conditions abroad A later section of this chapter further explores the international economic developments that are weighing on U.S. growth To the extent that changes in business fixed investment predominantly reflect actions of large multinational firms that were responding to fluctuations in global demand conditions this situation could conceal the developments among smaller firms that are more domestically oriented.5 One of the TCJA s aims is lowering the business costs of small firms which tend to be more credit-constrained than large multinational firms. As figure shows this predicted effect of the TCJA is supported by survey data with level small business optimism rising to the highest level in almost two decades and the number of private establishments surging in Inflation Despite a tight labor market price inflation remains low and stable. Measures of inflation expectations have also been stable. The stability of price inflation and of inflation expectations indicate the economy is not facing supply constraints and has been a key factor in extending the duration of the current expansion What is different about the structure of the recent economy that accounts for the coexistence of a tight labor market and low and stable inflation that is the flattening of the Phillips curve ? Partial explanations include the falling relative price of imports a different monetary policy regime and recent deregulatory actions Price Inflation Key measures of price inflation are essentially flat and are all roughly in the range of percent at an annual rate. The price index for GDP the aggregate price for everything that is produced in the United States rose percent during the four quarters of down from and percent in and respectively. Consumer price inflation as measured by the price of personal consumption expenditures in the National Income and Product Accounts ( known as the PCE Price Index ) was only percent during the four quarters of With the exception of the third quarter in consumer price inflation has generally been below ( or equal to ) GDP price inflation for each of the past eight years as shown in figure A well-documented stylized fact in the international economics literature is that larger firms have a higher propensity to export and import ( WTO ) The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM  $ "   ) ! '  / $ * )  The      $   )         $   )  Four-quarter change ( percent )      $   $ )      P- $   I )   *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /       p * )  '  c * ) ( +/ $ * )  e3+ )  $ /0-   #   $ ) "   ) * /    $ * )  $ "   ( * -/   $         $   )   Log levels       #  $ )  $   $ )  ( * -/.  * !  " * *    )   $    #  $ )  $   $ )   *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /  ( * -/  $     (      / #  $   ! *  " * *    )   $   ! * (  / #    / $ * )  '  )  * (   )    *   /     * ) /.   #  $ )  $     ' * " "    )   ) * (  ' $    #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM One reason that consumer price inflation has been below the pace of GDP price inflation has been the persistent decline in the relative price of imports During the eight quarters through : Q4 import prices did not increase while GDP prices ( i.e. goods and services produced in the United States ) increased at a much faster rate of percent so that the relative price of imports fell at a percent annual rate. The declining relative price of imports has held down consumer price inflation ( percent over eight quarters ) by more than it has held down GDP price inflation because imported goods and services are included directly in consumer prices but influence GDP prices only indirectly through competition A situation of declining relative prices of imports has not always been the case as can be seen in figure which shows the log levels of GDP prices and the log levels of import prices. In particular import prices increased percentage points per year faster than GDP prices from to increased percentage points more slowly from through and increased percentage points more slowly during the eight years since As can be seen in figure the separation between the log levels of GDP and import prices is currently the largest recorded in the period Different Measures of Inflation : The CPI Chained CPI and PCE Price Index and Their Cores The Consumer Price Index ( CPI ) tends to increase slightly faster by about percentage point a year on average than the PCE Price Index.6 These two commonly used measures of consumer prices are both important. The CPI tends to overstate a cost-of-living price index however largely because it uses a fixed market basket updated every two years which means that it does not capture real-time substitution by consumers toward goods and services with declining relative prices. Another version of the CPI known as the chained CPI corrects for this substitution bias and as a result also rises about percentage point per year less than the official CPI. The chained CPI is now used to index the notches in the new TCJA tax schedules. The PCE Price Index also begins with most of the same CPI components and aggregates with a formula that allows for substitution Price indices that exclude the volatile components of food and energy provide a smoother signal of inflation trends than the overall index. The core CPI ( which excludes food and energy ) increased percent during the months of up only slightly from the percent year-earlier pace. The PCE Price Index version of core inflation rose percent in down from the year-earlier pace of percent. The rate of core PCE inflation was below the Federal Reserve s target of percent as was the rate of overall PCE inflation as shown in figure Computed from : Q4 to : Q4 The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Figure Consumer Price Inflation Percent change ( 12-month ) Nov-19 Federal Reserve s long-run objective Core PCE Price Index Total PCE Price Index Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : PCE = personal consumption expenditures  $ "    *     ) ! '  / $ * )  )   ) ! '  / $ * )    /  / $ * )  Percent    *      ) $ $ /4  * !   $  # $ "  )    /     $ ) ! '  / $ * )       ! *     /   $ ) ! '  / $ * )   * ( )  / $ * )  *    ) $ $ /4  * !   $  # $ "  )     '     *       * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $     )  '4/ $   * /    #  ( * ) / #   ) /   #  ) "  $  /  & )  ! *   *        ( * ) / #   ) /   ( * $ ) "    "  $  /  & )  ! *  / #   ) $ $ /4  * !   $  # $ "  )    )      ) ! '  / $ * )   * /  /     $ / $       #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Measures of inflation expectations have also been stable at a rate close to the percent Federal Reserve target as shown in figure which graphs two measures : one from the University of Michigan s Survey of Consumers and one extracted from the market for the Treasury s Inflation Protected Securities Buttressed by the stability of core inflation and of expectations of core inflation the Administration forecasts rates of increase in the CPI at percent and the GDP price index at percent during the 11-year Budget forecasting interval Hourly Compensation Inflation Productivity Growth and Stable Inflation Nominal hourly compensation inflation as measured by the Employment Cost Index for the private sector increased by percent at an annual rate during the months of down slightly from the percent pace This percent pace edged up from the annual pace of percent during the four years through Over long periods wage inflation can exceed price inflation by the rate of labor productivity growth. And over the seven quarters through : Q3 nonfarm labor productivity grew at a percent annual rate. As a result the roughly percent rate of annual hourly compensation growth ( which suggests unit labor costs rising at percent ) is compatible with price inflation of percent ( or slightly less ) without putting upward pressure on the price structure The sensitivity of inflation to fluctuations in the unemployment rate has decreased during the past two decades as shown in the scatter diagram given in figure which illustrates a version of the Phillips curve. The vertical axis shows the difference in core PCE inflation relative to a year-earlier survey of inflation expectations. The horizontal axis shows a version of the unemployment rate one that is demographically adjusted to control for the major fluctuations in the share of young people in the labor force during these past years. ( The share of young people in the labor force was exceptionally high in the 1970s when the baby boom cohorts entered the labor market. ) As can be seen in figure by the blue regression line fitted through the early years an extra percentage point of unemployment lowered the rate of inflation by percentage point a year. In contrast the red regression line fitted on the last years ( ) indicates that an extra percentage point of unemployment lowered the rate of inflation by only percentage point. One could argue that this shallow slope estimated during the past years provides the best guide to the future. Or one might argue that the best estimate of the slope is the one covering the entire 60-year sample ( percentage point of inflation per percentage point of unemployment ; not shown ) The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Figure Price-Price Phillips Curve Scatter Diagram Percent change in core PCE Slope = Slope = Fixed-weighted unemployment rate ( weights ) Sources : Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : PCE = Personal consumption expenditures. Inflation expectations are measured by the Livingston Survey for ; by the Survey of Professional Forecasters ( SPF ) 10-year Consumer Price Index for ; and by the SPF expectation for 10-year PCE inflation for Table Effects of Deregulation on Relative Price Increases on the Core CPI Priced good/service Ten-year % change in relative prices Dec. Dec AR ( ) 34-month % change Change since Dec. in trend AR p.p ( ) Relative importance weight in Core CPI ( ) = ( ) ( ) Effect on Core CPI inflation ( ) ( ) = ( ) * ( ) Prescription drugs Internet services Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : AR = annualized rate ; p.p. = percentage point ; CPI = Consumer Price Index Explanations for the declining slope of the Phillips curve include the influence of import prices in holding down the rate of inflation in recent years ( as argued above ) the wage and price rigidity that kept inflation from falling below zero during the early years of this recovery ( ) the diminishment of the Phillips curve coefficient in a monetary policy regime that effectively targets inflation ( Hooper Mishkin and Sufi ) and the evolution of the input-output structure of the economy toward increasing intermediate inputs ( Rubbo ) Another possible explanation is the deregulation efforts of the current Administration | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Deregulation and Inflation As discussed in chapter of this Report estimates suggest that deregulation has lowered the relative price of prescription drugs and Internet services. We calculate that these effects lower total inflation by about percentage point a year. The relative price of prescription drugs in particular is increasing by percentage points a year less that during the years through ; see table To summarize this analysis inflation remains low and stable inflation expectations are well anchored at this low level and recent estimates of the Phillips curve suggest a diminishing sensitivity of inflation to unemployment rates The Global Macroeconomic Situation As alluded to in previous sections a major headwind to growth in was a synchronized slowdown in global growth. In its latest semiannual economic outlook the International Monetary Fund ( IMF 2019c ) revised down global growth sharply by percentage point to what would be the lowest growth rate since the Global Recession percent one of the largest one-year downward-revisions in recent years ( figure ) Among advanced economies growth was revised down by percentage point with growth disappointments concentrated in Europe especially Germany. Emerging market economies also saw a downward revision of percentage point. Amid this global slowdown the U.S. economy has performed largely as projected by the IMF in October growing faster than any other G7 country in the first three quarters of ( figure ) At the heart of the current global slowdown has been a manufacturing downturn. Uncertainty about trade policy is one often-cited culprit in the manufacturing slowdown particularly uncertainty surrounding the Administration s negotiations toward a bilateral trade agreement with the People s Republic of China on enforceable commitments to remove or lower structural barriers in China ( BIS 2019a 2019b ; IMF 2019a 2019b ; OECD 2019a ; World Bank 2019a 2019b ) However other reasons for the global manufacturing slowdown also preceded or were contemporaneous with trade policy developments. These reasons make it difficult to isolate the effects of trade policy uncertainty and possibly result in an upward bias of its effects on the global economy. Other factors weighing on manufacturing include a change in European automobile emission standards in September that caused a production bottleneck in Europe especially Germany and a growth slowdown in China caused by the government s efforts to deleverage the financial system beginning in The manufacturing sectors of these two countries two of the world s preeminent manufacturing powerhouses had begun slowing down before or around the time of the imposition of tariffs on Chinese goods by the current Administration ( figure ) The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Figure IMF Five-Year Real GDP Growth Forecasts for the World Year-over-year percent change Forecast Oct. Forecast Oct. Forecast Oct. Forecast Oct. Actual growth Forecast Oct. Forecast Oct. Source : International Monetary Fund Note : Each forecast is taken from World Economic Outlook which is published by the IMF in October of each year Figure Forecast of Real GDP Growth Oct. WEO Oct. WEO Year-over-year percent change United States Germany Italy France United Kingdom Japan Canada Source : International Monetary Fund Note : WEO = World Economic Outlook published annually by the IMF | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Composite Output Purchasing Manager s Index ( PMI ) Index ( > = expansion ) : Q4 Germany s PMI Global PMI China s PMI Sources : Caixin ; IHS Markit ; JPMorgan Chase Note : Index levels over represent an expansion The Administration s efforts to create a more reciprocal environment and rebalance the trading relationship between the United States and China required negotiation over how this new relationship should be shaped Negotiations have covered a wide range of critical issues including the ways that U.S. companies are required to transfer proprietary technology as a condition of market access ; the numerous tariff and nontariff barriers faced by U.S businesses in China ; and China s other market-distorting practices and policies that have weighed on U.S. and global economic growth such as industrial subsidies and support for state-owned enterprises China s weak protection and enforcement of intellectual property rights is symptomatic of a broader challenge. Chinese firms engage in systematic theft of U.S. intellectual property because the costs are insufficient to incentivize them to do otherwise.7 Instead of pursuing an enforceable bilateral trade agreement through targeted tariffs prior Administrations took a multilateral approach that imposed no costs on the offenders and failed to resolve these issues. The Administration first imposed tariffs on imports from China based on There is a common misconception that the grievances against China relate exclusively to intellectual property. Although Chinese forced technology transfer and intellectual property theft ( discussed at length in the Section investigation ) are important the actions are also designed to address a number of other long-standing trade issues with China : expanding the Chinese market access for services and agriculture implementing an agreement like the United States Mexico Canada Agreement s provision on currency addressing the many nontariff barriers on U.S. exports to China and increasing Chinese purchases of U.S. products ( White House ) The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM the findings of the Section investigation of China s acts policies and practices related to technology transfer intellectual property and innovation. The Administration then took supplemental action in and in response to China s imposition of retaliatory tariffs and failure to eliminate these unfair acts policies and practices These Administration actions have prompted a renegotiation of the trading relationship between the two countries. Studies that examined the effect of the tariffs point out that tariffs impose near-term costs on the United States ( Amiti Redding and Weinstein 2019a 2019b ; Caldara et al. ; Fajgelbaum et al. ) Negotiations over a new agreement necessitate a degree of uncertainty over how that agreement will be shaped exacerbating near-term costs. However achieving a new trade relationship with China that is balanced and reciprocal will deliver long-term economic benefits for the United States including a reduction in near-term costs In January the Administration finalized a historic and enforceable agreement on phase one of the trade deal. The trade deal requires structural reforms and other changes to China s economic and trade policies in the areas of intellectual property technology transfer agriculture financial services and currency and foreign exchange. The ultimate goal is that with lower market barriers and further market orientation in China the global trading system will operate in a more balanced reciprocal environment. Global growth as a result would benefit from the increase in trade liberalization While trade policy uncertainty has held the spotlight another underappreciated reason for the global manufacturing slump was both supply and demand problems in the global motor vehicle industry. Supply problems in the European motor vehicle industry were precipitated by a change in the European Union s emissions regulations in September which led to bottlenecks at testing agencies and production cuts from automobile manufacturers to avoid unwanted inventory accumulation. Germany a global hub for automobile production particularly felt the impact of the supply disruption ( Deutsche Bundesbank ; IMF 2019b ) German automobile production fell percent in as a whole and shrank another percent in Given its long global value chains and sizable share in global output and global exports weaknesses in the automobile sector extend well beyond the industry in Europe propagating the shock through upstream industries around the world like steel metal and automobile parts as well as downstream industries like services ( OECD 2019b ) Caldara et al. ( ) look at the costs imposed by this trade policy uncertainty and find cumulative costs of up to percent of GDP after two years. Amiti Redding and Weinstein ( 2019b ) examine the direct impact of implemented tariffs in and and find that they impose a net deadweight loss of percent of GDP per year. Fajgelbaum et al. ( ) find that the additional tariffs in imposed a cost of percent on GDP after accounting for tariff revenues and gains to domestic producers The automobile sector accounts for percent of global output and percent of global exports | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure China s Change in Automobile Sales Twelve-month change ( percent ) Dec-19 Sources : China Association of Automobile Manufacturers ; CEA calculations These adverse shocks to the motor vehicle industry were further compounded by a cyclical downturn in automobile demand in China. Efforts by China s authorities to deleverage the shadow-banking sector since have led to a protracted slowdown in credit growth including consumer credit Increasing difficulty in accessing credit heightened risk aversion among households in a slowing economy and the termination in of consumer tax breaks for automobile purchases in all led to a substantial pullback in Chinese automobile consumption. As a result China s automobile consumption has contracted in consecutive quarters since mid-2018 ( figure ) and has accounted for over half the global contraction of automobile sales Accordingly the quantity of German automobile exports for which China is an important market have plunged since early and were percent below the mid-2018 level as of November ( figure ) Beyond the problems in the automobile industry and the slowdown in China country-specific shocks have also exacerbated the global slowdown. In the United Kingdom uncertainty over Brexit has continued to weigh on growth After the U.K. Parliament failed to ratify a deal negotiated between Prime Minister Boris Johnson s government and the EU his government secured an extension of the Brexit deadline to January With the December elections in the U.K. securing a large majority for Johnson s party in Parliament Parliament passed legislation for Britain to leave the European Union with a The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Figure German Vehicle and Car Engines Exported Index ( June = ) Nov-19 Value Quantity Sources : Federal Statistical Office ; Kraftfahrtbundesamt ; CEA calculations withdrawal agreement on January after which the U.K. will enter a transitional period and adhere to EU rules until end of Japan after experiencing surprisingly positive growth of percent at annual rate in the first half of saw its growth edge down to a percent annual rate in the third quarter as exports slumped amid weakening global demand mainly due to a drop in demand from China and a boycott of Japanese goods in South Korea. The long-planned sales tax increase from to percent also came into effect in October causing consumer spending to plummet Emerging market economies which until had been an engine of global growth became a drag in After months of antigovernment protests Hong Kong entered its first recession since the global financial crisis.10 In India increasing defaults in the shadow-banking sector have resulted in a large pullback of domestic credit growth causing GDP growth to slow sharply In Mexico uncertainty over domestic policies reinforced by the sudden resignation of Mexico s financial minister and the slowdown in global trade have impeded growth. Meanwhile growth remains weak in Brazil as high public debt levels have constrained the government from using fiscal stimulus to further support the economy in the face of subdued domestic and external demand Hong Kong s real GDP contracted by percent at an annual rate in : Q2 and by percent in : Q3 | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Central Bank Policy Rates Percent Dec-19 United States Japan Sweden Euro area Denmark Switzerland Sources : Swiss National Bank ; Sveriges Riksbank ; Danmarks Nationalbank ; Federal Reserve Board ; European Central Bank ; Bank of Japan Note : For Japan the effective uncollateralized overnight call rate was used The U.S. Dollar and Monetary Policy Because of the weak international economic outlook several non-U.S. major economies eased monetary policies throughout In particular the European Central Bank announced in September that it would resume its asset purchase program at a pace of billion a month and it lowered its policy rate by basis points to percent. The National Bank of Denmark ( a non-euro country ) also followed the European Central Bank in lowering its policy rate further into negative territory. Global negative-yielding sovereign debt mostly issued by European countries has recently reached a record amount of about $ trillion In contrast in response to an improved outlook for the U.S. economy the Federal Reserve began to normalize its balance sheet in December During the years the Federal Reserve raised its policy rate eight times while several central banks across Europe ( Denmark the European Central Bank Sweden and Switzerland ) kept their policy rates negative ( figure ) Though the Federal Reserve subsequently reduced rates on three occasions in U.S. policy rates continued to exceed those of other advanced economies which induced capital inflows into the United States and in turn contributed to an appreciation of the dollar through September before it edging lower during the final three months of the year Looking through the fluctuations of the real and nominal tradeweighted broad dollar was little changed from December to December The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM  $ "     '        $ " # /   *     * ( $ )  '     '   * ' '   Index ( January = )    #           '         #     '  # $ ./ * $   '    "   * ( $ )  '  *      '     *          '  '  / $ * )  * /   #   $ ) "  ) * /     $ * ) Relative to other major advanced country currencies the dollar edged up percent over the same period in real terms. Curcuru ( ) finds that for every divergence of percentage point in interest rates between the United States and other advanced economies the real advanced dollar index appreciates percent. Applying this elasticity one finds that the interest rate differential between the United States and the other G7 countries would have predicted a depreciation of percent in the advanced dollar.11 As of December the real level of the broad dollar is percent higher than its historical average calculated from January to the present though most of the appreciation occurred from the summer of to ( figure ) The real broad dollar is however still below the record highs of and Although higher U.S. interest rates than in other advanced countries would ceteris paribus cause some dollar appreciation and reduce U.S exports monetary spillovers from abroad also have an offsetting positive economic effect by lowering the longer end of the Treasury yield curve. This effect could be observed in August when data in Germany and China that were weaker than expected triggered global growth concerns that caused an immediate influx of safe haven flows to the U.S. Treasury market. Market expectations of future easing actions by the European Central Bank then caused an immediate decrease in U.S. 10-year Treasury yields contributing to the Collins and Truman ( ) employed the same methodology for the period July September and found that percentage points of the percent appreciation in the major dollar over this period was due to the United States / G7 interest rate differential | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM inversion of the yield curve at that time. As a result U.S. mortgage rates came down which on the whole supported the U.S. housing market and allowed U.S households to refinance their mortgages unlocking more disposable income for consumption Domestic Headwinds In addition to international headwinds four other idiosyncratic domestic factors impeded U.S. growth by almost percentage point in : ( ) the partial government shutdown for days in January ( ) the grounding of Boeing MAX jets ( ) industrial action at General Motors and ( ) the Midwest s spring flooding.12 Boeing. After two fatal accidents of the Boeing MAX in and civil aviation authorities around the world ( including the United States ) grounded the aircraft. The accidents and eventual grounding caused Boeing deliveries to collapse to nearly zero and production to fall. This drop in production and deliveries lowered GDP because fewer planes were produced and those produced were placed into inventory instead of being delivered. The CEA estimates that these effects depressed real GDP growth during the four quarters of by percentage point GM strikes. In mid-September the United Auto Workers began a work stoppage that halted production at General Motors for six weeks. The CEA estimates that the strike subtracted at most percentage point from GDP growth in the four quarters of ; but the effects will be reversed by an equal amount in Midwest flooding. Production of corn and soybeans ( the Nation s most valuable crops at about $ billion and $ billion in respectively ) fell in by percent and percent. Spring flooding due to excessive rain and snowmelt which damaged production in the Upper Midwest may be partly responsible for the decline in production. We estimate that these declines reduced the value of corn and soybean crops ( the major crops throughout the Midwest ) by $ billion in or percent of GDP Conclusion This chapter has shown that despite strong headwinds from the global economy and expectations of growth moderating as the current expansion matures the U.S. economy continued expanding at a healthy pace in the past year. During consumer spending continued to grow strongly while the labor share of income continued to increase. The labor market tightened further even after strong gains in the previous two years. Wages rose faster The partial government shutdown affected the level of real GDP as well as the annual average-to-annual average growth rate but not the fourth quarter to fourth quarter growth rate The Great Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM than inflation which ultimately boosted real middle-class incomes. After years of decline the stabilization of labor force participation due to increased prime-age participation combined with capital deepening to boost potential long-term output The tepid recovery from the Great Recession in the years before the Trump Administration prompted economic forecasters to project pessimistic growth into the future reflecting a widespread belief that the U.S. economy is in the midst of a period of secular stagnation. But the first three years of the current Administration have demonstrated that stagnation is not inevitable And the Administration s structural reforms including lower taxes deregulation and pro-innovation energy policies can overcome secular stagnation and have set the stage for continued economic strength As the current record expansion matures beyond the 42nd quarter some worry that the expansion will die of old age. But academic evidence indicates that expansions do not end simply because of their length. Old age does not kill expansions though bad policies and exogenous shocks can and do lead to recessions. The United States historically strong labor market the potential for further deregulation and the capital deepening that is having a positive impact on productivity suggest that there is still substantial room to grow in the present U.S. expansion | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM x Chapter Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans The U.S. labor market is the strongest it has been in the last half century as President Trump s pro-growth economic policies continue boosting labor demand and lowering structural barriers to entering the labor market Economic data show that recent labor market gains disproportionately benefit Americans who were previously left behind. These groups are becoming more and more self-reliant through their economic activity rather than remaining inactive in the labor market to qualify for means-tested government programs Under the Trump Administration and for the first time on record there are more job openings than unemployed people. In the U.S. unemployment rate has reached percent the lowest rate in five decades. Falling unemployment has reduced the share of the population on unemployment insurance to the lowest level since recording started in Importantly the African American unemployment rate has hit the lowest level on record and series lows have also been achieved for Asians Hispanics American Indians or Alaskan Natives veterans those without a high school degree and persons with disabilities among others Since the election the economy has added more than million jobs far exceeding the million predicted by the Congressional Budget Office in its final preelection forecast. These gains have brought people from the sidelines into employment. In parts of nearly three quarters of people entering employment came from out of the labor force the highest rate on record. And the prime-age labor force is growing reversing losses under the 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM prior administration s expansion period. This evidence suggests that the labor market s revival over the past three years is not a continuation of past trends but instead is the result of President Trump s pro-growth policies The Trump Administration s policies are not only leading to more jobs but also to higher pay. While nominal wage growth for all private-sector workers has been at or above percent for all but one month in wage growth for many historically disadvantaged groups is now higher than wage growth for more advantaged groups as is the case for lower-income workers compared with higher-income ones for workers compared with managers and for African Americans compared with whites. These income gains mark a fundamental change relative to those opposite trends observed over the expansion before President Trump s inauguration contributing to reduced income inequality Employment and earnings gains continue pulling people out of poverty and off of means-tested welfare programs. The number of people living in poverty decreased by million from to and the poverty rates for blacks and Hispanics reached record lows. Food insecurity has fallen and there are nearly million fewer people participating in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP formerly known as the Food Stamp Program ) than at the time of the election. The caseload for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families ( TANF ) has fallen by almost individuals and the number of individuals on Social Security Disability Insurance has fallen by almost since the election. Similarly due primarily to rising incomes Medicaid rolls are decreasing Today s strong labor market helps all Americans but the largest benefits are going to people who were previously left behind during the economic recovery Additional deregulatory actions targeted at remaining barriers in the labor market will allow the economy to add to its record-length expansion and lead to further employment and income gains particularly for these historically disadvantaged groups | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM T he U.S. labor market is the strongest it has been in the last half century as shown by economic data across various metrics. President Trump s pro-growth economic policies are contributing to this strength. While the economic gains realized over the past three years are widespread this chapter shows that they are disproportionately benefiting Americans who were previously left behind during the recovery. The Administration s policies increase labor demand and decrease structural barriers to entering labor markets. This approach has contributed to reduced inequality through an economic boom that is greatly benefiting historically disadvantaged groups. These groups are becoming more and more self-reliant through economic activity rather than by remaining economically inactive to qualify for means-tested government programs Today s tighter labor market and the resulting wage growth are predictable outcomes of the Administration s historic tax cuts and deregulatory actions which have delivered continued economic expansion. Eliminating unnecessary regulatory burdens and lowering taxes spur labor demand and incentivize firms to make productivity-enhancing investments ( see chapter ) As a result worker productivity wages and employment all increase Ultimately these policies help boost the job market s continued expansion as increased demand with unchanged supply raises quantity ( employment ) and prices ( wages ) in labor markets.1 The United States has experienced consecutive months of positive job growth continuing the longest positive job growth streak on record. The civilian unemployment rate which in December remained at its 50-year low of percent has been at or below percent for consecutive months. Today s historically low level of unemployment makes rapid job creation more difficult as it becomes harder for companies to find available workers. Since the Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) started collecting data on job openings in the number of unemployed people exceeded the number of recorded available jobs until March Since then there have been more job openings than unemployed people for a remarkable consecutive months In total since the election the economy has added million jobs more than the population of Massachusetts.2 These job gains are impressive given that the economic recovery since the Great Recession became the longest in United States history during the summer of Figure shows the total number of jobs by quarter. Before the election the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) expected job growth to slow and the total number of jobs to level off as workers who were out of the labor force were largely expected to remain on the sidelines ( CBO ) Instead job growth under President Trump Tax cuts also increase the supply of labor as after-tax wages increase for a given pretax wage Because supply and demand both increase quantity will increase and the effect on price ( wage ) will depend on the relative magnitude of the increases The most recent jobs data are preliminary and are subject to revision Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  * /       * ) " $ * )  '    " /   ! ! $       ! *   ./  $  ! * (   " 0./    $ "    * /  '  *     '  / $ * )   *   ./  Total jobs ( millions )   * /  '  % *      ! *   ./          *    * ) " $ * )  '   " /   ! ! $      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * )  * /       * ) " $ * )  '    " /   ! ! $       ! *   ./  $  ! * (   " 0./  has far exceeded the million predicted by this point in the recovery by the CBO in its final preelection forecast. Americans coming from the sidelines to get jobs have led to employment growth at a similar rate as before the election even as the unemployment rate has fallen to historic lows. Similarly before the election the CBO and the Federal Reserve forecasted that the unemployment rate which had been declining steadily for many years would level off at about percent as seen in figure ( FOMC ) As it becomes more difficult for employers to find available workers employers will offer higher pay or expand the pool of workers whom they consider. Annual nominal wage growth reached percent in for the first time since the Great Recession and nominal wage growth has been at or above percent for all but one month in Importantly wage growth for many disadvantaged groups is now higher than wage growth for more advantaged groups. And the lowest wage earners have seen the fastest nominal wage growth ( percent ) of any income group since the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was signed into law. Beyond this pay increase for low-income workers from the start of the current expansion to December average wage growth for workers lagged that for managers and that for African Americans lagged that for white Americans. Since President Trump took office each of these trends has been reversed contributing to reduced income inequality. When measured as the share of income held by the top percent income inequality fell in by the largest amount in over a decade. The Gini coefficient an overall measure of inequality in the population also fell in ( U.S. Census ) | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    ) ( ' * ( ) /    /    '  / $ * )   *   ./.  Unemployment rate ( percent )   ) ( ' * ( ) /   /      (  $  )  ! *   ./     ! *   ./       *    * ) " $ * )  '    " /  ! ! $      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $      '    * /        * ) " $ * )  '    " /   ! ! $            '   )    -& /   * ( ( $ //     ! *   ./  $  ! * (   " 0./        ! *   ./  $  ! * (   +/ (   These employment and income gains have brought people from the sidelines into employment. In the fourth quarter of percent of workers entering employment came from out of the labor force rather than from unemployment which is the highest share since the series began in Additionally the prime-age labor force is growing reversing losses under the prior administration s expansion period until the election. Under the prior administration s expansion period the prime-age labor force shrank by roughly million ; in contrast under the current Administration it has expanded by million people so far. Importantly a strong market for jobs creates work opportunities for those with less education or training prior criminal convictions or a disability This movement from the sidelines into the labor market also pulls people out of poverty and off of means-tested welfare programs increasing their selfreliance through economic activity while decreasing their reliance on government programs that incentivize people to limit their hours or stop working to qualify. The number of people living in poverty decreased by million from to and the poverty rates for blacks and Hispanics reached record lows. Furthermore the number of working-age adults without health insurance who are below the Federal poverty line fell by between and Because of the strong job market and sustained wage gains food insecurity has fallen and as of August there are nearly million fewer This CEA calculation is from labor force transition data reported by the BLS Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM people participating in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP formerly known as the Food Stamp Program ) than at the time of the election. The caseload for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families ( TANF ) has fallen by almost individuals and the number of individuals on Social Security Disability Insurance has fallen by almost since the election. Similarly Medicaid rolls are decreasing even as the U.S. population increases. Our analysis shows that this decrease is predominantly due to a reduction in the number of Medicaid-eligible individuals because of income growth not eligibility restrictions In addition to having encouraged these unprecedented gains for disadvantaged groups the Trump Administration is launching several new initiatives to increase economic opportunity by removing barriers to work. One of the most significant barriers is that available workers do not always have the skills and training required to fill available jobs. Additionally available workers may not be located near available jobs. The increase in prevalence in occupational licensing has made it more difficult for individuals to find and take jobs in different States. Individuals labor market participation can also be limited by a struggling local economy childcare responsibilities opioid addiction and prior criminal convictions. The Administration is addressing these barriers with initiatives like the National Council for the American Worker the Pledge to America s Workers the Initiative to Stop Opioid Abuse and the Second Chance Hiring Initiative The Trump Administration continues its relentless focus on reducing poverty by expanding self-sufficiency. The CEA ( 2019a ) accounted for the value of government subsidies for goods ( in-kind transfers ) like healthcare food and housing and we found that contrary to claims from the policy community and the media poverty has decreased dramatically since the War on Poverty began in the 1960s. However the war was largely won through increasing government dependency ( demand side ) rather than through promoting selfsufficiency ( supply side ) meaning that there is still more progress to be made This is where Opportunity Zones come in Opportunity Zones which were created by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act are best understood as supply-side economic policies. These zones entail tax cuts analogous to the corporate tax cut designed to spur investment and drive up labor demand and thus directly help the disadvantaged achieve selfsufficiency through increased economic activity. Supply-side tax cuts are the opposite of the traditional failed approach to fighting poverty which entails higher taxes to fund demand-side subsidies for healthcare food and other goods or services that incentivize people to limit their hours or stop working to qualify Although the economic benefits of the Trump Administration s policies are widespread this chapter s main finding is that a stronger U.S. economy over the past three years has especially helped racial and ethnic minorities | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM less-educated individuals people living in poverty and those who had been out of the labor force. As the Administration continues to implement a progrowth agenda the benefits to these historically disadvantaged groups are likely to persist and intensify This chapter is organized in two main sections. In the first we outline how today s strong labor market is benefiting lower-income individuals and individuals in historically disadvantaged groups. In the second section we discuss barriers that continue keeping some individuals from benefiting from a strong national economy along with the actions the Administration is taking to address these barriers and add to historically disadvantaged groups employment and income gains.4 Shared Prosperity from Strong Economic Growth The Trump Administration s tax and deregulatory policies increase labor demand of firms. The continued economic expansion enabled by these policies has predictably been accompanied by a very strong labor market. As additional workers became more difficult to find firms started considering a broader pool of potential workers. Low unemployment and strong wage growth have drawn workers into the labor force from the sidelines increasing the quantity of labor supplied The Current State of the Labor Market In December the national unemployment rate was percent matching the lowest rate in years.5 The unemployment rate has been at or below percent for consecutive months. This consistently low unemployment rate is an indication of a relatively tight labor market Just as a low unemployment rate signals a strong labor market a high number of job openings as measured by the BLS s Job Opening and Labor Turnover Survey ( JOLTS ) indicates strong labor demand. Compared with the time of the election there were over million more job openings in October In total there were million job openings in October million more than the number of unemployed persons. October was the 20th consecutive month in which there were more job openings than unemployed Figure shows the number of unemployed workers and job openings over time. Since the JOLTS data began being collected by the BLS in the current period beginning under the Trump Administration is the first time when there have been more job openings than unemployed people A version of this chapter was previously released as The Impact of the Trump Labor Market on Historically Disadvantaged Americans ( CEA 2019b ) Unemployment statistics are produced by the BLS and are calculated from data collected in the monthly Current Population Survey ( CPS ) Unless otherwise stated the data are seasonally adjusted Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "   (   * !   ) ( ' *   People   (   * !  *    ) $ ) "    Thousands   ) ( ' *  *   * ) $ ) "  *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $   * /   #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * )   #      $   "  ) $ )    (    As a result of a more robust U.S. economy many groups that historically have had a tougher time getting ahead are now gaining ground. Under the Trump Administration many of these groups have reached notable lows in their unemployment rates ( see table ) In August the unemployment rate for African Americans fell to percent the lowest rate on record since the series began in Meanwhile the unemployment rate for African American women also reached its series low in August For Hispanics the September unemployment rate achieved its series low of percent ( the series began in ) In the unemployment rate for American Indians or Alaska Natives fell to percent the lowest rate since the series began in Figure shows the unemployment rates for different racial and ethnic groups compared with their prerecession lows. The decline in unemployment after the recession and before the start of the Trump Administration was largely the result of a recovery from the losses during the recession. During the last two years the black and Hispanic unemployment rates have fallen below their prerecession lows and Asian unemployment has fallen to its prerecession low Among various levels of educational attainment those with less education typically face tougher labor market prospects. The Administration s tax and regulatory policies however are stimulating labor demand and are helping to provide labor market opportunities for those with less education and | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Table Unemployment Rates by Demographic Group December ( percent ) Characteristic Series low ( percent ) Low of the Trump Administration ( date ) The Trump low is lowest since Education Less than high school ( Sept. ) ( Sept. ) High school diploma ( Nov. ) ( April ) Series began ( Jan. ) April Some college ( Oct. ) ( Dec. ) Nov. Bachelor 's or higher ( Dec. ) ( Dec. ) Mar. African American ( Aug. ) ( Aug. ) Hispanic ( Sept. ) ( Sept. ) White ( May ) ( April ) Asian ( June ) ( June ) Race and ethnicity Series began ( Jan. ) Series began ( Mar. ) May Series began ( Jan. ) Age and gender Adult women ( age ) ( May ) ( Sept. ) Adult men ( age ) ( Mar. ) ( Dec. ) Aug. Oct. Teenagers ( age ) ( May ) ( Nov. ) Dec. Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations Note : The series for high school diploma some college and bachelor 's or higher began in The series for " white " began in The series for adult women adult men and teenagers began in  $ "    ) ( ' * ( ) /   /        Unemployment rate ( percent )    '   & $  ) $   $  )  *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $   * /   * //   ' $ )   ) * /  / #  $ *  ' *    # $   *  / #  $ *   ) $ * )   #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * ) Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    0'/ $ '  *  # * '        ) /  "  * !   ' '   ( ' *   Percent    *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $  training. In September the unemployment rate for individuals without a high school degree fell to percent achieving a series low ( the series began in ) Since the President s election the unemployment rate for those without a high school degree has fallen at a faster rate than the rate for those with a bachelor s degree or higher. The gap between the two rates reached a series low under the Trump Administration. For people with a high school degree but not a college education the unemployment rate fell to percent in April the lowest it has been in over years. And for individuals with some college experience but no bachelor s degree the rate fell to percent in December the lowest since Persons with disabilities can have a harder time finding work as can veterans. However President Trump s policies are translating into economic gains for these populations as well. In September the unemployment rate for persons with a disability dropped to percent the lowest it has been since the series began in In April the unemployment rate for American veterans fell to percent matching the series low previously achieved in The unemployment rate by disability status is not seasonally adjusted The unemployment rate for veterans is not seasonally adjusted | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Working multiple jobs can be a negative labor market indicator if individuals must work multiple part time jobs due to the lack of available full time work. However having multiple jobs is not necessarily a negative economic indicator as the opportunities to supplement one s main source of income may be greater during expansions. The share of people with multiple jobs has been around percent since the end of the Great Recession ( figure ) It reached a high of percent in and has been decreasing since that year. The data does not exhibit a strong cyclical trend as the share of people working multiple jobs has declined during the last two recessions. It has declined by percentage point since the election ; but the average under the Trump Administration has been percent and the annual average has been between and percent since Demographic Change and Labor Force Statistics In this subsection we construct labor force participation rates that control for changing demographics over time. The demographically adjusted participation rates are near prerecession levels for Hispanics and have exceeded prerecession levels for blacks. The adjusted participation rates show that due to the strong labor market in recent years many workers are coming from the sidelines and are reentering the labor force Various measures of the labor market such as job growth and the unemployment rate indicate a strong labor market but the labor force participation rate has not recovered to its prerecession level. Before the recession in December the participation rate was percent. The participation rate fell during the recession and continued to fall during the recovery reaching a low of percent in September before rebounding slightly to its current level of percent ( in December ) In past recoveries workers reentering the labor force due to the stronger economy caused the participation rate to increase. However comparing participation rates over time can be complicated by demographic changes. To get a clearer picture of the labor market we construct demographically adjusted participation rates by race and ethnicity using as the reference period.8 Adjusting the labor force participation rate for changing demographics is necessary because participation varies predictably over a person s lifetime The overall participation rate will depend on participation at each age and on the share of people in each age group. For example as the overall population ages a larger share of people are in the older age groups where participation is lower due to retirement. The aging of the population therefore will likely cause a decrease in the participation rate even if participation at each age is unchanged. The baby boom generation which is currently leaving the labor force through retirement is a relatively large generation. Even though workers The choice of reference year is arbitrary ; is chosen to facilitate comparison between current rates and precrisis rates Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    ( * "  # $   ''4   % 0./    *   *     -/ $  $  / $ * )  ! *   ! $   )   ( $   )  Labor force participation rate ( percent )  ( * "  # $   ''4    % 0./   '   *  ! *    -/ $  $  / $ * )   /  )   % 0./   '   *  ! *    -/ $  $  / $ * )   /  *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * ) are coming from the sidelines and reentering the labor force due to the strong labor market the positive effect on the participation rate is largely offset by retiring baby boomers even as some boomers are working longer Narrower measures such as the prime-age labor force participation rate ( i.e. those age years ) offer one alternative to mitigate the effects of demographic changes on labor market measures across time. But this is only a partial solution because there is still heterogeneity among groups of primeage individuals so prime-age participation is still subject to demographic shifts among the different age groups within the larger prime-age category. There can also be important participation trends among both older and younger workers that will affect the overall participation rate. Demographically adjusted participation rates are a single measure of participation that separates changes in participation from changes in demographics by holding demographics constant ( Szafran ) To find this adjusted rate the age and sex distribution of the population is first held fixed at a given reference period. The demographically adjusted participation rate for each period is constructed by using that period s age- and gender-specific participation rates and the population of the reference period.9 Keeping in mind that the demographically adjusted labor force participation rate holds the age race and sex population distribution constant at levels figure presents the demographically adjusted labor force We use the following age groups : and and over | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    ( * "  # $   ''4   % 0./     *  *     -/ $  $  / $ * )    /  ! * $  ) $  Labor force participation rate ( percent )  ( * "  # $   ''4    % 0./   '   *  ! *    -/ $  $  / $ * )   /  )   % 0./   '   *  ! *    -/ $  $  / $ * )   /  *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * ) participation rate for blacks. The data are aggregated to the annual level due to the relatively small sample size at the level of race by gender by age group.10 The overall participation rate for blacks has fallen since the global financial crisis of although the decline during the recession was the continuation of a longer-term downward trend starting in the late 1990s. The adjusted participation rate shows that much of this decline can be explained by demographic changes. The participation rate for blacks was higher in than it was before the Great Recession and it is slightly below the peak in once the effects of an aging population are removed. For comparison the adjusted participation rate for the entire population age and above fell from percent in to a low of percent in before recovering to percent in Adjusting for demographic change has a large impact on the labor force participation rate for Hispanics in recent years. Figure shows the demographically adjusted participation rate for Hispanics. From to the start of the Great Recession demographic changes had a minimal effect on the overall participation rate for this group as there tends to be little difference between the adjusted and unadjusted rates. However the adjusted and unadjusted participation rates have diverged since the Great Recession. The unadjusted rate The BLS does not produce seasonally adjusted monthly or quarterly labor force participation data by race for the finer-grained age groups needed to produce the demographically adjusted participation rate Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    * ( $ )  '   &'4    "   * 2/ #   ( * ) "   ' '    0'/   0' '  $ (    "   )     '    * -&  Year-over-year change ( percent  / #   ) / $ '   $  )       *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $    ) /   * '  / $ * )          '  '  / $ * )  * /    /     ) * )  * )  ''4    % 0./  initially fell by a relatively large amount and has only increased slightly during the recovery. The demographically adjusted rate has fully recovered and now exceeds its preelection level Wage and Income Growth Over the past three years the higher demand for labor and the tighter job market have been leading to larger wage gains especially for the lowestincome workers. In the third quarter of the 12-month change in nominal weekly wages for the 10th percentile of full-time workers was up percent ( see figure ) This is higher than the year-over-year change in the nominal weekly wage for the median worker ( percent ) and well above inflation Furthermore in : Q3 median weekly wages for full-time workers without a high school degree were up percent over the year Figure shows that as of November nominal average hourly earnings of production and nonsupervisory workers grew at percent year over year.12 Inflation as measured by the Personal Consumption Expenditures ( PCE ) Price Index remains modest at percent year over year in November.13 Therefore the real wages of private sector production and nonsupervisory workers increased by percent during the year ending in November Weekly earnings data are released by the BLS and are from the CPS Average hourly earnings are measured by the BLS in the Current Employment Statistics December inflation data are not yet available at the time of writing | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    "  * 0-'4    ) $ ) "  ! *   *   / $ * )  )    * ) $ *   * -&   )   / #   * )  '   * ) ( +/ $ * )   )  $ /0-   $   )   Year-over-year change ( percent )    * ( $ )  '    "  # * 0-'4   ) $ ) "      $   )   *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $  * /       * )  '   * ) ( +/ $ * )   )  $ /0-  #   $ ) "  ) * /     $ * ) Minorities are experiencing some of the fastest increases in pay. In : Q3 African Americans saw their weekly earnings grow by percent over the year while Hispanics weekly earnings grew by percent. For comparison the 12-month change in weekly earnings for all Americans rose by percent. In addition to faster earnings growth lower-income households are seeing the largest benefits from deregulatory actions that lower the costs of goods and services. Box shows an example of the beneficial impact of the Administration s deregulatory agenda on lower-income households Poverty and Inequality The gains in employment and wages for those who had previously been left behind are lifting many out of poverty. In September the Census Bureau released its official measures of the economic well-being of Americans for using data from the Annual Social and Economic Supplement ( ASEC ) to the Current Population Survey ( CPS ) While Americans across the board generally saw improvements the data show that there were larger gains among historically disadvantaged groups In the official poverty rate fell by percentage point to percent the lowest level since lifting million Americans out of poverty. This decline follows a decline of percentage point in meaning that the U.S. poverty rate fell almost a full percentage point over the first two years of the Trump Administration. In the CPS-ASEC income is defined as Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Box Who Bears the Burden of Regulatory Costs ? Well-designed regulations promote important social purposes but at a cost. The question of who bears the burden of regulatory costs is like the question of who bears the burden of the taxes needed to fund government spending programs. The Federal income tax has a progressive structure ; thus compared with lower-income households higher-income households bear a greater share of the burden of taxation. Unfortunately however lower-income households can bear a disproportionate share of the burden of regulatory costs. We estimate that the cost savings from deregulatory actions in two sectors Internet access and prescription drugs ( see figure 2-i ) especially helped lower-income households. These are two of the regulations whose benefits were estimated by the CEA ( 2019c ) The lower burden of regulatory costs reinforces the gains in employment and wages from today s strong labor market  $ "  $   * ) (    $ ) "  * )    $ +/ $ * )  "   )   ) / ) /        * # * '   )  * (   $ ) / $ ' Share of income ( percent ) * ./   ) /   * )    ) /  # $    ) /  * 0-/ #   ) / $ " # ./   ) /  *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  Note : Values represent the CEA s estimates of consumers savings as a share of their income which applied the Consumer Expenditure Survey s quintile and expenditure data to national $ )  * (    /   Costly regulations hurt lower-income households because they spend a larger share of their budgets on goods and services produced by regulated sectors of the economy. For example in data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey the poorest fifth of households spend percent of their incomes out-of-pocket on prescription drugs while the richest fifth of households spend only percent. The poorest fifth of households also spend a | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM higher percentage of their incomes on Internet access. As a result the costs savings from deregulatory actions in these two sectors represent percent of the income for the poorest fifth of households compared with percent for the richest fifth Many regulations also hurt lower-income households because they impose standards that tend to increase the price of those goods that are disproportionately purchased by lower-income households. For example after controlling for other differences Levinson ( ) finds that higher-income households purchase more fuel-efficient cars. As a result he estimates that the corporate average fuel economy ( CAFE ) standards are regressive and disproportionately burden lower-income households. The CAFE standards matter less to higher-income households because they prefer to purchase more fuel-efficient cars anyway. The notable actions analyzed by the CEA ( 2019c ) include other deregulations of standards that restricted the ability of lower-income households to choose the products that best suited their preferences and budgets money income before taxes. It includes cash assistance but not the value of in-kind benefits for government assistance programs or refundable tax credits targeted at low-income working families. Including the value of these benefits raises the total resources available to households at the bottom of the income distribution. We conduct an analysis later in this chapter that examines the effect of using after-tax and after-transfer income ( including the value of inkind transfers ) on the changes in poverty during the Administration Disadvantaged groups experienced the largest poverty reductions in The poverty rate fell by percentage point for black Americans and by percentage point for Hispanic Americans with both groups reaching historic lows ( see figure ) The poverty rates for black and Hispanic Americans in were never closer to the overall poverty rate in the United States Children fared especially well in with a decrease in poverty of percentage points for those under Poverty among single mothers with children fell by percentage points Although real income at the bottom of the income distribution increased and the percentage of people in poverty fell it can also be informative to examine how these gains compare with gains elsewhere in the income distribution which will be reflected in the changes in various measures of income inequality. Inequality fell in as the share of income held by the top percent fell by the largest amount in over a decade as did the Gini index ( an overall measure of inequality in the population ) In fact households between the 20th and Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    * -/4   /         )    / # ) $  $ /4  Poverty rate ( percent )  ! $   )   ( $   )  * -/4   / $  ) $   * -/4   /  * /  '  * -/4   /  *   ) /   * '  / $ * )         ) )  '   *  $  '   )     * ) * ( $    ' ( ) /  * /   #    /   ! *    )    * )   ! '  /  / #  $ ( ' ( ) /  / $ * )  * !  / #   $ " )   $ )  * (  ./ $ * )   #    /   ! *    )    * )   ! '  /  / #  $ ( ' ( ) /  / $ * )  * !   )    /        ) )  '   *  $  '   )     * ) * ( $    ' ( ) /  *  $ ) "  .4./ ( 40th percentiles of the distribution experienced the largest increase in average household income among all quintiles in with a gain of percent.14 Low unemployment rising incomes and declining poverty mean that more Americans are becoming self-sufficient. The caseload for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families ( TANF ) is on the decline falling by almost individuals since the election as of March Meanwhile the number of individuals on Social Security Disability Insurance ( SSDI ) has fallen by almost since the election. The decline in the official poverty rate mirrors a decline of percentage point in food insecurity in Since the election nearly million Americans have moved off the SNAP rolls. These substantial declines in enrollment suggest that a growing economy may lead to positive outcomes in moving families toward self-sufficiency. While some of the enrollment decline in welfare programs could be due to administrative or policy changes designed to prevent ineligible individuals from receiving Data from the American Community Survey ( ACS ) which is a separate data source also released by the Census Bureau showed that inequality increased from to The ACS has a much larger sample size than the CPS-ASEC but it measures income less accurately. For this reason the Census recommends using the CPS-ASEC for national income statistics like inequality U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service using data from the December Current Population Survey Food Security Supplement ( https : //www.ers.usda.gov/topics/foodnutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-us/key-statistics-graphics.aspx ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM benefits it is possible that some otherwise-eligible individuals would be affected.16 However the decline in food insecurity combined with the decline in poverty suggests that the net effect of any administrative changes and the strong economy has been to reduce hardship in turn reducing reliance on public benefits Health Insurance and Medicaid Strong job growth is the key to expanding and improving access to health insurance. Employer-sponsored health insurance is by far the largest source of health insurance coverage in the United States. The employment and earnings gains that are reducing poverty are also driving a decrease in the number of people on Medicaid. Medicaid rolls are decreasing in both expansion and nonexpansion States even though the U.S. population is increasing ( see figure ) Our analysis of the data indicates that the reduction in the number of people on Medicaid is due predominantly to a reduction in the number of Medicaid-eligible individuals because of income growth as opposed to eligibility restrictions The Census Bureau asks about health insurance coverage during the previous year in the CPS-ASEC. Individuals are classified as being uninsured if they lack coverage for the entire year. For each of the insurance types individuals are asked if they were covered by that type of insurance at any point during the year. Comparisons of insurance coverage in recent years have been complicated by changes in the CPS-ASEC data. In the CPS-ASEC revised its questionnaire to better measure health insurance coverage. Starting with the release of the data the Census Bureau implemented improvements in data processing to fully take advantage of the revised questionnaire. Data for and have been released with the updated data processing so consistent comparisons can be made for health insurance coverage in and using CPS-ASEC data.17 Table shows the change from to in the number of people between age and with different types of health insurance coverage at different levels of income in the CPS-ASEC. For all individuals the number of uninsured increased by about million and the number covered by employer provided coverage increased by about million. Directly purchased individual coverage fell by million people and Medicaid fell by million people The distribution of income relative to the Federal poverty line for the overall population of those age shows that income relative to the poverty level Administrative costs of program participation can prevent eligible individuals from enrolling in public programs ( Aizer ) Administrative changes that increase the nonmonetary cost of enrollment could lead to an increase in the number of eligible individuals choosing not to enroll The updated files are the ASEC bridge files and the ASEC research files. Note that the updated data processing will cause the health insurance estimates for these years to differ from the results using the production files that were published by the Census Bureau in the works by Barnett and Berchick ( ) and Berchick Hood and Barnett ( ) Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    (   * !    $   $    )       ) * ' '   ) $ * )   )    * )  ) $ * )   /  /     * ) / #  $ )  Enrollment ( millions ) Enrollment ( millions )  "   ) $ * )  ./  /  ' ! /   $  * )  ) $ * )  ./  /  $ " # /   $  *    ) / ! *    $       $   $    $    $    ( $ '4   * )   / $ * )        '  '  / $ * ) Note : Expansion !  / *  ./  /  / #  /  #    )      $   $    *  "  ! * ' ' * $ ) "  / #   ! ! *    '       / increased and the number of people living below the Federal poverty line fell by million. Of the million increase in the number of uninsured million have a family income percent or more of the Federal poverty line. The number of people without insurance who are below the Federal poverty line fell by between and These results indicate that from to the income gains for working age adults led to reduced participation in Medicaid A particularly vulnerable population is children living in poverty. Table presents the change in the number of people under the age of years with different types of insurance by family income level. The number of uninsured children increased by between and even as the total number of children fell. Almost half the increase in the number of uninsured children is due to children in families that earn at least percent of the Federal poverty line. The number of children on Medicaid ( includes the Children s Health Insurance Program CHIP ) fell by million which is largely due to a decline in the number of children living in poverty. Some have argued that the decrease in the number of children enrolled in Medicaid and the increase in the number of uninsured is due to administrative changes that exclude eligible children and discourage otherwise-eligible children from being enrolled.18 The small increase in the number of children below the poverty line who are For example see Goodnough and Sanger-Katz ( ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM    '    #  ) "  $ )  / #   (   * !   * '   "       '   $ / #   $ ! ! ) /    * !  )  )       ( $ '4  )  * (  '   )  * (  ' '  ' '  * '  / $ * )  / # *  )   ) $ )   / # *  )   ( ' *  * $    / # *  )   $  /   #   / # *  )    $   $   / # *  )    ) /  * !      ) /  * !      ) /  * !      )   *   ' *     *    ) /   * '  / $ * )     ) )  '   *  $  '   )     * ) * ( $    ' ( ) /        '  '  / $ * )  * /      !   '  * -/4  ' $ )    '    #  ) "  $ )  / #   (   * !   # $ '  )  $ / #   $ ! ! ) /    * !  )  )       ( $ '4  )  * (  '    * '  / $ * )  / # *  )   ) $ )   / # *  )   ( ' *  * $    / # *  )   $  /   #   / # *  )    $   $    ) /  * !      ) /  * !      ) /  * !      )   *  )  * (  ' '  ' '  ' *     *     ) /   * '  / $ * )     ) )  '   *  $  '   )     * ) * ( $    ' ( ) /        '  '  / $ * )  * /      !   '  * -/4  ' $ ) uninsured suggests that administrative changes may be playing a small role However the data indicate that income gains and the reduction in the number of children living in poverty are primarily responsible for the large decline in the number of children on Medicaid The number of people without health insurance can increase for a number of reasons. Two factors behind the increase in the number of uninsured over the past couple of years are the elimination of the Affordable Care Act s ( ACA ) individual mandate penalty and a decline in the number of people who qualify for Medicaid and ACA exchange subsidies. One consequence of higher household incomes is that households will lose eligibility for public assistance programs. Because households have a choice to remain eligible by working less revealed preference shows that the higher income more than offsets the loss of Medicaid or ACA subsidies in terms of their overall level of utility. The other reason why a lack of insurance is increasing is that some individuals thought the elimination of the mandate penalty applied to while the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act set the mandate penalty to $ starting in The CBO estimates that about million people opted out of insurance coverage in due to the mistaken belief about the timing of the elimination of the mandate penalty ( CBO ) For individuals who were only buying insurance to avoid the mandate penalty the elimination of the penalty makes them better off ( CEA 2018b ) Full-Income Measures of Poverty Income at the bottom of the distribution is rising and poverty based on the Official Poverty Measure ( OPM ) is falling. As people move out of poverty Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM their benefits under various public assistance programs are phased out. The potential to lose government benefits acts as a disincentive to participate at all in the labor market for those who are out of the labor market or to increase participation for those who are in the labor market as the loss of benefits acts as a tax on increasing engagement with the labor market. Because of the level of wages and the available jobs the labor market gains that are pulling people out of poverty on average more than offset the loss in government benefits in terms of total available resources The OPM which is based on pretax money income has many limitations as a measure of the total resources available to a family which leads it to understate resources for low-income families. The Full-Income Poverty Measure ( FPM ) overcomes these limitations by considering a broader resourcesharing unit the household instead of the family and by including a comprehensive set of income sources The FPM estimates the share of people living in poverty using a posttax posttransfer definition of income. It subtracts Federal income and payroll taxes and adds tax credits ( e.g. the Earned Income Tax Credit and Child Tax Credit ) and cash transfers. It also includes the market value of SNAP subsidized school lunches rental housing assistance employer-provided health insurance and public health insurance ( Medicare and Medicaid ) It is important to note however that despite using a comprehensive set of income sources the FPM may still understate income due to the underreporting of income sources and especially transfers in survey data ( Meyer Mok and Sullivan ) For more details on the FPM see Burkhauser and others ( ) and chapter of the CEA s Economic Report of the President The OPM and FPM differ in how they define the unit that shares resources Because there are economies of scale in consumption the cost per person of achieving a given standard of living falls as the number of people in the unit increases. The FPM treats the household as the resource-sharing unit and adjusts the thresholds proportionally based on the square root of the number of people in the household. In contrast the OPM restricts the sharing unit to those in the same household who have family ties. By using the household as the resource-sharing unit ( which is standard in studies of income distribution ) the FPM reflects the increasing rates of cohabitation among non family members in the United States Figure shows the change in the poverty rate under the OPM from to compared with poverty measures that incorporate progressively broader measures of income. All measures are anchored to equal the official We calculate the market value of public health insurance based on the cost of its provision and it is adjusted for risk based on age disability status and State of residence ( for additional details see Elwell Corinth and Burkhauser ) The market value of employer-provided health insurance is included as well and is imputed for because employer contributions are no longer reported in the CPS-ASEC. The CBO has used a similar method for valuing health insurance since in its reports on the distribution of income | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    #  ) "  $ )  / #   ! ! $  $  '   * -/4       / #   * -/4      )         % 0./   $  ' )     ' # * # * '   #  $ ) "  ) $ /     *   .//  *   .//-  ) !   '/ #  $ )  )  Poverty rate ( percent )  *    ) /   * '  / $ * )     ) )  '   *  $  '   )     * ) * ( $    ' ( ) /   0-& #   /   '         '  '  / $ * )  * /        ! ! $  $  '   * -/4           * )  '   * ) ( +/ $ * )   )  $ /0- poverty rate in of percent. The official poverty rate fell by percentage point from to Using the adjusted equivalence scale making the sharing unit the household and using the PCE as the preferred measure of inflation instead of the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers ( called the CPI-U ) caused the poverty rate to fall by percentage points from to Moving to posttax and posttransfer income causes the reduction in poverty to be smaller. This reflects the fact that as individuals gain labor income ( which is included in the OPM poverty measure ) they receive less in tax credits and transfer income ( including the value of in-kind transfers ) .The effective tax rate of individuals on public assistance can be very high which can be a disincentive to increasing labor market participation. Given that the posttax and posttransfer poverty rate still fell by percentage point we can conclude that overall the increase in labor income more than offset the decrease in tax credits and transfers. Finally including the value of employer-provided and publicly provided health insurance leads to an even larger decline in poverty of percentage points. This occurred even as enrollment in Medicaid fell because the individuals losing coverage tended to be living above the poverty threshold. The decline is partially due to the value of public health insurance increasing over this period which raised the full incomes of those who remain enrolled The choice of income measure also affects the measurement of income inequality. When taxes and transfers are progressive using pretax income Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM will tend to overstate the level of inequality. The United Nations handbook on income statistics notes that the preferred measure of income is posttax and posttransfer ( including in-kind transfers ) as that allows for an evaluation of the effectiveness of redistributive policies as well as for meaningful comparisons between countries with different degrees of redistribution ( Canberra Group ) Elwell Corinth and Burkhauser ( ) calculate income growth by decile from to Using a posttax and posttransfer measure of income that includes government health insurance and the value of employersponsored health insurance they calculate that the Gini coefficient was in but it was for the same year using pretax and pretransfer market income adjusted for household size.20 Furthermore the posttax and posttransfer income Gini coefficient was lower in than it was in Supporting Further Economic Gains The strong U.S. labor market has led to historic labor market successes including higher incomes lower poverty and a reduced reliance on government programs for many groups of people who had been previously left behind during the economic recovery. In this section we discuss some of the remaining barriers that are preventing people from fully benefiting from the strong labor market. The skills of the available workers may not match those needed by employers. There can also be a geographic mismatch between workers and jobs. Childcare costs a criminal record or drug addiction can also prevent certain individuals from fully participating in the labor market. Continuing the current rate of job growth with the unemployment rate at a historically low level will likely require drawing even more workers from the sidelines. This will require targeted policies which the Trump Administration is pursuing to address the barriers that have prevented these individuals from entering the labor force despite a very strong labor market Making Sure That Workers Have the Skills to Succeed In a previous report Addressing America s Reskilling Challenge ( CEA 2018a ) we outlined the emerging issue of the skills gap in the ever-changing U.S economy. The skills gap refers to the situation whereby the skills of available workers are not matching the skills needed by employers. Even in a booming economy the lack of necessary skills can prevent some individuals from enjoying the benefits of a robust labor market. Our previous report highlighted the importance of addressing this issue as well as the challenges facing workers and firms that seek to do so The CEA also examined the existing infrastructure of Federal worker training programs and reviewed the evidence regarding their effectiveness The Gini coefficient measures inequality on a scale from to where values closer to indicate greater equality | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM ( CEA 2019d ) Overall we found mixed evidence that these programs improve labor market outcomes. The programs may have small positive effects overall but they may be more effective for particular groups of people and at certain times in the business cycle. The large number of these programs and their heterogeneity make it difficult to reach a single general conclusion but rather suggest that some programs are effective whereas others are failing to live up to their hoped-for potential To help close the skills gap the Trump Administration has taken action to address the limitations of these existing Federal worker training/reskilling programs. The United States needs innovative solutions for worker training given the mixed effectiveness of the existing Federal programs. Addressing this problem is necessary in response to employers struggles to find skilled workers and to enable more people on the sidelines to benefit from the booming economy In this context to develop a national strategy for workforce development the Administration has created the National Council for the American Worker ( NCAW ) The NCAW is addressing issues related to improving skillstraining programs focusing on private-sector-led approaches and promoting multiple education and training pathways for individuals to enable them to achieve family-sustaining careers. The NCAW is also focusing on enhancing transparency in the outcomes of Federal and State workforce programs to allow job seekers policymakers and program administrators to better understand which programs are effective. Additionally with better data there are opportunities to learn from the successes and failures across public programs and to shift resources to the types of programs that show the greatest returns In the previous CEA ( 2019d ) report we did not determine an optimal level of government spending on employment and training programs but we did argue that Federal efforts should shift their spending depending on what the evidence says is the most effective. Among the current Federal worker training programs Registered Apprenticeships have shown strong improvements in labor market outcomes and the Administration has already increased spending on these types of learn while you earn models. Additionally job search assistance provided through the Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act is more effective in improving job outcomes than is access to training funded by this act. Job search assistance aims to reduce the time an individual is unemployed and helps individuals assess their skill sets and address other barriers that may be preventing them from entering the workforce Along with existing dedicated Federal programs industry-led and nonprofit-led sectoral training programs have shown significant promise in randomized studies. Sectoral training programs are industry-specific programs that seek to provide training for skilled entry-level positions within a given industry. Currently these programs tend to be small focusing on a particular industry in a particular city and are run by nonprofit groups in cooperation with State and local governments. A randomized study of three sectoral training Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Box The Federation of Advanced Manufacturing Education Industry collaboration is one solution to the shortage of skilled workers in a given area. An example of a program built on this model is the Federation for Advanced Manufacturing Education ( FAME ) which is a cooperative organization of employers that seeks to build advanced manufacturing career pathways. Businesses form partnerships with local community colleges to provide a specialized degree program whereby students can work at the businesses while completing their associate degrees. FAME began as a successful partnership between Toyota and Bluegrass Community and Technical College in Lexington Kentucky. A company sponsors a student in the Advanced Manufacturing Technician ( AMT ) program. The student goes to classes two days a week and works at the sponsoring company three days a week. Once the student completes the associate degree they have the option to continue full time at the company or to continue on to pursue a four-year engineering degree The first class completed the AMT program in and FAME has expanded rapidly to additional sites. There are currently FAME operations in eight States with multiple operations in the original state Kentucky where FAME now coordinates directly with and receives support from the State government programs found that they were effective at increasing participants earnings ( Maguire et al. ) A follow-up study of one of these programs found that the gains persisted and may have grown over time ( Roder and Elliot ) Other randomized studies of sectoral training programs have also shown evidence of effectiveness ( Hendra et al. ; Fein and Hamadyk ) The sector-based approach guides the Administration s proposed Industry Recognized Apprenticeship Program which seeks to expand the apprenticeship model into sectors that have not traditionally used it. The private sector has taken note of the success of the sector-based approach and has launched similar programs to address industry-level worker shortages ( see box ) One option is to further scale up these existing industry-led sectoral training programs through Federal support Finally it could be beneficial to incentivize the private sector to invest in training. Private firms generally have a disincentive to provide training in general human capital because trained workers can be poached by other firms before the firm has recovered the cost of training. Yet even with this risk of employee poaching firms will provide training in general skills when the labor market is tight and new workers are difficult to find. Firms also provide general training as a fringe benefit in order to improve employee retention. Financial incentives in the form of subsidies for private sector training are less likely to be effective if they end up subsidizing training that the firms would have | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM provided even in the absence of the subsidy. The difficulty is to design incentives to encourage more private sector training without subsidizing training that would otherwise occur in any case The Administration is working to better highlight the efforts of the private sector and to show the return on those investments to a company s bottom line as well as to a worker s increased wages and career opportunities. Through the Administration s Pledge to America s Workers companies commit to provide a given number of training or reskilling opportunities for their current and future workforces over a five-year period. To date more than companies have pledged to provide over million new opportunities for American students and workers Limiting Geographic Frictions in the Labor Market Although labor market data are often presented for the Nation as a whole the national labor market is a collection of local labor markets. Available jobs and available workers do not always match geographically. Economic theory predicts that wages will rise in areas with worker shortages and fall in areas with surpluses of workers causing workers to move to the areas with worker shortages. Yet moving itself can be very costly which limits the degree to which migration can alleviate local labor market imbalances ; but government policies and regulations can impose additional barriers and costs to moving to a different labor market For over a year monthly JOLTS data have illustrated the strong job market for people looking for work. The JOLTS data show that at a national level there are more job openings than unemployed workers. For the first time the BLS is producing experimental State JOLTS estimates that also allow for an analysis of job openings at the State level. These new data demonstrate that not only are there more job openings than unemployed workers nationwide but this is true in most States as well ( see figure ) Comparing the number of unemployed people in each state from BLS data on State-level employment and unemployment to the number of job openings shows that as of the second quarter of there were more job openings than people looking for work in States and the District of Columbia.21 Although State-level labor markets appear to generally be strong some are in greater need of additional workers than others. The very best States in which to be looking for work where there were fewer than unemployed workers per job openings include many States in the Midwest and the Great Plains. The States where there are as many or more unemployed workers as job openings are Alaska Arizona Connecticut Kentucky Louisiana Mississippi and New Mexico The experimental JOLTS data are monthly. However due to the limited sample size they are calculated as three-month moving averages. The analysis here uses the June experimental State JOLTS data which correspond to the average of the months in the second quarter Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    (   * !   ) ( ' *    * -&    *    ) $ ) " Q2 :  ( U.S. total = )  *  !  / *   / *   / *   / *   *  # $ " #  *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * )  $ "    #  * !      $  ) /.   # *   *   Percentage share  *    ) /   * '  / $ * )    * /   #  * )   " * "  # $   ( *  $ ' $ /4  ./ $ * )   ) * /   .&    /2 )    )    *   /2 )    )    *  / #   '0  $  $ ) / * '  /     # * )    / #   * //   ' $ ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM In addition to booming job markets in many States geographic mobility has reached the lowest rate in at least years declining by percentage point over the year to percent in ( see figure ) This decline in mobility which could be exacerbated by government policies that limit worker mobility is one reason for the persistence of geographic disparities in the labor market. Although not discussed in this chapter unnecessary regulations that drive up housing costs can also limit mobility into certain metropolitan areas with strong labor markets ( see chapter ) Reforming Occupational Licensing Occupational licensing requirements impose an additional cost on entering a given occupation. There is a wide range of licensed occupations including plumbers electricians florists and barbers ( Meyer ) Some occupational licensing restrictions can be justified to protect the public but the existing requirements for many occupations in many States include jobs that pose no physical or financial risk to the public. Instead licensing is being used as a barrier to entry into a profession to artificially inflate wages for those already in the profession. A report from the Federal Trade Commission found that the share of American workers holding an occupational license has increased fivefold from less than percent in the 1950s to percent in ( FTC ) Obtaining the needed license and paying the necessary fees is a barrier that can be particularly prohibitive for those with low incomes negatively affecting these workers by preventing them from entering professions where they would earn more even if they have the skill set to do the job. A report from the Obama Administration supports this claim finding that the licensing landscape in the United States generates substantial costs for workers ( White House ) One such cost is how licensing adversely affects worker mobility. Workers in licensed occupations see the largest reductions in interstate migration rates ( Johnson and Kleiner ) Absent State agreements to recognize outside licenses State-by-State occupational licensing laws prevent workers from being able to provide their services across State lines or move to another State to work in a licensed profession Johnson and Kleiner ( ) find that the relative interstate migration rate of workers in occupations with State-specific licensing requirements is percent lower than that of workers in other occupations. There are substantial differences in relative interstate migration rates across occupations particularly for jobs frequently held by middle- to low-income people. Teachers have one of the lowest relative interstate migration rates ( about percent ) Electricians have a reduced relative interstate migration rate of percent while barbers and cosmetologists have such a rate of percent. Occupational licensing can also serve as a barrier to upward economic mobility for low- to middle-income Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM workers because it is associated with hefty administrative charges test fees tuition payments and education and time requirements Occupational licensing also affects the employment of military spouses Military spouses had an unemployment rate of percent in more than four times greater than the U.S. overall employment rate at that time ( Meyer ) This is partially because military spouses regularly move across State lines and those in licensed occupations are required to renew or reissue their licenses after moving to a new State. Additionally military spouses are more likely to be licensed than the civilian population and they are times more likely to move across State lines in a given year. ( For more details see chapter of the Economic Report to the President. ) Overall the evidence indicates that occupational licensing limits workers ability to enter professions or move to new areas with greater opportunity The regulation of occupational licenses is primarily at the State level so there are limited options at the Federal level to reform occupational licensing other than recognizing and supporting best practices at the State level The Administration is currently evaluating these options. States can enter reciprocal agreements to recognize out-of-State licenses work to standardize the licensing requirements for a given occupation across States and expedite license applications for military spouses and others who hold an out-of-State license ( FTC ) Opportunity Zones : Matching People Communities and Capital Historically areas with less income grew faster than areas with more income leading to convergence in income per capita. Since the late 20th century however this convergence has stopped or has possibly been reversed ( Nunn Parsons and Shambaugh ) There are many explanations for this change such as a slowdown in individuals with lower incomes moving to higher-income areas for better-paying jobs or businesses moving to lower-wage regions that have lower input costs ( Ganong and Shoag ) The Opportunity Zone provision of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act seeks to counter the solidification of geographic economic inequality by bringing capital to low-income communities through tax cuts on capital gains. It contrasts with antipoverty policies that increase taxes to fund transfers to lowincome households giving them income but not necessarily spurring opportunity in their communities. Under the Opportunity Zone provision an investor who realizes a capital gain can defer and lower taxes on the gain if he or she invests it in an Opportunity Zone Fund. The fund in turn invests in businesses or properties in census tracts that have been selected as Opportunity Zones. If the investor keeps his or her money in the fund for at least years they receive the additional benefit of paying no taxes on the gains earned while invested in the fund. In doing so the provision acts like a means-tested reduction in the | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM cost of capital where the cost reduction only occurs in selected communities that meet the provision s eligibility requirements The design of the Opportunity Zone provision improves upon that of the Federal New Markets Tax Credit ( New Markets ) which has arguably been the most significant Federal place-based incentive in recent years. Investors must complete an extensive application to the Department of the Treasury for approval before receiving these tax credits. In the allocation round only percent of applicants received credits ( CRS ) This highlights another limitation of New Markets it has a cap. In the Treasury only awarded $ billion in credits. In addition recipients of credits must adhere to substantial compliance and reporting requirements ( CDFI Fund ) The complexity of participating in New Markets and the limit on total allocations have led some to conclude that New Markets is unable to induce large-scale investment that can revitalize entire communities ( Bernstein and Hassett ) The Opportunity Zone incentive in contrast has no application process or limitation on scale ( CRS ) Within broad guidelines the incentive lets investors act upon their insights about where to invest in what to invest and how much to invest. The Opportunity Zone statute also carves out roles for State and local governments and communities. States nominated tracts to become Opportunity Zones and the Department of the Treasury made the final designation and ensured that the tracts met the income or poverty criteria in the statute. Many areas have incorporated the incentive into their broader development initiatives. Alabama for example adopted a new law to align its development incentives with the Opportunity Zone incentive Today there are Opportunity Zones across all States the District of Columbia and five U.S. possessions ( CDFI Fund ) The zones are home to nearly million Americans and on average they have a poverty rate nearly twice as high as the average census tract Opportunity Zones : Evidence of Investor Interest and Activity Early evidence indicates considerable investor interest in Opportunity Zones The National Council of State Housing Agencies maintains an Opportunity Zone Fund Directory. As of July the directory listed funds seeking to a raise a total of $ billion ( NCSHA ) The funds are diverse with two-thirds having a regional focus and the rest a national focus. Most funds plan to invest in commercial development such as multifamily residential or in hospitality but more than half also plan to invest in economic or small business development Evidence from real estate markets also suggests that the Opportunity Zone incentive is getting attention from investors. Data from Real Capital Analytics which tracks commercial real estate properties and portfolios valued at $ million or more show that year-over-year growth in development site acquisitions in zones surged by more than percent late in after the Department of the Treasury had designated the zones greatly exceeding Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM growth in the rest of the United States. Similarly Sage Langen and Van de Minne ( ) using the same data find that a zone designation led to a percent increase in the price of redevelopment properties and a percent increase in the price of vacant development sites Sage Langen and Van de Minne ( ) only find appreciation effects for particular property types and they conclude that the Opportunity Zone incentive is having limited economic spillovers in communities. Their data however only include very particular types of properties commercial properties valued at less than $ million. An analysis by Zillow which uses many more properties and transactions suggests that the zone incentive is bringing a broader economic stimulus. The year-over-year change in the average sales price for properties in zones reached over percent in late compared with about percent in tracts that met the zone eligibility criteria but that were not selected ( Casey ) The greater appreciation in zones suggests that buyers expect zone tracts to become more economically-vibrant in years to come Expanding Opportunities for Ex-Offenders Another barrier to employment is a prior criminal conviction and not only because incarceration lowers the available labor force. Having a job can help someone just released from prison reenter society and it reduces the likelihood of recidivism. There is evidence that strong job growth particularly in manufacturing and construction can reduce recidivism ( Schnepel ) Guo Seshadri and Taber ( ) estimate that an increase of percent in county-level construction employment decreases the county s working age population s recidivism rate by percent In December President Trump signed into law the historic First Step Act which is aimed at establishing a fairer justice system for all reducing recidivism and making communities across America safer. Since this reform was signed into law percent of the individuals who have had their sentences reduced have been African American Also since then the Trump Administration has taken steps to provide individuals leaving prison with the opportunities and resources needed to obtain employment. This Second Chance hiring initiative is an effort coordinated across the Federal government States the private sector and the nonprofit sector. Nonprofits serve a crucial role in assisting former prisoners to obtain transitional housing counseling and education. Across the Federal government the Department of Justice and Bureau of Prisons have launched the Ready to Work Initiative which links employers to former prisoners ; the Department of Education is expanding an initiative that will help people in prison receive Pell Grants ; the Department of Labor has issued grants to support comprehensive reentry programs that promote work as well as grants to expand fidelity bonds to employers to assist formerly incarcerated individuals with job placement ; and the Office of Personnel Management has made the | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Federal government s job posting website accessible to people serving in and released from Federal prisons Americans are reaping the benefits of the First Step Act. Data in this area are scarce but a number of positive anecdotes have been reported in the news For instance Troy Powell a former prisoner and guest at the White House had served years in prison. When he was released in February under the First Step Act he found a job at a lumber company in less than days. A Cleveland native Andre Badley was released from a Federal prison in February and within three months was hired as a driver for Amazon. The number of such success stories will continue to grow as more inmates who have served their time and pose no danger to society are released and as more is done to prepare them for employment and a second chance The Administration s initiatives in this area like the First Step Act and Second Chance hiring can help assist former prisoners seeking to reenter society as productive members of the community meet the needs of businesses that may be struggling to find workers and reduce crime across American communities Supporting Working Families Since the start of the Trump Administration supporting working families has been a top priority. In December the President signed into law the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act which increased the reward for working by doubling the Child Tax Credit and increasing its refundability. The President signed into law the largest-ever increase in funding for the Child Care and Development Block Grants expanding access to high-quality childcare for nearly families across the country. In addition President Trump was the first president to include nationwide paid parental leave in his annual budget The President has continued to support pro-growth pro-family policies including those that address obstacles that mothers of young children may face in entering the labor force. Figure shows the labor force participation rate of mothers and fathers with young children. For fathers with a youngest child age or under the participation rate fell from percent in to percent in A similar decline occurred among fathers of older children Though participation rates have fallen the vast majority of fathers continue to either work or look for work. This high level of participation contrasts with participation among mothers with young children. For mothers with a child under age participation increased from percent to percent between and This increase was driven largely by shifting cultural norms as well as welfare reforms that rewarded and required work for those receiving welfare benefits and tax credits. However participation rates stopped growing in Today the participation rate of mothers with a child under is percent just percentage point higher than their rate years earlier. Moreover the gender Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "     *   *     -/ $  $  / $ * )    /   ( * ) "    ) /.     "  * !   * ) " ./   # $ '   $ )  * # * '    )     * !    0'/  Labor force participation rate ( percent )   '  Male  (  '   (  '   *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * )  * /   #   "  * !   / #  * ) " ./   # $ '   $  # * )  $ )   ) / #   ) '4   $ * ' * " $   '   # $ '  )    * +/    # $ '  )  *  ./  # $ '  )  ' $ $ ) "  $ )  / #   (  # * # * '     / #    0'/     * ) /    ) '4    0'/.   /2 )  / #   "  * !    )      $ )  '0     gap in participation rates stands at percentage points for parents of children under age and at percentage points for parents of children age to Some parents opt out of the labor force on the basis of personal preference. For others especially mothers with young children the inefficiently high cost of childcare may play a role in their decision to remain out of the labor force. Thus addressing this barrier to work by reducing inefficiently high childcare costs could potentially bring more parents into the formal labor force and increase economic efficiency As documented in a recent CEA report ( 2019e ) regulations that do not improve the health and safety of the children increase childcare costs and these inefficiently high costs can weaken incentives to work. For the average State as of the average hourly price of center-based childcare for a child age represented percent of the hourly median wage. Evidence on the responsiveness of work status and hours to childcare costs suggests that some of these parents would enter the labor force or increase their work hours in response to a reduction in the cost of childcare. The Administration is focused on ensuring that more parents have safe options for their children while simultaneously giving parents more opportunities to work Globally the Administration is working to expand female labor opportunities as discussed in box | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Box The Women s Global Development and Prosperity Initiative and Female Labor Force Participation Globally A wide range of circumstances can have an effect on a woman s decision about whether to participate in the labor force. For example some women desire to partake in productive activities outside the formal labor market such as taking care of children or family members. At the same time increasing female labor force participation by offering opportunities to women not in the labor force who might otherwise elect to participate could have a substantial effect on a country s economy Among the developed countries that belong to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) in the United States had a female labor force participation rate higher than of OECD countries ( the most recently available data for OECD-wide comparisons are from ) The lowest rate within the OECD was percent ( Turkey ) a full percentage points below the United States. Iceland had the highest female participation rate of all OECD countries about percentage points higher than the United States. Although the United States has a relatively high female participation rate compared with other OECD nations there may yet be opportunities for additional growth given the higher rates in some peer countries ( figure 2-ii ) A number of factors can likely explain the differences in female labor force participation rates among developed countries in the OECD including policy differences cultural factors and demographics. For example Blau and Kahn ( ) estimate that almost percent of the decrease in women s prime-age participation in the United States relative to other OECD countries between and can be attributed to differences in family-related policies such as those relating to childcare For developing countries too there could be a range of reasons that women may opt against or be prevented from pursuing formal employment opportunities including but not limited to discriminatory laws and practices a failure to enforce relevant laws and social and cultural practices that limit female employment opportunities or in other instances a desire to participate in other productive activities that are outside the formal labor market Nevertheless research has found that increasing opportunities for women to participate in the workforce has several potential positive outcomes. For example the World Bank has suggested that increasing opportunities for women s workforce participation increases political stability and reduces the likelihood of violent conflict ( Crespo-Sancho ) For low-income countries increasing female labor force participation rates also creates an opportunity for countries to increase the size of their workforce and achieve additional economic growth. When women are empowered economically they reinvest back into their families and communities producing a multiplier effect that spurs economic growth and can potentially create societies that are more peaceful Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "  $ $   (  '    *   *     -/ $  $  / $ * )    /     '  /         * ) /-4  Percent  *        ./  / $ ./ $   * /   $ " ) /.   "  Accelerating women s economic empowerment is critical to ensuring that developing countries can achieve economic self-reliance and transition from being aid partners to trade partners. To this end the Trump Administration established the Women s Global Development and Prosperity ( W-GDP ) initiative which seeks to spur growth in developing countries by promoting economic empowerment among women. W-GDP aims to economically empower million women in the developing world by through U.S. government activities private-public partnerships and a new innovative fund W-GDP focuses on three pillars : vocational education for women empowering women to succeed as entrepreneurs and eliminating barriers that prevent women from fully participating in the economy. W-GDP s third pillar addresses legal and cultural employer practices and social and cultural barriers that preclude women s economic empowerment in developing countries. On legal barriers specifically W-GDP focuses on five foundational factors : economic empowerment on the basis of five principles : ( ) accessing institutions ( ) building credit ( ) owning and managing property ( ) traveling freely and ( ) working in the same jobs and sectors as males. There is much evidence showing that amending or passing laws in these categories results in measurable economic benefits both on an individual level and also on a global scale | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM One estimate shows that eliminating discriminatory laws and practices ( both formal and informal ) could have added $ trillion to the global economy percent of global gross domestic product ( GDP ) in ( Ferrant and Thim ) In terms of gender parity in the workforce a McKinsey & Company report estimates that if barriers to participation in the workforce were removed and women chose to participate in the economy identically to men up to $ trillion would be added to global GDP ( or percent ) in ( Woetzel et al. ) This includes adding $ trillion to India $ trillion to the Middle East and North Africa $ trillion to Latin America and $ billion to Sub-Saharan Africa Additionally a World Bank ( ) report found that strengthening land rights has a positive impact on female farmer productivity. Evidence using data on women s property rights spanning countries over a period of years shows that legal reforms was correlated with higher female labor force participation and higher rates of women in formal ( wage-earning ) labor in addition to higher educational enrollment Overall the W-GDP initiative is backed by economic research and evidence-based policy recommendations that would help empower women around the globe and boost global GDP Combating the Opioid Crisis Another barrier to labor market success for many are the high rates of drug addiction and overdoses. Beyond deaths from opioids research suggest that the abuse of prescription opioids decreases labor force participation ( Krueger ) The CEA estimates that the full cost of the opioid crisis was $ trillion over the four-year period from to ( CEA 2019f ) This cost estimate includes the value of lives lost and also higher criminal justice costs lost labor productivity and higher healthcare and treatment costs. See chapter for a discussion of the trends in opioid overdose deaths and steps the Administration has taken to address the opioid crisis Conclusion The U.S. labor market is strong even as the economy continues its record expansion. The Trump Administration s agenda of tax cuts and deregulation has contributed to a strong demand for labor and an increasing labor supply We would expect to find the largest increases in labor demand in the industries that benefit the most from deregulatory actions but further research is required to confirm this. As unemployment falls to record low rates groups that were previously left behind in the economy s recovery are beginning to see substantial benefits in job opportunities and income growth. The increase in labor market earnings is pulling millions of families out of poverty and off Economic Growth Benefits Historically Disadvantaged Americans | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM public assistance showing how economic growth likely benefits historically disadvantaged Americans more than expanded government programs However there are still barriers that prevent lower-income workers from realizing the full benefits of the strong labor market such as skill mismatches geographic mismatches occupational licensing distressed communities prior criminal convictions childcare affordability and drug addiction. These barriers prevent many from finding jobs. The Administration is seeking to reduce these barriers to both labor demand and supply by focusing on improving worker training reforming occupational licensing incentivizing private investment in disadvantaged areas facilitating the successful reentry of ex-offenders assisting working families with access to high-quality and affordable childcare and reducing the impact of the opioid crisis. Successful reforms in these areas will help to grow the economy by increasing the number and productivity of workers. The Administration s current and future economic agenda will focus on ensuring that all American households can benefit from strong sustained economic growth | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM x Chapter Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy The Trump Administration s focus on deregulation has led to historic reductions in costly regulation. The Administration has cut more than two significant regulations for each new significant regulation it has finalized while maintaining critical protections for workers public health safety and the environment This fundamental shift in how the Federal government views regulation breaks with the decades-long accumulation of regulatory mandates that place high costs on the U.S. economy The Council of Economic Advisers estimates that after to years this new approach to Federal regulation will have raised real incomes by $ per household per year by increasing choice productivity and competition Twenty notable Federal deregulatory actions alone will be saving American consumers and businesses about $ per household per year after they go into full effect. These results show that the Trump Administration s deregulatory actions across a vast array of American industries are among the most significant in U.S. history Beyond eliminating outdated or costly regulations established by prior administrations the Trump Administration has also sharply reduced the rate at which new Federal regulations are introduced. The ongoing introduction of these costly regulations had previously been subtracting an additional percent per year from real incomes thereby giving the false impression that the American economy was fundamentally incapable of anything better than slow growth in real incomes and gross domestic product. Now consumers and 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM small businesses no longer need to dread the steadily accumulating costs of new Federal regulations Concurrently with the Presidential inauguration real growth in gross domestic product began outperforming experts forecasts where it was previously underperforming them. This should not come as a surprise because studies that evaluate regulation across countries show that all else being equal countries that deregulated experienced more economic growth The new regulatory approach also significantly reduces consumer prices in many markets such as those for prescription drugs health insurance and telecommunications while it prevents price increases in other markets Furthermore deregulation removes mandates from employers which especially benefits smaller businesses that unlike their large companies do not typically have a team of in-house lawyers and regulatory compliance staff to help them understand and comply with onerous regulations By increasing choice productivity and competition the Trump Administration s regulatory reforms have cut red tape for American businesses and have extended them greater freedom to create jobs. Given the Administration s ambitious plans for this year deregulatory benefits for consumers job creators and the economy are bound to grow further in T he Trump Administration s focus on deregulation has led to historic reductions in costly regulation while protecting workers public health safety and the environment. In January President Trump signed Executive Order Reducing Regulations and Controlling Regulatory Costs which is the cornerstone of the Administration s regulatory reform success. Executive Order requires Federal agencies to eliminate two regulations for every new regulation issued ( 2-for-1 ) and has created incremental regulatory cost caps. After Executive Order was issued in fiscal year ( FY ) there were significant deregulatory actions and only significant regulatory actions ( 4-for-1 ) In FY there were significant deregulatory actions and only significant regulatory actions ( 4-for-1 ) In FY there were significant deregulatory actions and only significant regulatory | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM actions ( 2-for-1 ) In total the Trump Administration has exceeded its 2-for-1 goal though many critics thought that even 2-for-1 would not happen The Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) previously looked at regulation across countries finding that all else being equal countries that deregulated experienced more economic growth ( CEA 2018a ) We then related crosscountry regulatory indices to potential regulatory developments in the United States and estimated that regulatory reform had the potential to increase U.S gross domestic product ( GDP ) by at least to percent over a decade This chapter reexamines the impact of the Administration s regulatory reform agenda now that it has been more completely implemented. It also takes an alternative approach to the CEA s earlier analysis and estimates the aggregate economic effects of deregulation by examining specific Federal rules and by accounting for the unique circumstances of the industries targeted by the rules in addition to the rules and industries similarly analyzed in previous CEA reports.1 Our analysis utilizes an economic framework that situates each industry in a larger economy that includes market distortions from taxes imperfect competition and other sources. To date we have conducted industry-specific analyses for deregulatory actions The primary subject of this chapter is the impact of regulation and deregulation on nationwide real income. In contrast guided by the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) Federal agencies and OMB s Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs ( OIRA ) prepare and discuss related calculations of the benefits and costs of Federal regulations that do not typically calculate effects on GDP or nationwide real incomes. GDP and real income are of independent interest because they are important aspects of national accounting and they are included in the budget forecasts made by OMB the Social Security and Medicare Trustees and the Congressional Budget Office to name a few.2 Moreover economists and journalists routinely use GDP and real income as familiar metrics of the performance of the economy ( Brynjolfsson Eggers and Gannamaneni ) The CEA estimates that after to years regulatory reform will have raised real incomes by $ per household per year.3 Twenty notable Federal deregulatory actions alone will be saving American consumers and businesses about $ billion per year after they go into full effect. They will increase real ( after-inflation ) incomes by about percent. Many of the most notable deregulatory efforts in American history such as the deregulation of airlines The CEA previously released research on some of the topics covered in this chapter ; the text that follows builds on these reports ( CEA 2019a 2019b 2019c ) Estimates of the welfare effects of deregulation are therefore not enough by themselves to know among other things how GDP forecasts should be revised to account for the economic impact of deregulation Throughout this chapter all dollar amounts are in dollars unless noted otherwise Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM and trucking that began during the Carter Administration did not have such large aggregate effects Regulatory reform not only reduces or eliminates costly regulations established by prior Administrations but also sharply reduces the rate at which costly new Federal regulations are introduced. The ongoing introduction of costly regulations had previously been subtracting an additional percent a year from real incomes thereby giving the false impression that the American economy was fundamentally incapable of anything better than slow growth Now new regulations are budgeted and kept to a minimum In the first section of this chapter we review the trends in Federal regulation before and after regulatory reform. We next turn to describing our general analytical approach and how we selected deregulatory actions for analysis The subsequent sections discuss the industry-specific deregulatory actions with the largest aggregate effects. We estimate large reductions in regulatory costs in the market for Internet access healthcare markets labor markets and financial markets. Next we estimate the additional cost-savings from reversing the trend of adding new regulations and regulatory costs each year. We also explain why some pre-2017 regulations carried disproportionate costs and we offer a brief conclusion Reversing the Regulatory Trend Before turning to industry-specific analyses we provide an overview of the recent history of Federal regulation. This history is one of rapid growth until when the growth was halted by regulatory reform. Between and Federal agencies added an average of economically significant regulatory actions each year ( figure ) In and the average dropped to less than Figure excludes rules that were deregulatory actions. As in previous years in and a subset of the economically significant rules included in figure are considered transfer rules and are not considered by OMB/OIRA to be either regulatory or deregulatory actions. When the transfer rules are excluded in and the average number of economically significant regulatory actions falls to The economically significant rules shown in figure are those the Federal agencies and OMB/OIRA expected to have an aggregate impact on the economy of at least $ million or to adversely affect the economy in a material way ( Executive Order ) Figure also shows the total numbers of significant rules which include economically significant rules and other significant rules that meet part of the definition for economic significance or are important for other reasons described in Executive Order Including economically significant and other significant rules Federal agencies added an average of significant regulatory actions per year between and ; the average fell to in and after regulatory reform | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Significant Final Rules by Presidential Year Excluding Deregulatory Actions Economically significant rules Number of final rules Significant rules Sources : George Washington University Regulatory Studies Center ; Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs ; CEA calculations Note : Presidential years begin in February and end in January of the following year. Rule counts for and exclude rules considered economically significant deregulatory actions. Before we estimate one economically significant deregulatory action per year Last year the CEA discussed in depth the cumulative economic impact of regulatory actions on the U.S. economy and explained why the regulatory whole is greater than the sum of its parts ( CEA 2019b ) Based on the annual accounting of rules published in OMB s annual Reports to Congress we found that regulatory costs grew by an average of $ billion each year from through However OMB s annual Reports for only included rules with fully quantified cost-benefit analyses. Over this same period there were just over economically significant rules ; including other significant rules increases the count to almost By definition the regulatory actions expected to have the largest effects on the economy are included in the count of economically significant rules. However this focus misses the sheer bulk of Federal regulation This year we use textual analysis of the Code of Federal Regulations ( CFR ) to provide a broader and longer perspective on the cumulative regulatory burden. The CFR lists all regulations issued by Federal agencies and departments that are currently in force at the time of its publication ; it is updated annually RegData is a database applying textual analysis to the CFR that measures the restrictions imposed by the regulations based on the number of times words such as shall and must appear ( Al-Ubaydli and McLaughlin ) Figure shows the RegData index of regulatory restrictions from through The total number of regulatory restrictions in the CFR nearly tripled between ( the earliest available data ) and increasing from Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Regulatory Restrictions by All Agencies Restrictions in the Code of Federal Regulations ( thousands ) Sources : Code of Federal Regulations ; Mercatus Center RegData to almost million. Aside from a few isolated year-to-year declines the trend was steadily upward through From through the trend flattened and began to reverse showing the first declines in regulatory restrictions that have been sustained for more than a single year. The turnaround in the growth of regulatory restrictions parallels the turnaround in the growth of regulatory costs that the CEA documented last year ( CEA 2019b ) Last year we reviewed estimates of the total regulatory costs in the United States that ranged from almost half a trillion to over a trillion dollars. Putting those estimates together with the total number of regulatory restrictions implies that each restriction is on average associated with somewhere between $ and $ million of regulatory costs Because deregulatory actions might involve words like shall and must the RegData index of restrictions shown in figure can not distinguish between the impact of regulatory and deregulatory actions. To explore this we searched the text of two Final Rules published in the Federal Register the regulatory action and the deregulatory action on short-term health insurance ( discussed in more detail below and in CEA 2019a ) The Federal Register text of the deregulatory action was longer and included restrictions compared to only regulatory restrictions in the text of the regulatory action. It is not known to what extent this pattern generalizes to the RegData index of restrictions in the CFR. It seems likely that if it were possible to adjust | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM for restrictions included in the deregulatory actions taken since the index in figure would show an even steeper decline beginning in Figure includes restrictions due to Federal agencies covered by Executive Order as well as restrictions due to independent Federal agencies that are not subject to Executive Order accounting. In recent years restrictions due to independent agencies account for about percent of all restrictions. Since the number of restrictions due to independent agencies has grown by about percent. Even though the independent agencies were not subject to Executive Order accounting starting in the growth in their regulatory restrictions began to decline In addition to regulations Federal agencies also issue guidance documents that advise the public about the agency s approach to adjudication or enforcement. Figure does not include regulatory restrictions stemming from guidance documents because they are not part of the CFR. Moreover guidance documents are non-binding so in principle they can not impose binding restrictions. However a common concern is that agencies can treat guidance documents as binding in practice. Estimates suggest that some agencies issue anywhere from twenty to two-hundred pages of guidance documents for every page of regulations they issue ( Parrillo ) To the extent those guidance documents impose regulatory restrictions that are binding in practice the restrictions should ideally be added to the count of regulatory restrictions in figure Although not reflected in figure Federal agencies guidance documents are subject to Executive Order accounting of the 2-for-1 requirement and regulatory cost caps. Significant guidance documents that increase costs are defined to be regulatory actions ; guidance documents that yield cost savings are defined to be deregulatory actions Figure shows how CFR regulatory restrictions on the manufacturing industry has grown over time until regulatory reform. RegData uses further text analysis to determine the applicability of the regulatory restrictions to specific industries. The method uses search strings to identify phrases related to each industry ( Al-Ubaydli and McLaughlin ) The resulting measure shows that regulatory restrictions on manufacturing remained roughly constant from the late 1970s until From through the number of regulatory restrictions almost quadrupled from a little over to more than Again starting in the upward trend reverses ; the index shows sustained declines in regulatory restrictions on manufacturing from and The regulatory reform results to date are notable accomplishments given that it is difficult and time-consuming to identify opportunities for appropriate deregulatory actions. In a follow-up to Executive Order in February President Trump signed Executive Order Enforcing the Regulatory Reform Agenda which requires each Federal agency to designate a regulatory reform officer to oversee deregulatory initiatives and policies. In an innovative response to meet this challenge the Department of Health and Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Regulatory Restrictions on Manufacturing Restrictions in the Code of Federal Regulations ( thousands ) Sources : Code of Federal Regulations ; Mercatus Center RegData Human Services began exploring the use of artificial intelligence and machinelearning algorithms to identify opportunities for regulatory reform. As an example of the project s potential the department discovered that percent of its regulations created before have never been updated Because regulatory reform takes time Federal agencies efforts that began in are continuing to unfold. As a result important pending and inprogress deregulatory actions can not be included in this chapter. For example our analysis does not include the deregulatory actions related to emission and fuel economy standards for automobiles ; once finalized the SAFE rule might be the largest deregulatory effort to date. Other important deregulatory efforts include the Department of Energy s reforms of regulatory restrictions on residential dishwashers and lightbulbs Analyzing Regulatory Reform The Trump Administration uses regulatory cost caps to reduce the cumulative burden of Federal regulation. In addition to regulation-specific cost-benefit tests the cost caps induce agencies to view all their regulations as a portfolio which is more congruent with the experiences of the households and businesses subject to them. While pursuing their agency-specific missions the regulatory cost caps provide the framework for agencies to evaluate regulatory | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM costs to consider deregulatory actions and to set priorities among new regulatory actions The CEA uses a pragmatic streamlined approach to analyze the costs that regulatory actions impose on consumers small businesses and other economic actors. This approach requires making estimates of a small set of key parameters that describe the market that is primarily affected by the regulatory action in question. We follow a standard approach in cost-benefit analysis and rely on revealed preferences in markets ( OMB ) For example the price-elasticity of demand which shows how consumers change their consumption in response to a price change reflects the value consumers place on the good or service relative to their next-best alternatives. For this reason the price-elasticity of demand serves as one of the sufficient statistics to analyze the impact of a policy change on consumer welfare within the regulated industry ( Chetty ) Detailed applications and a sensitivity analysis of our approach are given in our earlier reports ( CEA 2019a 2019b 2019c ) To account for effects outside the regulated industry the analysis again takes a streamlined approach that does not require a fully detailed model of the economy ( known as a structural general equilibrium model ) but instead relies on an implementable formula that provides a good approximation of the excess burden that a regulatory action imposes on the markets for labor and capital ( Goulder Parry and Williams ; Parry Williams and Goulder ; Goulder and Williams ; Dahlby ; CEA 2019b ) For example anticompetitive regulation reduces the demand for labor and capital in the regulated industry and thereby reduces the aggregate quantities of those production factors. Marginal excess burdens in labor and capital markets are translated into an additional increment to aggregate output by dividing them by our percent estimate of the marginal tax wedge which is broadly interpreted Our analysis is not as detailed as the regulatory impact analyses that Federal agencies conduct to comply with Executive Order ( OMB ) .This chapter is independent of the rulemaking process. Instead this chapter contributes to the CEA s mission as established by Congress in the Employment Act of to offer objective economic advice based on economic research and empirical evidence. Our analysis is consistent with the economic principles that guide cost-benefit analysis including our focus on the key concepts of willingness to pay and opportunity cost Another report ( CEA 2019b ) provides an additional discussion of our approach ; and still another report ( CEA 2019a ) provides a detailed discussion of the methods used to conduct prospective cost-benefit analyses of three of the deregulatory actions considered in this chapter. Our approach complements agencies completed analyses and fills in gaps for example when a regulatory impact analysis was not able to quantify costs or benefits or when a regulatory impact analysis was not required. Note that consistent with standard practice shifts of resources between industries are not counted as a cost or a benefit or a real income effect except to the extent that market prices indicate that the industries put different values on those resources Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM to include implicit taxes and imperfect competition.5 This formula captures general equilibrium interactions that would be left out of an analysis that only considered the impact of the regulatory action in the primary market. OMB s guidance on cost-benefit analysis of federal programs ( Circular A-94 ) recommends analysis of the marginal excess tax burden. To date however for practical reasons the guidelines for regulatory cost accounting for the Executive Order regulatory budget have not required agencies to include the costs imposed on the private sector by excess tax burdens induced by regulatory actions. The analysis in this chapter demonstrates the feasibility and importance of a more complete accounting of regulatory costs including marginal excess tax burdens The economic effects of regulation can be summarized in several ways such as the costs to businesses nationwide costs nationwide benefits or national incomes. The CEA employs three nationwide outcome concepts in this chapter : costs savings net benefits and real income. The distinction between the first two arises because a single regulation can create costs for one segment of the population while it creates a benefit for other segments. We refer to the aggregate of these as the net cost of the regulation which ( aside from sunk startup costs ) is equal to the net benefit of overturning the regulation. We refer to the cost savings of overturning the regulation as the costs imposed on the segment of the population that was harmed by the regulation.6 Real income is similar to GDP except that real income subtracts depreciation and reflects the effects of international terms of trade on the purchasing power of U.S. residents which is an important result of one of the larger deregulatory actions. GDP and real income which can differ from welfare or utility subtract the opportunity costs of the Nation s labor and capital as well as environmental and other nonpecuniary costs. As used in this chapter all these concepts refer only to domestic benefits costs and incomes The primary subject of this chapter is the impact of regulation and deregulation on nationwide real income ; we estimate that over time the impact of regulatory reform will be worth $ per household each year This chapter also estimates the net benefits of deregulatory actions. Some regulatory actions trade private goods for public goods such as environmental quality. With public goods and in other situations where private markets may fail it is necessary to carefully consider the benefits and costs of regulatory actions. Even if the original regulatory action addressed a private market An aggregate increase in a factor of production by unit increases output by its marginal product ( MP ) but the entire output exceeds the net benefit ( i.e. marginal excess burden ) because the production factor has a marginal opportunity cost of supply. The net aggregate benefit of that unit is * MP where is the marginal tax wedge. The additional output is therefore the net aggregate benefit divided by The CEA s concept of cost savings is analogous to the revenue savings from eliminating a Federal program whereas the net benefit would be the difference between revenue savings and the forgone benefits of the program s expenditures | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Box Looking Forward and Backward to Study Regulatory Reform Federal agencies conduct forward-looking or prospective cost-benefit analyses of proposed regulatory and deregulatory actions. In contrast academic policy analysts typically conduct backward-looking or retrospective analyses of past public policies. For example the definitive academic studies of the Airline Deregulation Act of were conducted in the 1980s and early 1990s ( Winston ) The retrospective studies took advantage of data that reflected what actually happened in the deregulated airline market However analysts conducting either prospective or retrospective studies face the challenging task of predicting market outcomes in a world that they can not observe. Analysts in Federal agencies observe current market outcomes that in many cases reasonably approximate the no action baseline of what the world will be like [ in the future ] if the proposed rule is not adopted ( OMB ) But the agency analysts can not look into the future and observe how the proposed rule would change market outcomes. In their prospective studies the agency analysts use economic reasoning and empirical evidence to predict what an unobserved counterfactual world would be like if the proposed rule were adopted. Academics who conduct retrospective analyses of past policies face the opposite challenge. They observe market outcomes in the real world where the policy was implemented but they can not observe the counterfactual world without the policy. The academic policy analysts must also rely on economic reasoning and empirical evidence to predict outcomes in a counterfactual world Academic studies of airline deregulation illustrate the difficulty of doing an accurate retrospective analysis. Although the analysts observed airline market outcomes both before and after deregulation they had to disentangle the effects of deregulation from other changes that affected the airline industry. In particular airline deregulation in happened to coincide with an energy crisis that increased fuel prices and led to higher air fares and lower airline profits. Analysts took a counterfactual approach to isolate the effects of the energy crisis and to estimate the causal effects of deregulation lower air fares and higher profits ( Winston ) When done well prospective and retrospective analyses contribute valuable evidence about regulatory reform. Federal agencies by necessity must conduct prospective analysis of proposed actions. Likewise in this chapter we mainly rely on prospective analysis in order to predict outcomes of the Trump Administration s regulatory reform agenda. Future academic research will undoubtedly conduct retrospective analysis and provide more evidence and new insights about the effects of the regulatory reforms that began in Research on the deregulations of the 1970s and 1980s provides reasons to be both optimistic and cautious about prospective analysis. When Winston compared predictions that deregulation would lead to lower prices to retrospective assessments he described them as surprisingly close Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM even though they were often made more than a decade apart by different researchers ( Winston ) At the same time he noted that the economics profession s predictions failed to quantify the value of reducing the inconvenience costs of airline travel restrictions and grossly underestimated the benefits from deregulation ( Winston ) failure a deregulatory action is still warranted when the regulatory cost savings outweigh the forgone regulatory benefits.7 GDP and real income capture the value of private goods production but these measures do not capture the value of public goods or other important nonpecuniary effects. However when including nonpecuniary costs and benefits that are not part of real income we estimate that the deregulatory actions have a net benefit of more than $ per household each year compared with the previous trend of growing regulatory costs. This gain stems from the implementation of the regulatory reform agenda and from achieving a better balance between the cost of regulations and their societal benefits Because the preparation of this chapter occurred long enough after some of the regulatory or deregulatory actions to enable us to adequately measure relevant market outcomes the CEA could also deviate from the regulatory impact analyses that accompany economically significant rulemaking by relying more heavily on retrospective analysis ( see box ) Deregulatory Actions Considered We sampled deregulatory actions for industry-specific analyses. When applicable we also examined the corresponding regulatory action taken by the previous Administration. The actions were sampled from four broad categories.8 The first category consists of the statutes passed by Congress and signed by President Trump. The second category consists of the Federal rules or guidance overturned under the Congressional Review Act ( CRA ) since January The third category consists of the rules in FY Regulatory Budget ( i.e. the rules covered by Executive Order and finalized during that fiscal year of which there are ) as well as the rules in the FY Regulatory Budget The concept of market failure plays a central role in cost-benefit analysis but the existence of a market failure does not guarantee that the original regulatory action s benefits outweighed its costs. Market failure is a necessary but not sufficient condition for this conclusion. In practice it is not clear that many of the deregulatory actions we consider overturned regulations that addressed market failures In statistical terms the categories are strata and the overall population of interest consists of all economically important Federal regulatory actions taken since January Also see CEA ( 2019b appendix I ) For each rule Congress passed a resolution of disapproval that was signed by President Trump thereby overturning the rule | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM ( OMB ) The fourth category consists of agency guidance documents and rulemaking by independent agencies Because the purpose of this chapter is to estimate the aggregate economic effect of all new regulatory and deregulatory actions as opposed to the effect of an average deregulatory action we designed a sampling procedure to identify the likely largest actions in terms of economic impact. The average effect of the sampled actions is not necessarily a good estimate of the effect of the average unsampled action but that is not our purpose. Rather if the unsampled actions have an average effect that is in the same direction ( but not necessarily magnitude ) as the sampled actions then the total effect of the sampled actions is a conservative estimate of the total effect of all the actions Moreover sampling the potentially larger effects yields a more accurate estimate of the total effect than sampling randomly. The omitted regulatory actions are those with few ( most often zero ) comments from the public and little attention from Congress. These are the regulations where we have more confidence that the effects are comparatively small so that excluding them from the total is less likely to have a large effect on our estimate of the total.11 Our sampling procedure is not perfect. Some regulations attract attention from the public or Congress for various reasons unrelated to their regulatory costs. Our sample includes a few actions that we estimate have comparatively small aggregate effects even though they received many comments from the public. At the same time there might be regulatory actions that will have large aggregate effects but are excluded from our sample because they did not receive many public comments From the first category/stratum we selected sections of two important new Federal laws enacted during the Trump Administration : the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ; and the Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act. From the second category we selected three employment rules that affect a large number of workers as well as the top four economic regulatory actions in terms of number of comments received from the public. From the third category we selected the top six regulatory actions from FY in terms of the number of comments received from the public We selected four regulatory actions from the FY Regulatory Budget that we expected to be among the comment leaders. Three of these contribute to both our estimate of the cost savings from deregulation since and to A number of the rules disapproved under the CRA were part of the FY Regulatory Budget To analogize suppose that you wanted to measure the number of automobiles in a house. It would be unnecessarily inaccurate to take a random sample of rooms because most of the time the garage would not be sampled and therefore most of the time the conclusion would be zero automobiles. Looking exclusively in the garage is the obviously superior alternative to a random sample. That is what the CEA has done with regulations : we looked exclusively at those with a significant chance of having a large economic effect. The formal statistical proof of this conclusion is provided above Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM our estimate of the costs of the growing regulatory state before that.12 A fourth regulatory area with heavy commenting and potentially large costs imposed by the previous Administration relates to emission and fuel economy standards for automobiles. To be conservative we do not include any cost savings from deregulatory actions in this area.13 Finally our sample of regulatory actions includes important guidance at the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) regarding the approval of generic drugs as well as a rule from the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) that received millions of comments from the public. All the comment leaders for FY and FY were deregulations rather than regulations and most of them have had an economically significant nationwide impact.14 And though we have not measured the economic impact of hundreds of other FY and FY Federal rules the aggregate cost savings for the other rules reported in the Federal Register are in the direction of additional cost savings.15 Table lists the regulations and our estimates with of the rows ( Savings arrangements and Joint Employer ) each showing the combined effect of a pair of deregulatory actions so the table represents a total of deregulatory actions.16 Although numbers of pages of regulations are not part of our quantitative analysis it is interesting to note that the regulatory actions and their deregulatory companions in our sample were promulgated with more than pages of Federal statutes the Federal Register or separate agency impact analyses These are the Joint-Employer proposed rule ( RIN 3142-AA13 ) from the National Labor Relations Board ( NLRB ) and the Joint Employer proposed rule ( RIN 1235-AA26 ) from the Department of Labor ( DOL ) Because our analysis does not separate the effects of the DOL guidance and the NLRB proposed rule on joint employers technically we have also selected the NLRB rule even though it is not part of any year s Regulatory Budget. The Fiduciary Rule ( RIN 1210-AB82 ) is in the FY budget but its temporary predecessor rule ( FR ) also appears in the FY Regulatory Budget with many comments The Trump Administration has not yet finalized a rule establishing fuel economy or emissions standards for automobiles. The CEA plans to estimate its economic effects after such a rule is finalized The top commented rules from each of the FY and FY budgets were all deregulatory actions. Most rules in the Regulatory Budget receive no comments Some analysts have concluded that many regulatory impact analyses reported in the Federal Register omit important resource and opportunity costs of regulation ( Harrington Morgenstern and Nelson ; Belfield Bowden and Rodriguez ) which holds on average in our sample. An example is the rule restricting short-term limited duration health insurance while asserting that this regulatory action is not likely to have economic impacts of $ million or more in any one year ( FR ) whereas the CEA ( 2019a ) found the annual costs to exceed $ billion ( times the upper bound cited by the rule ) This suggests that estimates of the costs savings from deregulation based on the Federal Register would be understated although not necessarily relative to the cost additions of regulations As is explained in more detail below the pre-2017 regulatory actions that made table s deregulatory actions necessary are used to estimate the economic effects of a regulatory freeze | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM    '    " '  / *   )    /  /0/ *    / $ * )   ) )  '  (   /  * )    '  )  * (   '  / $  / *     " '  / *        ( ' $ ) "   /-  /     ( ' $ ) "   /-  /        0' ' $ ! $   / $ * )    * ) * ( $    " '  / $ * )  $ / #  $ " #   * ( ( ) /   * '0 (       0' ' $ ! $   / $ * )   *     ( ' * ( ) /   " '  / $ * )    (   $ +/ $ * )   * /  / $ ) "  / #   $    * !   0./ * (  * !   *     )    )    / #   '  * ( ( ) $   / $ * )   $    +/ )   $  ' *  * !    ( ) /.     *    3/-   / $ * )   )  )  ) /   " )    )    $   )    *  ( ) /.   * /   '   /  /0/       /-  (   * /  / $ * )   '       $ /-  / $ * )   " ( ) /.      $ ) "    ) " ( ) /.   ./   ' $ #      /  /  ! *   * )  * ) ( ) /  '   ( ' *     ' $ ! $    /  /   * ' $ / $   '     $ $ $ * )  ! *   * )  * ) ( ) /  '   ( ' *     '    $ $ / $ * )   " '  / $ * )    $      )     !   * -&+ '        $   )   '   )        '  "   $ ) "  / #   /  )     ! *   / ( $ ) $ ) "  * $ ) /  ( ' *   /  /0.    ! $ ) $ / $ * )  * !   ( ' *   )     / $ * )   * !       *  $  / $ * )   '/ #   '  )      '      *       " '  / *    " /    * ) * ( $    " '  / $ * )  $ / #  $ " #   * ( ( ) /   * '0 (   (   /  * )    '  )  * (    $ )    $ ' ' $ * )        $ $ * )  * !   '  ) / / $ ) "    $    ( +/ $ * )  $ )    / $ * )    * !  / #            '   # * -/  (  $ ( $ /    / $ * )  )  )             # $  '   $ / '   )    -/  $ )  $ " #  * ./  ) ./  ' ' ( ) /  *  )   * ) / #   3/ ) $ * )  * !    ) $ / $ * )   $ *    )    '   * !   ' $    $ ' $ /4    /   $   $    '   *  * !    / $ * )     )     * !     &   )    / *  &4      /    ./   ) / $ * )   *   / $ * )    %  /  / *   *  '/ $   )    *    * )  / $ * )    $ $ * )  *   $ $ * )      a b                 '  * !   * /  / $ ) "   )    * ( * / $ ) "  / #   )  ) / ) /   )    )   * !   ./ * $ ) "  ) / ) /    * (         )        *  ) $  / $ * )   ! ! * -/.   #      0/.   )   *     /       / #  )  $ $   '    )   /   )  '/4  / *   *    * ) * ( $    * 2/ #   " '  / *   ' $ !   )    * ) (   * /  / $ * )    /          * /  '  i (   /  r '  / $  / *   r " '  / *  t- )       (   t * /  '  i (   /  r '  / $  / *    r " '  / *  f-  *    ! ! $   * !  ) ! * (  / $ * )   )    " '  / *   ! !  $   * ) ( ) /     * ) /   $ ' $ /4   ! ! $    ' (  & $ ) "   * "  (    )  " ( ) /   ! ! $   $    * !   * ) "        '  '  / $ * )   * /        * *    )    "    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )       -/ ( ) /  * !   '/ #   )   (  )   $    )   ./ $ .&   $ " ) $ ! $  / #   * !    # * -/ )   )  (  ! *  / #  " '  / $ * )   ' '   ) )  '  ! !  /.  * )   '  $ )  * (    * )    / *  / #  )  ./   $ ' ' $ * )   #  ./ $ (  /  ! *  % * $ ) /  ( ' *  '  $ )  '0    ) / $  * ( / $ / $  ! !  /.  * !  * / #      )       " '  / $ * )  a. The estimate for joint employer rules includes anticompetitive effects of other DOL and NLRB regulations b   #    '  '  / $ * )  ! *      (  / #  /  / #   ) $ * )  * !  / #   ! $ ) $ / $ * )  * !   )  ( ' *  ! *     $ ' '    ! * )   '  ! '  # )    %  $   / $ * )  $   * ( ' / Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Consumer Savings on Internet Access Deregulation frequently reduces consumer prices by enhancing competition and productivity. To show how this happens we begin our analysis of specific Federal rules with two examples from the broadband or Internet service provider ( ISP ) industry which includes wireless smartphone service as well as home Internet service over cables telephone lines fiber-optics and satellites Before ISPs were permitted to and often did use and share customer personal data such as Internet browsing history unless the consumer opted out of data sharing. With so many consumers staying with the default sharing option ISPs could earn revenue both from subscriber fees which are tracked by the industry s consumer price index ( CPI ) and from using or sharing customer data. Equivalently the receipt of customer data allowed ISPs to earn the same profits with a lower subscriber fee. In effect consumers paid for their subscription part with money and part by providing personal data In the FCC proposed and finalized a broadband privacy rule requiring ISPs to have consumers to pay by default with only money thus prohibiting the opt-out system and instead requiring the opt-in system. This rule which was likely anticipated well before as the FCC was moving ISPs under the stricter Title II regulation ( see below ) was to go into effect on January However in Congress passed and President Trump signed a resolution of disapproval under the Congressional Review Act to overturn the FCC rule and prevent future Administrations from adopting similar rules This deregulatory action assured market participants that the ISP market would proceed with low subscriber fees. By overturning the rule the action restored the FCC s pre-2016 regulatory approach to protecting customer privacy. Consumers with privacy concerns may opt out and request that their ISP not share their data.17 Overturning the FCC s opt-in rule resulted in lower prices for wired and wireless Internet service as shown by the CPIs graphed in figure Wireless service prices fell at the same time that Congress was considering the resolution of disapproval and wired Internet prices fell a couple of months later Both these declines are about $ per subscriber over the life of the subscription which is similar to independent estimates of the per-subscriber cost of In AT&T introduced its Internet Preferences Program which gave consumers the choice to opt out of data sharing. If consumers opted in and allowed data sharing they received the lowest available subscription rate which was at least $ per month lower. Media reports suggest that the vast majority of consumers opted in ; i.e. they were willing to allow data sharing in order to qualify for the lower subscription rate | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Wireless and Wired Internet Service Provider Price Cuts Close to Congressional Review Act Nullification of Federal Communications Commission Rule Congress using CRA to nullify FCC rule Wireless price index ( = ) Wired price index ( = ) Dec-17 Wireless ( left axis ) Wired broadband ( right axis ) Jan. July Jan. July Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : CRA = Congressional Review Act ; FCC = Federal Communications Commission obtaining personal data consent from retail customers that are the basis for our quantitative analysis.18 At the aggregate level we estimate the effect of overturning the opt-in rule to be a net savings ( including a subtraction for the cost to consumers of providing personal data and an addition for producer surplus ) of about $ billion per year.19 Overturning the rule also encourages the aggregate supplies of capital and labor ( CEA 2019b ) as well as competition in online advertising and other markets where consumer data are valuable. We estimate that these effects would create additional net benefits of $ billion per year and Staten and Cate ( ) report results from a credit card issuer that tried an opt-in program for personal customer information and found that it cost an average of about $ ( converted to prices ) per customer in terms of mailings and phone calls to obtain opt-in from their customers. Amortized over a 24-month wireless contract and over a wired Internet contract lasting months i.e. about percent and percent of the retail price respectively. Assuming that costs are passed through retail price according to the percent markup rate measured by Goolsbee ( ) for the broadband industry we predict retail price effects of percent and percent respectively. The actual price drops shown in figure are percent and percent respectively We estimate that broadband industry revenue ( wired and wireless combined ) would be $ billion per year under the FCC rule. We estimate that the consumers providing personal data as a result of the overturning of the FCC rule do so at an aggregate annual cost of $ billion offsetting an aggregate annual savings in subscription fees of $ billion as well as an addition to producer surplus Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM corresponding additional real income of about $ billion per year which is small compared with total activity in those other markets but significant compared with the regulated market.20 After to years when these effects are fully realized the total impact on real incomes is estimated to be $ billion ( see table ) Before the Trump Administration another FCC rule adopted in restricted the vertical pricing arrangements of ISPs that is monetary transactions between ISPs and the providers of Internet content such as Netflix and Yahoo.21 The rule also imposed government oversight on communication services making it difficult for these companies to quickly respond to competition and provide new goods and services on the market. These vertical pricing and other restrictions are being removed by the FCC through its Restoring Internet Freedom order returning to regulating ISPs under Title I of the Communications Act Previous research shows that vertical pricing restrictions in broadband significantly reduce the quantity and quality of services received by broadband consumers.22 Hazlett and Caliskan ( ) for example looked at open access restrictions that were applied to U.S. Digital Subscriber Line service ( DSL ) but not Cable Modem ( CM ) access. They found that three years after restrictions on DSL services were relaxed in and U.S. DSL subscriptions grew by about percent relative to the trend while U.S. CM subscriptions increased slightly relative to the trend. Average revenue per DSL subscriber fell while average revenue per CM subscriber was constant ( although quality increased ) At the same time DSL and CM subscriptions in Canada which was not experiencing the regulatory changes did not increase relative to the trend. Applying these findings to ISPs in the years we find that by removing vertical pricing regulations the Trump Administration s Restoring Internet Freedom See also Goulder and Williams ( ) and Dahlby ( ) Throughout this chapter as in our other reports ( CEA 2019a 2019b ) we use a marginal cost of public funds to approximate the extraindustry net costs of an industry s regulation except when we estimate those costs to be primarily outside the United States ( see especially figure and the associated discussion ) Both the vertical pricing restrictions and the opt-in requirement are linked to the alternative regulatory frameworks that the FCC has variously proposed for ISPs Title I versus Title II of the Communications Act. However vertical pricing restrictions and the opt-in requirement are economically distinct and were also implemented by separate rulemaking ( see respectively FR and FR ) See also Becker Carlton and Sider ( ) who conclude that regulating vertical pricing in broadband interfere [ s ] with the development of business models and network management practices that may be efficient responses to the large ongoing and unpredictable changes in Internet demand and technology [ which ] is likely to harm investment innovation and consumer welfare. Flexible contracting between customer and supplier is generally expected to increase productivity because of the complementary relationship between the two in contrast to contracts between two suppliers of the same good that have the potential to increase market power | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM order will increase real incomes by more than $ billion per year and consumer welfare by almost $ billion per year Consumer and Small Business Savings on Healthcare Deregulation is also reducing prices for healthcare. Figure shows an inflation-adjusted index of retail prescription drug prices compared with its previous trend growth. Prescription drug prices outpaced general inflation for decades ; but in the past two years they have fallen more than percent below the previous trend as of May and below general inflation. In prescription drug prices even declined in nominal terms over the calendar year for the first time since Much of this is the result of the Trump Administration s efforts at the FDA such as its Drug Competition Action Plan and Strategic Policy Roadmap to enhance choice and price competition in the biopharmaceutical markets. Under these policies the FDA has approved a record number of generic and new brand name drugs to compete against existing drugs ( CEA 2018b ) We estimate that the results of these actions will save consumers almost percent on retail prescription drugs which results in an increase of $ billion per year in the purchasing power of the incomes of Americans ( including both consumers and producers ) The Trump Administration has also taken deregulatory actions in other healthcare markets such as insurance. Previous CEA reports provided analyses of four healthcare deregulatory actions : the process improvements at the FDA reflected in figure and three actions deregulating health insurance for individuals and small groups ( CEA 2019a 2019b ) These four actions which remove restrictions and alleviate some of the costs of Federal policies introduced during the years are by themselves expected to increase average real incomes by about percent or an average of about $ per Another indicator of the quantitative importance of new FDA procedures is the July crash of the stock price of at least one foreign generic drug maker which analysts attributed to greater competition as a result of an increase in generic drug approvals by the U.S. FDA. See Sheetz ( ) The percent assumes that standard deviation below the pre-2017 trend is due to factors other than deregulation. Retail prescription drug expenditures of $ billion per year were measured by Roehrig ( ) Note that prices may have fallen even more than shown in figure because in the Bureau of Labor Statistics changed its formula from geometric to Laspeyres which increases the measured rate of inflation ( CEA 2018b ) The three health insurance actions are ( ) reducing through the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of the individual mandate penalty to zero owed by consumers who did not have federally approved coverage or an exemption ; ( ) permitting via a June rule more small businesses to form Association Health Plans ( AHPs ) to provide lower-cost group health insurance to their employees ; and ( ) expanding through an August rule short-term limited-duration insurance plans Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Inflation-Adjusted CPI for Prescription Drugs Prescription drug CPI / all items CPI ( ratio ) Sep-19 Preinauguration trend % below trend Postinauguration Preinauguration July July July July July July Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : The Consumer Price Index ( CPI ) covers retail transactions which are about three-fourths of all prescription drug sales. Inflation adjustments are calculated using the ratio of the CPI of prescription drugs relative to the CPI-U for all items. The preinauguration expansion trend in annual growth rates is estimated over a sample period July December with projected levels then reconstructed from projected growth rates household each year.26 Among those who benefit from these deregulatory actions are an estimated million consumers who will save on their individual health insurance policy premiums by switching to less-regulated short-term plans with savings that may exceed percent.27 Also included are small businesses which may see substantial premium savings from obtaining access to cheaper large-group health insurance coverage Employment Regulations Unlike large companies small businesses do not typically have a team of in-house lawyers and regulatory compliance staff making understanding This average includes zeros for households not affected by the four deregulatory actions. For the purposes of calculating real income effects we do not count parts of the net benefit that are consumer hassle costs because those costs are traditionally excluded from GDP even though they are genuine costs from a consumer s point of view. Similarly we treat the revealed preference value of public health insurance as part of net benefits but not GDP or real income which traditionally are assigned those values according to cost rather than revealed preference value. As a result the GDP effect of the health insurance deregulations is less than the net benefit while the opposite tends to occur for other deregulations Part of the premium savings comes from the fact that the short-term plans restricted by the Obama Administration have different characteristics than the individual plans regulated by the Affordable Care Act. The CEA s ( 2019a ) analysis shows how the Trump Administration s deregulatory actions reduced health insurance prices significantly even after adjusting for differences in plan characteristics. See also our report ( CEA 2019a ) for sources on short-term plan premiums | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM and complying with regulations particularly onerous. Of the small businesses surveyed monthly by the National Federation of Independent Business ( NFIB ) between and the election of President Trump a plurality of surveyed businesses selected government requirements and red tape that is regulations as their single most important problem percent of the time they were asked. Though a plurality of small businesses have never selected regulations as their single most important problem since President Trump s election regulations remain an important issue During President Trump s Administration the Department of Labor ( DOL ) and National Labor Relations Board ( NLRB ) have been working to eliminate a number of regulations that disproportionately burden small businesses reduce worker productivity and real wages and distort competition in the labor market. The NLRB under the Obama Administration expanded the definitions of both joint employer and independent contractor which among other things would have categorized some franchisers as joint employers of their franchisee employees. DOL had also changed its guidance under certain statutes regarding joint employers and independent contractors Without the Trump Administration s proposed deregulatory actions thousands of small businesses including franchisees and subcontractors would no longer be able to compete against larger corporations and millions of workers wages would have fallen due to the effect of these labor regulations. The CEA ( 2019b ) estimates that together the Obama Administration s DOL guidance and the NLRB standard related to joint employers would have created more than $ billion in annual net costs and reduced real incomes by about $ billion Federal rulemaking also plays a role in maintaining a level playing field for small businesses that are subject to State regulations. In DOL determined that Federal rulemaking was likely required in order to permit States to mandate private employers to administer payroll deductions with proceeds to be invested in State-managed individual retirement accounts ( IRAs ) and automatically enroll their employees in those accounts. In the revealed preference framework the fact that a number of small businesses did not voluntarily offer these plans strongly suggests that the costs of administering these plans exceeded the value they create for employees.28 Nevertheless a number of States are requiring all employers to automatically enroll employees and legislation is pending before other State legislatures to require the same.29 If employers are forced to comply the administrative costs or the penalty for noncompliance reduce what can be paid out in employee compensa28 Between million and million people work for an employer that does not offer a retirement plan ( AARP ; Panis and Brien ; and the final rule ) Following the standard approach in labor economics ( Lazear ; Mortensen ) we assume that the composition of employee compensation maximizes the joint surplus of employer and employee See State of Oregon ( ) Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM tion which is why Congress and President Trump overturned previous DOL rulemaking designed to facilitate the State-level employer mandates The CEA uses the same economic framework for analyzing the IRA mandate that it used for health insurance mandates ( CEA 2019a ) We assume that Federal rulemaking is relevant and will be affecting million workers with an average annual IRA contribution of $ per year.31 We estimate that each $ deposited in an IRA is in present value terms a transfer from the Federal Treasury to the worker of $ Because employers need to be forced to provide the accounts we infer that there is some combination of marginal employer and employee costs of providing a retirement plan that equals or exceeds $ per worker each year. Conversely this cost is bounded above by $ plus the annual per-worker fine for noncompliance which we take to be $ per employee each year.32 Following Harberger ( ) this makes the aggregate of the employer and employee costs $ billion per year.33 Adding in the deadweight cost of taxes that is a net cost of $ billion per year most of which is borne outside the State implementing the program. As a real income loss ( i.e. ignoring factor-supply costs in the net cost calculation ) it is $ billion per year In DOL proposed costly Persuader Rule amendments to the Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act that would potentially have generated reporting requirements for consultants ( including attorneys ) when the employer posed labor law questions even if the attorney or consultant did not communicate directly with employees.34 These amendments were One difference is that the IRA mandates allow individuals to opt out without penalty. Our analysis assumes that some but not all workers affected by the rule will opt out. Research has found that automatic enrollment in retirement plans generates substantial inertia so workers remain in plans that they would not have voluntarily chosen ( Madrian and Shea ; Bernheim Fradkin and Popov ) Since States have studied proposals for State-facilitated savings programs or considered or adopted legislation to create them. At least States enacted legislation to expand access to retirement savings for nongovernmental workers. California Connecticut Illinois Maryland and Oregon have all adopted auto IRA models ( NCSL ) As to the average contribution the CEA notes that the Illinois pilot had employees investing an average of $ per employee per quarter ( about $ a year ) ( Hayden ) The Illinois fine is $ per employee a year ( Hopkins ) California has a $ penalty days after receiving a noncompliance notice and a $ penalty after days ( UC Berkeley Labor Center ) It is unclear whether and how often the State will send notices. It does not appear that Oregon has yet established its penalty It is often the case in cost-benefit analysis that a reduction in subsidy payments is merely a transfer that leaves social benefits unchanged ; the benefits to taxpayers are exactly offset by the costs to the recipients who lose the subsidy. The tax subsidy to IRA deposits is properly treated as a transfer when the task is evaluating the effects of the subsidy i.e. when comparing current policy with a hypothetical policy that has no tax subsidy for IRAs. But the purpose of this chapter is to evaluate the effect of relaxing restrictions on choices by employers and employees not changing the tax subsidy rules for IRAs. See also CEA ( 2019a ) Cummings ( ) and FR | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM finalized and set to take effect in but were delayed due to ongoing litigation.35 The Persuader Rule amendments were rescinded by DOL in Under the Persuader Rule consultants ( including attorneys ) would have needed to file with DOL a Form LM-20 which becomes publicly available reporting the amount of their fee and the type of advice provided.37 As another example persons attending an invited talk at their local Chamber of Commerce related to employment law would have had their names likely disclosed to DOL and made [ publicly ] available. In order to comply with the Persuader Rule a practitioner of labor law might have had to identify and segregate every increment of time billed to each of [ their ] clients for labor relations advice or services even if the firm was not doing any persuader consulting under the New Rule for that client currently. The American Bar Association understood the Persuader Rule to require labor lawyers to violate their ethical duties to their clients ( Brown ) while some labor law firms refused to take on any work that would fall under the Persuader Rule s new reporting requirements.38 Due to the large number of employers subject to the rule the midpoint of Furchtgott-Roth s ( ) estimates shows the rule to have ongoing compliance costs of $ billion per year combined for employers attorneys and consultants. Initial costs of the rule were estimated as $ billion. The CEA determined that of the components of the estimates may be overstated and therefore we adjusted the ongoing costs downward to $ billion per year in prices. The compliance costs come out of productivity and thereby have additional net annual costs of $ billion as they reduce aggregate supplies of capital and labor These and other rules introduced by DOL and the NLRB during the Obama Administration had anticompetitive effects on the labor market.39 We do not attempt to parse the combined effects among the various rules and guidance but instead allocate it entirely to the rules regarding joint employers and we then avoid double-counting by omitting any competition costs of other NLRB and/or DOL regulations. The combination of regulations cited in this section would have reduced real incomes by about $ billion per year or an average of almost $ per household each year See NFIB v. Perez ( ) Also see Eilperin ( ) See DOL ( ) This paragraph quotes or paraphrases Cummings ( ) See page of the June testimony in NFIB v. Perez ( Federal case number : 16-cv-66 ) See the CEA s ( 2019b ) analysis ( as well as FR ) of how a broader definition of joint employer would reduce competition among employers in some industries Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Financial Regulations In the wake of the global financial crisis banking reforms attempted to address the systemic risk created by large financial institutions. Congress and regulators raised banks capital standards imposed new stress tests and bestowed new regulatory powers on bank regulators. Though these reforms were intended to reduce the risks created by large financial institutions the Dodd-Frank Act s regulations imposed costly new regulatory requirements on small and mid-sized banks that did not pose a systemic risk Ultimately Dodd-Frank s overly broad regulations hurt lending to small businesses by unnecessarily burdening community and regional banks which play an outsized role in supporting small businesses and local economies across the Nation. Per the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation s definition community banks make up percent of federally insured banks and thrifts and they are responsible for percent of total loans and leases. Community banks also hold percent of small loans to farms and businesses. Also in there were United States counties in which the only banking offices belonged to community banks and another counties where community banks held at least percent of deposits. Together these counties made up almost percent of all U.S. counties The Economic Growth Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act also known as the Crapo Bill signed by President Trump removes the restrictions from smaller banks that were misapplied to them as part of earlier efforts to alleviate the too big to fail banking problem. The CEA ( 2019b ) posits that this act recognizes the vital importance of small and midsized banks as well as the high costs and negligible benefits of subjecting them to regulatory requirements better suited for the largest financial institutions. [ It ] is expected to reduce regulatory burdens and help to expand the credit made available to small businesses that are the lifeblood of local communities across the nation. Heightened consolidation among small banks ( those with assets less than $ billion ) followed the enactment of Dodd-Frank with the number of institutions declining by more than ( percent ) since Bank consolidation is not inherently uncompetitive but consolidation that is driven by regulations reflects the distortionary burden of regulatory costs. After DoddFrank the total loans by small banks has declined from $ billion to $ billion ( percent ) since If these small banks had instead grown their loan portfolios by percent the average of the past three expansions during this period there would have been about percent more small bank loans now than there actually are. These missing loans are associated with about $ billion in additional annual value added in small banking which we | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM estimate to produce about $ billion in annual surplus for lenders and borrowers.40 Including effects on the entire economy due to additional employment and investment the Crapo Bill has annual net benefits of almost $ billion and raises real annual incomes by about $ billion by removing regulatory burdens from small bank lenders The CEA has also conducted industry-specific analyses of the effects of several other regulations that were introduced during the years and have been removed ( or are in the process of being removed ) during the Trump Administration. One of these was the attempt by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau ( CFPB ) to largely eliminate the small dollar lending industry which had revenues of about $ billion per year in ( FR ) Small dollar lending is a valuable service that provides consumers with important resources and flexibility to better manage their finances. The CFPB s analysis acknowledged that consumers found the loans helpful for paying rent childcare food vacation school supplies car payments power/utility bills cell phone bills credit card bills groceries medical bills insurance premiums student educational costs daily living costs and other pressing expenses ( FR ) The CFPB predicted that its rule would reduce activity in the small dollar lending industry by percent. The lost flexibility to use small dollar lending to help pay for pressing expenses is indicative of the opportunity costs of sharply contracting the industry. Using revealed preference methods the CEA estimates a corresponding loss of consumer and producer surplus of $ billion and a reduction of real incomes by about $ billion.41 Additional Regulations Among our sample of rules we find that have comparatively small aggregate effects : DOL s Fiduciary Rule the Security and Exchange Commission s Disclosure of Foreign Payments by Resource Extraction Issuers the Department of the Interior s Stream Protection Rule the CFPB s prohibition of arbitration agreements in financial contracts the Waste Prevention Rule and a U.S. Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) rule implementing the Packers and Our estimate of lender surplus uses the Lerner-index estimates from Koetter Kolari and Spierdijk ( ) and assumes a unit price-elasticity of loan demand with respect to net interest margin Assuming that the industry demand for small dollar lending is linear in the fees charged and has a point elasticity of the lost consumer surplus alone is $ billion. The lost consumer surplus is even more if the demand for small dollar lending has a constant elasticity even if this elasticity were as far from zero as is the firm-level elasticity of estimated by McDevitt and Sojourner ( ) Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Stockyards Act.42 We estimated that eliminating these rules as the Trump Administration has done increases real incomes by about percent in total which is about $ billion per year. A 7th rule that has also been eliminated the Fair Pay and Safe Workplaces Rule may technically have zero effect on GDP and real incomes because it raises the costs of Federal contractors whose contribution to GDP is by definition its costs.43 Although the effects of these rules are likely large compared with many of the rules not in our sample $ billion per year is a small fraction of the combined effects of the other rules in our sample We have not measured the economic impact of hundreds of FY and FY Federal rules including a few regulations. However the aggregate cost savings reported for the other rules as recorded in the Federal Register are in the direction of additional cost savings suggesting that the cost savings from our sample of deregulatory actions may be a conservative estimate of the cost savings from all regulatory and deregulatory actions since January The Doubling Effect of Shifting from a Growing Regulatory State to a Deregulatory One Before the Federal regulatory norm was the perennial addition of new regulations. As shown above in figure between and the Federal government added an average of economically significant regulations each year. During the Trump Administration the average has been only ( not counting deregulatory actions or transfer rules ) Even if no old regulations were removed freezing costly regulation would allow real incomes to grow more than they did in the past when regulations were perennially added ( shown by the dark blue line in figure ) as with the The Fiduciary Rule added to the costs of saving for retirement by further expanding the circumstances under which a financial adviser is considered to be fiduciary. DOL estimated at the time the rule was published in that it would benefit investors on net. The rule was vacated in toto by the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals in Chamber of Commerce v. Department of Labor F.3d ( 5th Cir. ) The Disclosure of Foreign Payments by Resource Extraction Issuers Rule raised costs for U.S. extraction companies. Hydrological balance provisions of the Stream Protection Rule would shut down much of the U.S. longwall mining industry ( Murray Energy Corporation v U.S. Department of the Interior ) The CFPB prohibit [ ed ] consumers and providers of financial products and services from agreeing to resolve future disputes through arbitration rather than class-action litigation which would have raised the prices of consumer financial products ( U.S Department of the Treasury ) The Waste Prevention Rule added additional restrictions on oil and gas drilling and extraction operations on Federal and tribal lands ( CEA 2019b ) The USDA rule interfered with vertical contracts in the production of poultry and pork raising costs throughout the supply chains ( 8th circuit ) In contrast raising the costs of private enterprises typically does reduce GDP and real incomes because their contribution to GDP depends on the value those enterprises create for their customers as measured by what customers pay. The CEA notes that the production of some of the Federal contractors may be measured like those of private enterprises in which case zero is a conservative estimate of the real income effect of overturning the rule | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Deregulation Creates More Growth Than a Regulatory Freeze Real income Additional gain from deregulation ( % ) Cumulative gain from a regulatory freeze ( % ) Previous growth path Source : CEA calculations yellow line in figure The amount of extra income from a regulatory freeze depends on ( ) the length of time that the freeze lasts and ( ) the average annual cost of the new regulations that would have been added along the previous growth path. For the sake of illustration figure shows a freeze through We also have a conservative estimate of the average annual cost of regulatory additions during the years namely the cost of of the rules created during those years and identified in our sampling. At percent of real income spread over those years that is an annual cost addition of about percent a year ( i.e. about $ per household after years ) Those years are somewhat unusual in terms of numbers of new economically significant regulations so we take the previous trend ( for ) to be percent a year. In other words by the fifth year of a regulatory freeze real incomes would be percent ( about $ per household in the fifth year ) above the previous growth path As well as restraining the addition of new regulations the Trump Administration has removed previous ones. As shown by the red line in figure removing costly regulations allows for even more growth than freezing them. As explained above the effect relative to a regulatory freeze of removing costly Federal regulations has been to increase real incomes by percent. In total this is percent more income about $ per household Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Box How Old Are Midnight Regulations ? A number of the regulations reversed by the Trump Administration have been called midnight regulations which are final rules published between Election Day and the inauguration of a new President. ( Thus midnight regulations refer to regulations finalized at the end of a Presidential term and before the change to a President of the other political party. ) A new President can reverse the midnight regulations by using the standard rulemaking process to refuse to defend the regulations in court or by ( together with Congress ) overturning them with procedures established by the Congressional Review Act ( CRA ) In theory the publishing of a costly midnight regulation along with its reversal soon afterward could have little or no effect on industry or the wider economy if market participants recognize that the midnight rules would not last long enough to constrain economic activity. ( If market participants anticipate use of the Congressional Review Act a costly midnight regulation could have the opposite effect because the CRA would prohibit all future administrations from promulgating the same or a similar rule imposing those costs until a future Congress expressly approved that type of regulation. ) However the most costly of the midnight regulations can not be characterized this way because ( ) they had been in the rulemaking process for years before the inauguration ( ) most of the polls and media predicted a different election outcome and ( ) the CRA had been used only once before Sixteen Obama-era regulations were ultimately nullified by the CRA The more economically important of these are the Federal rule allowing States to mandate employers to provide retirement accounts ( the IRAmandate rule ) the FCC rule regarding broadband privacy and the Securities and Exchange Commission s rule requiring public disclosure of foreign payments ( RIN 1210-AB71 ; see also 1210-AB76 document FCC-2016-0376-0001 and RIN 3235-AL53 respectively ) They date back as far as but became eligible for CRA nullification in the 115th Congress because challenges from courts and the public extended the rulemaking process until late or later. ( See also Public Citizen which found that midnight regulations of Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush took longer [ years ] and underwent more days of OIRA review than the average rule over the past years. ) The IRA-mandate rule dates back to at least The proposed FCC privacy rule was released April although arguably it was anticipated by the FCC s actions on net neutrality dating back to The CEA therefore sees the Obama-era economic regulations as part of a normal rulemaking process rather than an economically irrelevant signaling of a political platform. Although final rules follow their notices of proposed rulemakings with a time lag and a new Administration may decline to finalize notices of proposed rulemaking from a previous Administration the length of the time lag should not affect estimation of the medium- to long-term economic effects of deregulation or of a regulatory freeze. The length of the time lag does affect the timing of the economic effects | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM each year relative to the previous growth path.44 ( Also see box on socalled midnight regulations. ) Regulations Before with Disproportionate Costs The analysis thus far has primarily considered the effects of regulation on income but regulation or the lack of it can affect well-being in nonpecuniary ways not captured by income. However even when including nonpecuniary costs and benefits we estimate that deregulatory actions have a net benefit of more than $ per household each year compared with the previous trend of growing regulatory costs. The gain stems from the fact that the new level of regulation strikes a better balance between the costs of regulations and their societal benefits where benefits include things valued by people but not necessarily bought or sold in the marketplace ( and that thus are not included in the National Income and Product Accounts or in the usual income measures ) The Trump Administration requires Federal agencies to conduct cost-benefit analyses of significant regulatory actions including deregulatory actions and that they only be issued upon a reasoned determination that benefits justify costs ( OMB ) An example from health policy illustrates how regulations before created disproportionate incremental costs and benefits. The Affordable Care Act created an individual mandate in order to reduce the costs of uncompensated care.45 But the average annual costs of uncompensated care are about $ per uninsured person ( including zeros in the average for those who are uninsured who do not use uncompensated care during the year ) whereas the annual economic costs of the individual mandate are over $ per uninsured person induced to purchase coverage ( CEA 2019a ) One economic reason that regulations before were so costly is that some of them were implemented with only a little safety valve in terms of an option for regulated businesses to pay a moderate fine in instances when compliance is especially costly. For example whereas automobile manufacturers had the option of paying a penalty to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) for falling short of Federal fuel economy standards the EPA is prohibited by the Clean Air Act from adopting the NHTSA s penalty structure to enforce the greenhouse gas standard that began with model year ( FR ) As another example a consultant incorrectly filling out DOL Form LM-21 ( one of the requirements under the rescinded Persuader Rule ) would be exposed to criminal penalties. Another reason is that the labor The red line s path in figure is drawn as linear for illustration purposes only. The percent effect ( relative to a freeze ) of deregulation is likely nonlinear over time and it may take more than five years to be fully realized Section ( a ) ( ) ( F ) of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM market is arguably the largest market of all with annual revenues of more than $ trillion and it was the object of active rulemaking by DOL during the Obama Administration Conclusion Coincidentally with the Presidential inauguration real GDP growth changed from underperforming experts forecasts to outperforming them ( Tankersley ) The CEA s findings on the aggregate effects of regulations and deregulations may help explain this turnaround. Regulatory actions and their aggregate effects may be easily overlooked and underestimated because the actions are numerous and if not seen through the lens of economic analysis may appear cryptic to the general public. This chapter helps to narrow this information gap by showing the importance of the deregulatory agenda for everyday Americans as well as the national economy Since consumers and small businesses have been able to live and work with more choice and less Federal government interference. They can purchase health insurance in groups or as individuals without paying for categories of coverage that they do not want or need. Small businesses can design compensation packages that meet the needs of their employees enter into a genuine franchise relationship with a larger corporation or seek confidential professional advice on how to organize their workplaces. Consumers have a variety of choices for less expensive wireless and wired Internet access. Small banks are no longer treated as too big to fail ( which they never actually were ) and as subject to the costly regulatory scrutiny that goes with this designation In addition to regaining freedoms that they once had consumers and small businesses no longer need to dread the steady accumulation of costly new Federal regulations. In a time frame of to years these landmark changes to regulatory policy are anticipated to increase annual incomes by about $ per household ( $ billion in the aggregate ) by increasing choice productivity and competition. This chapter arrives at its aggregate total by building estimates from the industry level. In doing so it closely examines specific Federal rules accounts for the unique circumstances of the industries targeted by these rules and quantifies benefits of regulation such as consumer data privacy environmental protection fuel savings and reductions in uncompensated healthcare. The analysis employs an economic framework that situates each industry in a larger economy that includes market distortions caused by taxes imperfect competition and other factors The benefits of the newest wave of deregulation compare favorably with those during the most significant deregulatory waves of American history. Take the deregulation of airlines and trucking that occurred four decades ago as the major parts of a deregulation wave described as one of the most important experiments in economic policy of our time ( Winston ) Combined the | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Carter Administration s deregulation of these two industries provided net aggregate benefits of about percent of national income. Although no of the deregulatory actions analyzed in this chapter have had ( according to our estimates ) such a large net benefit their combined net aggregate benefits exceed percent of national income.46 Other notable historical deregulations were of natural gas markets between and which had benefits estimated at about percent of national income ( Davis and Kilian ) This is hardly more than the combined net benefit of the three health insurance rules analyzed in this chapter Moreover the totals reported in this chapter reflect only deregulatory actions occurring during less than three years whereas the full effects of the deregulation of airlines trucking and natural gas each reflect actions taken over almost a decade.47 There is room for additional deregulation to further grow the economy increasing benefits to American consumers workers and businesses. According to the accounting for Executive Order the projected cost savings from planned deregulatory actions in FY exceed the combined cost savings achieved in and The Administration has also taken further steps to promote regulatory reform. On October President Trump signed two regulatory reform Executive Orders. The first is titled Promoting the Rule of Law Through Improved Agency Guidance Documents. Many discussions of Federal regulatory and deregulatory actions including most of this chapter focus on rules adopted through the Administrative Procedure Act s notice-and-comment rulemaking process. In addition to such rules Federal agencies issue nonbinding guidance documents. Although guidance documents are not subject to the notice-and-comment requirements some impose substantial regulatory costs. The new Executive Order s improvements to guidance documents include requirements that clarify their nonbinding status Significant guidance documents are also now subject to cost-benefit analysis The second Executive Order signed on October is titled Promoting the Rule of Law Through Transparency and Fairness in Civil Administrative Enforcement and Adjudication. In an economic framework agencies enforcement strategies can have important implications for regulatory costs ( Fenn and Veljanovski ) Perhaps more important the enforcement of regulations should be fair to the public. The new Executive Order prohibits agencies from enforcing rules they have not made publicly known in advance. Finally in parallel with the Winston ( table ) reports net benefits accruing in the airline and trucking industries that hold aggregate factor supplies constant. In calculating the percent for comparison we also held aggregate factor supplies constant Murphy ( ) cites U.S. Federal intervention into the petroleum industry in the 1970s [ as ] arguably the largest peacetime government interference with the economy in the nation s history. Arrow and Kalt ( ) estimate the cost of this intervention to be percent of national income Moreover the deregulation did not realize this full amount in cost savings because price controls were replaced with a windfall profits tax Regulatory Reform Unleashes the Economy | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM reforms of Federal regulations the Administration has created the Governors Initiative on Regulatory Innovation to encourage States to adopt regulatory reforms. The initiative will help governors and the White House work with leaders in local and tribal governments to cut regulatory costs advance reforms to occupational licensing and align regulations across levels of government | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM x Chapter Energy : Innovation and Independence U.S. energy innovation has continued to flourish under the Trump Administration. Innovation and the policies that support it lowers costs and prices and increases production. This is illustrated by the American shale revolution and its dramatic rise in oil and gas drilling productivity in shale and similar geologic formations. Gains in shale drilling productivity have led to lower prices for natural gas electricity and oil saving the average family of four $ annually. Shale-driven savings represent a much larger percentage of income for the lowest fifth of households than for the highest fifth Production growth due to shale innovation has also brought energy independence to the United States a goal first set by President Richard M. Nixon and pursued by subsequent Administrations but accomplished under the Trump Administration. In the United States became a net exporter of natural gas for the first time since ; and in September the United States became a net exporter of crude oil and petroleum products and is projected to remain a net exporter for all of for the first time since at least Historically a rise in energy prices increased the trade deficit and costs for firms and households sometimes pushing the U.S. economy into a recession. The innovation-driven surge in production and exports has made the U.S. economy more resilient to global oil price spikes. It has also improved the country s geopolitical flexibility and influence as evidenced by concurrent sanctions on two major oil-producing countries Iran and Venezuela In addition to consumer savings and energy independence benefits the shale revolution has reduced carbon dioxide and particulate emissions through 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM changes in the composition of electricity generation sources. We estimate that from to the shale revolution in particular lowered carbon dioxide emissions in the electric power sector by percent. This contributed to a greater decline in carbon dioxide and particulate emissions ( relative to the size of the economy ) in the United States than in the European Union according to the most recent data The Trump Administration s deregulatory energy policy follows earlier Federal deregulatory policies that helped to spur the shale revolution. By limiting unnecessary constraints on private innovation and investment the Administration supports further unleashing of the country s abundant human and energy resources. In contrast the State of New York has banned shale production and stymied new pipeline construction leading to falling natural gas production in the State greater reliance on energy produced elsewhere and higher energy prices. Similarly evidence on renewable energy mandates at the State and Federal levels shows their costs and limitations. More broadly predicting the evolution of energy markets and technologies remains difficult few anticipated the shale revolution s effect on lower prices for natural gas electricity and oil or the current economic challenges in the nuclear power sector. This difficulty highlights the value of policies that avoid picking winners and losers and instead provides a broad platform upon which innovation will flourish T he classic effects of innovation are improvements in productivity which lower costs and prices and increase production.1 Energy sector innovations and the policies that support them have similar effects and ultimately reduce prices for American households and businesses. This chapter describes the causes and consequences of growth in oil and natural gas production from shale and similar geologic formations while also highlighting broader energy sector innovations and policy questions. We first discuss the dramatic rise in productivity and its effects on cost production and price Second we estimate the consumer savings brought by shale-driven declines in energy prices. Third we document how the surge in shale production has led to The CEA previously released research on topics covered in this chapter. The text that follows builds on the report The Value of U.S. Energy Innovation and Policies Supporting the Shale Revolution ( CEA ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM U.S. energy independence as measured by positive net exports of both oil and natural gas. Fourth we assess total and shale-related changes in emissions in the United States. Finally we consider the implications of deregulatory versus government-directed energy policies From to innovation in shale production brought an 8-fold increase in extraction productivity ( new well production per rig ) for natural gas and a 19-fold increase for oil. These productivity gains have reduced costs and spurred production to record-breaking levels. As a result the United States has become the world s largest producer of both commodities surpassing Russia in ( for natural gas ) and Saudi Arabia and Russia in ( for oil ) The Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) estimates that greater productivity reduced the domestic price of natural gas by percent as of and led to a percent decrease in the wholesale price of electricity. The increase in U.S. oil production linked to shale oil development helped not only moderate but also reduce the global price of oil over the same period in the face of peak oil forecasts. By lowering energy prices we estimate that the shale revolution saves U.S. consumers $ billion annually or $ for a family of four. Nearly percent of the total savings stem from a substantially lower price for natural gas of which more than half comes from lower electricity prices. Because lowincome households spend a larger share of their income on energy bills lower energy prices disproportionately benefit them ; shale-driven savings represent percent of income for the lowest fifth of households compared with percent for the highest fifth. These consumer savings are in addition to economic benefits linked to greater employment in the sector At the same time shale-driven production growth has fulfilled the nearly 50-year goal of U.S. energy independence. In the United States became a net exporter of natural gas for the first time since ; and in September the United States became a net exporter of crude oil and petroleum products and is projected to remain a net exporter for all of for the first time since at least The long-standing goal of energy independence was motivated by the historic vulnerability of the U.S. economy to oil price spikes. Historically a rise in energy prices increased the trade deficit and costs for firms and households potentially pushing the U.S. economy into a recession. In fact a sudden rise in the price of oil preceded of the postwar recessions in the United States ( Hamilton ) With energy independence spikes in global energy prices continue to affect U.S. households and businesses but they now have a more muted effect on gross domestic product ( GDP ) because they do not inflate the trade deficit as they did when net imports were high. From to a $ increase in oil prices reduced the U.S. trade balance in goods by $ billion ; from to it reduced it by only $ billion. Higher prices could even increase GDP if they cause a large enough increase in investment by U.S. energy producers. Greater exports and resilience to price shocks have Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM also improved the country s geopolitical flexibility and influence as evidenced by concurrent sanctions on two major oil producers In addition to consumer savings and energy independence benefits the shale revolution has reduced carbon dioxide and particulate emissions through changes in the composition of electricity generation sources. The CEA estimates that from to the shale revolution in particular was responsible for reducing electric power sector carbon dioxide emissions by percent. This contributed to a greater decline in carbon dioxide emissions and particulate emissions ( relative to the size of the economy ) in the United States than in the European Union from to the most recent year for data in both areas The Trump Administration s deregulatory energy policy follows earlier Federal deregulatory policies that helped to spur the shale revolution By limiting unnecessary constraints on private innovation and investment the Administration s deregulatory policy supports further unleashing of the country s abundant human and energy resources. In contrast the State of New York has banned shale production and stymied new pipeline construction leading to falling natural gas production in the State greater reliance on energy produced elsewhere and higher energy prices. Similarly evidence on renewable energy mandates at the State and Federal levels shows their costs and limitations. More broadly predicting the evolution of energy markets and technologies remains difficult few anticipated the shale revolution s effect on lower prices for natural gas electricity and oil or the current economic challenges in the nuclear power sector. This highlights the value of policies that avoid picking winners and losers and instead provides a broad platform upon which innovation will flourish Market Pricing Resource Access and Freedom to Innovate Growth in the extraction of oil and natural gas from shale and similar geologic formations often referred to as the shale revolution is arguably the most consequential energy development in the last half century. Its far-reaching consequences are in part because fossil fuels account for percent of U.S energy consumption ( EIA 2019b ) Most oil goes to fuel the planes trains and automobiles of the transportation sector while most natural gas generates electric power or heat for industry and households Since at least the late 1970s geologists knew that shale and other lowpermeability formations contained prodigious amounts of natural gas. For decades methods to profitably extract the gas eluded the industry much of which pursued easier-to-access resources in the United States and abroad Although various countries have abundant shale resources entrepreneurs and engineers working in the United States innovation-friendly context first | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM unlocked the potential of shale which would eventually bring large savings to consumers and environmental benefits relative to a scenario without shale development The shale revolution came after major deregulatory changes in the governance of natural gas pricing and distribution. Three major deregulatory actions the Natural Gas Policy Act the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission s Open Access Order and the Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act liberalized access to pipelines and increased the role of market forces in determining prices paid to natural gas producers. Earlier price controls discouraged production and exploration leading to supply shortages. Once freed to move with supply and demand wellhead prices increased encouraging more innovation which eventually lowered prices ( MacAvoy ) Prices however would begin to increase again in the late 1990s and early 2000s Higher wellhead prices justified taking innovative risks on new methods and geologic formations and private ownership of underground resources made it easy for firms to access these resources and experiment in diverse locations. The United States is unique in that the private sector homeowners farmers and businesses owns the majority of subsurface mineral rights. This system allows private owners to grant access to energy firms through lease contracts which can be for one-tenth of an acre or acres ( Fitzgerald ) As a result energy firms do not need to navigate a cumbersome central government bureaucracy to begin accessing subsurface resources. Although firms must still abide by Federal and State regulations gaining the right to access resources is straightforward they just need to adequately compensate the owner of the relevant acreage The role of the Federal government in unlocking the shale revolution is often overstated. Certainly the U.S. Department of Energy s ( DOE ) investment of about $ million from to in Federal funding for research on drill bit technology directional drilling modeling for shale basin reservoirs and microseismic monitoring of multistage hydraulic fracturing treatment helped spur sector innovation. A more detailed analysis shows that primary credit belongs to the private sector. Federally subsidized research to aid the development of shale gas in the East carried limited transferability to the early breakthroughs in Barnett shale formation. Moreover an early tax credit aimed at stimulating the production of natural gas from unconventional sources expired in well before important breakthroughs in the early 2000s.2 Among firms pioneering in shale extraction the most important is arguably Mitchell Energy. In the 1980s and 1990s Mitchell Energy which had long-term contracts to sell its natural gas experimented with methods to coax natural gas from a Texas geologic formation known as the Barnett Shale Wang and Krupnick ( ) discuss Federal government policies that may have aided Mitchell Energy as it experimented in the Barnett and generally conclude that subsidies tax credits taxpreferred business structure and research and development played a secondary role Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Consistent commercial success emerged in the early 2000s when Devon Energy acquired Mitchell Energy. This acquisition accelerated the merger of two complementary technologies. Devon had considerable experience with horizontal drilling which involves drilling a conventional vertical well and at the bottom of the vertical leg transitioning to a horizontal leg which can extend for several miles. Mitchell Energy had more experience pumping liquids and sand under high pressure into wells to fracture low-permeability formations thereby releasing gas and/or oil trapped in the rock. This stimulation technique is known as hydraulic fracturing ( Wang and Krupnick ) Promising results from Devon s wells coupled with rising natural gas prices spurred a drilling boom in the Barnett Shale. Thus the number of well permits issued in the Barnett grew from less than in to more than in The revolution had begun The shale revolution may not have been sustained if it had not been for continued innovation by scores of engineers geologists and entrepreneurs who refined and adapted methods to draw oil from western North Dakota and southern Texas as well as natural gas from Appalachia in the Eastern United States. Persistent innovation and opportunity for its diffusion has transformed energy markets with considerable implications for consumers and the environment Important innovations have also occurred elsewhere in the energy sector. Advances in the design of combined-cycle turbines in natural gas plants have allowed the plants to generate more electricity from each unit of heat From to the amount of heat needed to generate a kilowatt-hour of electricity declined by percent. In addition the cost of turbines measured in dollars per unit of capacity has fallen by percent since Alongside more efficient and less costly natural gas turbines the cost of wind power projects has also fallen recently causing wind power prices to fall by more than percent from to These gains stem from various factors including larger turbines and lower manufacturing costs. Solar power generation has made similar gains Innovations in these sectors proved complementary. Electricity from wind and solar technologies remain variable and present challenges for grid management because generation may not align with the demands of the electric grid in any given hour. Relative to most other sources of electricity natural-gas-fired generators can quickly ramp up and ramp down generation to assist with grid integration and systems balancing requirements. Gains from innovation however have not occurred everywhere. Cellulosic biofuel production has grown slowly and is well below levels prescribed by a Federal mandate ( see box ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Box The Limits of Energy Mandates to Induce Innovation The directness of government mandates can have great appeal. Commands that the market conform to government targets however have limits in what they can achieve as illustrated by the Federal Renewable Fuel Standard. Even when targets are met they can come at a much higher cost than projected  $ "  $      ''0 ' * $    $ * ! '   /  /0/   )    $ )  '   * '0 (  Gallons ( billions )  /  /0/  $ )  '  *   * ) " $ * )  '     #   $  To further U.S. energy independence and provide additional revenue sources to U.S. farmers the Federal Renewable Fuel Standard which was set in and expanded in mandated increases in the domestic production and consumption of renewable fuels. The standard mandated the use of different categories of renewable fuels with type-specific targets increasing over time for most categories. Technology to produce ethanol from corn was well established by the mid-2000s and corn-based ethanol production and consumption quickly increased and have generally kept in line with the targets set in the statute. In contrast technology to convert cellulosic plant material such as corn fodder into renewable fuels was not well established when the standard went into effect and progress has been slow despite the mandate. As a result the EPA has utilized its waiver authority authorized in the statute when setting targets for cellulosic biofuel ( figure 4-i ) The cellulosic mandate has been waived every year since its establishment in resulting in no significant production of cellulosic biofuel. By the industry was to have produced billion gallons of cellulosic biofuel Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM The Effects of Innovation on Productivity Prices and Production Innovation raises productivity and lowers production costs allowing firms to offer lower prices. This dynamic corresponds to the textbook case of an outward shift in the domestic supply curve as shown in figure for the case of natural gas. The shift means that firms produce more at every price level than they did before innovation which lowers the market equilibrium price which is shown on the vertical axis in figure as a change in P while increasing the quantity produced as shown on the horizontal axis as the change in Qp. The lower price stimulates an increase in consumption as shown on the horizontal axis as the change in Qc Because of imports and exports of natural gas the market price is affected by the global price and does not occur at the intersection of domestic supply and domestic demand. Before shale gas development domestic consumption exceeded domestic production leading to imports as shown in figure as the difference between domestic production and consumption before shale. After shale domestic production exceeds domestic consumption leading to exports The Impact on Productivity Horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing made the development of shale and other low-permeability formations economical. In the last decade all growth in onshore oil and gas production has come from the development of these formations. One measure of innovation and productivity gains by energy producers is the quantity that new wells are producing relative to the number of rigs in use which the DOE s Energy Information Administration ( EIA ) tracks for all major shale formations. This measure known as new-well production per drilling rig is defined as the total production of wells recently brought into production divided by the number of drilling rigs recently in operation New well production per rig increased by more than 8-fold between and for key shale gas regions and by more than 19-fold for key shale oil regions. Particularly strong growth has occurred in the last five years for both oil and gas ( figure ) The recent growth highlights how energy firms have continued to improve upon the earlier breakthroughs of shale pioneers The productivity gains in production per rig stem from several factors that allow firms to generate more production from each rig per unit time. For example across regions and over time the number of days needed to drill a The sharp rise in productivity in largely reflects firms deciding to operate fewer drilling rigs ( because of very low prices ) and focus on bringing wells already drilled into production. This can be seen by a sharp decline in drilled but uncompleted wells in Similarly a rise in drilled but uncompleted wells in helps explain the apparent slowdown in productivity in that year. See EIA ( ) for estimates of drilled but uncompleted wells | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Innovation in Natural Gas Production Domestic supply no shale Price Domestic supply shale The effect of innovation Imports P no shale Price A P shale Exports B C D Domestic demand Qc no shale Qc shale Qp shale Qp no shale Quantity Production  $ "    *   / $ $ /4    $ )    ' '   *   / $ * )    $ "   $ '   )     /0-  '    Cubic feet per day ( thousands )  Barrels per day   /0-  '  "     "  $ " # /  $  $ '    "  ' ! /  $  *    ) "  ) ! * (  / $ * )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )        '  '  / $ * )  * /   ' '  *   / $ * )  $  / #  ) (   * !   * $ '  *  "   ''.   )   / # $  * 0/+0/  / #  /    $ )  / # $  ! $ -./  ( * ) / #  * !  *   / $ * )   #  $ "   * ) /  $  / #  ) (   * !    / $  * $ '  *  "    $ ' ' $ ) "  $ "  /2 *  ( * ) / #  $ *  Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "     $ )  $ )   *   / $ $ /4  *    & )   $     *   #  '   * (  / $ * )   Dollars ( ) per thousand cubic feet ' Dollars ( ) per barrel   /0-  ' "    "  $ " # /  $  $ '    " ' ! /  $  *    ' * * (  "       )  '4/ $         '  '  / $ * )  * /    & )  $   $ )  '0   / #   * ./  * !   $ ' ' $ ) "   )   *  / $ ) "    ' '   )    $ ) " $ ) "  / #  *   / *  (  -& /  $ )  '0  $ ) "  *  '/ $  /    )   "  / # $ ) "   )    * ( $ * )   * ./.  The o $ '    "  $  / #   "  $    /2 )    && )   * (  / $ * )   )    $ )    " '   *    )    ( $  )    $ )  The n  /0-  '  "     "  $  / #    "  $    /2 )     ''0.  / $     )    ) $ ' '    /     % 0./  / *    * ' '   $ ) "  / #   * ) (   $   )       are   $ ( * ) / #  ( * $ ) "    " well has fallen ( EIA ) and the average production from a well s first month has grown ( EIA 2018b ) The improvements come partly from firms drilling wells with longer horizontal portions and from placing more wells per pad both of which allow each well and pad to access more oil and gas Greater productivity reduces the cost of producing each barrel of oil or cubic foot of natural gas. Lower unit costs lead to a lower breakeven price which is the price needed to cover the costs of drilling and operating an oil or gas well. Figure shows an estimated breakeven price based on modeling of production costs in different regions.4 From to the breakeven price for natural gas ( averaged across key shale formations ) fell by percent ; for oil it fell by percent. The link between productivity as measured by new-well production per rig in operation and breakeven prices is direct. Well operators typically lease drilling rigs paying as much as $ per day so finishing a well in half the time yields considerable savings. Similarly higher volumes of initial production return cash more quickly to the firm and can mean greater lifetime production from the well The breakeven price calculated by BTU Analytics is best interpreted as the price needed to justify drilling another well assuming that the energy firm already holds the necessary acreage The price for a given period is calculated based on historical production data and projections of future production to model revenue and costs for every well brought into production in the period This analysis assumes a discount rate of percent and a well life of months. It is not based on energy firm calculations of their own breakeven costs and excludes potential costs that energy firms may incur such as interest payments on debt and costs to acquire their acreage | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM The Impact on Prices and Production In its Annual Energy Outlook the EIA projects energy-related outcomes for the coming decades. The projections incorporate detailed information and assumptions on resource reserves emerging technologies new policies and numerous other relevant trends. The difference between projected and actual outcomes provides one measure of the surprise and disruption brought by the shale revolution. This difference does not necessarily isolate the shale revolution s contribution because markets may have evolved differently than expected for reasons other than shale The Annual Energy Outlook which made projections for and later projected that natural gas production in the lower States would rise gradually and reach trillion cubic feet by Actual dry gas production for the lower states reached more than trillion cubic feet in percent higher than projected and now greatly exceeds that of any other country ( figure ) The production growth was not because of higher-than-expected prices. To the contrary prices in were percent lower than projected ( figure )  $ "     /0-  '       /0  '   *   / $ * )  * %  /    *   / $ * )  Cubic feet ( trillions )   /0  '  *   / $ * )  * %  /   *   / $ * )  *    ) "  ) ! * (  / $ * )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )           '  '  / $ * )  * /   * %  / $ * )    ! * (  / #     Annual Energy Outlook   *   / $ * )  $  ! *  / #  ' *    /  /  # $  #   '0    '  .&    )     $ $    "   !  / *  "   / #  /  $  $ (  $ '4  ( / #  )   / #  / #  )  #  *    * )   * ( * )  Energy : Innovation and Independence 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM  $ "     /0-  '       /0  '   $     * %  /    $   Dollars ( ) per million Btu  * %  /   $    /0  '  $   *    ) "  ) ! * (  / $ * )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )           '  '  / $ * )  * /   /0    $ / $ #  / # (  '  ) $ /   * %  / $ * )    ! * (  / #     Annual Energy Outlook   $       % 0./   / *    * ' '   $ ) "  / #   * ) (   $   )         "   !  / *  "   / #  /  $  $ (  $ '4  ( / #  )   / #  / #  )  #  *    * ) compounds Figure U.S. Monthly Wholesale Electricity Price and Natural Gas Dollars per megawatt-hour ( ) Dollars per million Btu ( ) Dec-2018 Henry hub ( right axis ) Wholesale electricity ( left axis ) Sources : Energy Information Administration ; Intercontinental Exchange ; CEA calculations Note : Btu = British thermal unit. Wholesale electricity prices were weighted by volume across weeks and eight wholesale electricity hubs. Wholesale natural gas prices are the Henry Hub spot price. Prices are adjusted to dollars using the Consumer Price Index ( CPI-U ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure U.S. Crude Oil Production Barrels per day ( millions ) Actual production Projected production Sources : Energy Information Administration ; CEA calculations Note : Projections are from the EIA Annual Energy Outlook. Production is for the lower states which excludes Alaska and Hawaii. Production includes both onshore and offshore production The unexpected production growth and price decline of natural gas spilled over to electricity markets. Wholesale electricity prices oscillated around $ per megawatt hour from to but then dropped markedly as the price of natural gas fell. Although natural gas-fired generators have accounted for less than one-third of electricity generating in recent years they play an outsized role in influencing prices in competitive wholesale electricity markets. This is because such generators are often the marginal generator of electricity and their operators can adjust output quickly in response to the market with relative ease making their costs and bid prices an important determinant of the market price of electricity. Figure shows the close tracking of wholesale natural gas and electricity prices and several studies have documented a strong causal effect of natural gas prices on wholesale electricity prices ( Linn Muehlenbachs and Wang ; Borenstein and Bushnell ) Turning to oil the difference between projected and actual oil production is even starker than the case of natural gas. Actual production in the lower States in exceeded the production projected by the EIA in by percent leading the United States to surpass Russia and Saudi Arabia to become the top global oil producer. Some of the difference between actual Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Imported Oil Prices Dollars per barrel ( ) Projected price Actual price Sources : Energy Information Administration ; CEA calculations Note : Projections are from the EIA Annual Energy Outlook. Prices are adjusted to dollars using the Consumer Price Index ( CPI-U ) Imported crude prices are the refiners average acquisition cost for imported crude oil and projected production stems from greater-than-expected oil prices in the first half of the period. The benefit of oil sector innovation however is still evident ; since actual prices have been below projected prices while production has greatly exceeded projections ( figures and ) The Impact of the Shale-Induced Decline in Energy Prices A simple supply-and-demand framework permits estimating how much energy prices have fallen because of the shale revolution as opposed to other factors that have changed over time. For natural gas we draw from Hausman and Kellogg ( ) who look at the market effects of shale gas from to Their analysis focuses on estimating the price of natural gas in a world without the shale revolution noting that the actual change in price before and after the emergence of shale is not necessarily the causal effect of shale because the demand curve could have shifted. As a result they estimate supply and demand curves for natural gas for and for The price of natural gas in the no-shale scenario is then estimated as the price at the intersection of | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM not because of higher-than-expected prices. To the contrary prices in were percent lower than projected the supply ( pre-shale ) curve and the ( figure ) demand curve.5 ( For details The unexpected growth and price decline of natural gas spilled on estimating the shale-driven price production effect see Hausman and Kellogg ) to electricity markets electricity pricesthe oscillated Our primary over modifications to their price Wholesale analysis are to use most around $ per megawatt hour from to then dropped markedly as the price of natural recent year for annual data as the end year notbut ; and to use more recent gas supply fell. Although natural gas-fired generators have accounted for less than one-third estimates of the elasticity of natural gas from Newell Prest and Vissing of electricity generating in recent years they play an outsized role in influencing prices ( ) competitive electricity markets This on is because such generators are We alsoinestimate the wholesale effect of lower natural gas prices wholesale often the marginal generator of electricity and their operators electricity prices. Natural gas plays a unique role in the electricity sector. In can adjust output quickly in response the market with relative ease making their costs and bid prices many parts of the United Statestothat have competitive wholesale electricity an important determinant of the market price ofunit electricity Figure shows the close markets natural-gas-fired plants generated the marginal of electricity tracking of wholesale natural gas and electricity prices and several studies have sold. As a result a decline in their costs lowers the market price of electricity documented a strong causal effect of natural gas prices on wholesale meaning that all electricity generators regardless of their fuel source receive electricity prices ( Linn Muehlenbachs and Wang ; Borenstein and Bushnell ) a lower price. Likewise all buyers regardless of who provides their electricity Turning to oil the difference between projected and actual oil production is pay a lower price. Linn Muehlenbachs and Wang ( ) studied the effect of even starker than the case of natural gas. Actual production in the lower States in the shale-driven decline in natural gas prices on electricity prices and found exceeded the production projected by the EIA in by percent leading the that across wholesale market hubs a percent decrease in the price of natural United States to surpass Russia and Saudi Arabia to become the top global oil gas lowers the price of electricity by percent. To estimate the shale-driven producer. Some of the difference between actual and projected production stems change in thefrom wholesale price of electricity therefore shalegreater-than-expected oil we prices in the multiply first halfthe of the period. The driven percentage change in the price of natural gas ( described in the benefit of oil sector innovation however is still evident ; sinceprior actual prices have paragraph ) bybeen 0.72.below projected prices while production has greatly exceeded projections For estimating effect of shale oil on prices we consider two surges in ( figures the and ) shale oil production with the second surge associated with production cuts by The of Impact of the Shale-Induced Decline in Energy Prices the Organization the Petroleum Exporting Countries ( OPEC ) The first wave is defined by Kilian ( November August ) and the second we define A simple supply-and-demand framework estimating as January May For the first wave we drawpermits from Kilian ( ) ,how whomuch energy prices fallen because shale revolution as opposed to other factors that have estimates thehave monthly Brent crudeofoilthe price absent U.S. shale oil development changed over time For natural gas we draw from Hausman and Kellogg ( ) who For the second wave we take the Killian effect from the end of the first wave look at the market effects of shale gas from to Their analysis focuses on and apply it to the change in U.S. shale oil production in the second wave after estimating the price of natural gas in a world without the shale revolution noting that taking into account the production cuts among OPEC countries since the actual change in price before and after the emergence of shale is not necessarily Kilian ( ) estimates the first shale oil wave reduced the global oil the causal effect of shale because the demand curve could have shifted. As a result price by roughly $ per barrel by August Extending his analysis to the they estimate supply and demand curves for natural gas for and for The second wave of production growth from shale we estimate that the additional price of natural gas in the no-shale scenario is then estimated as the price at the production further cut $ per barrel by May resulting in a total price intersection of the supply ( pre-shale ) curve and the demand curve.5 ( For drop of $ 6.29details per barrel This represents a percent decline in the price and Kellogg ) on estimating the shale-driven price effect see Hausman of oil relativeOur to primary what it modifications would have been if the shale revolution had never to their price analysis are to use the most recent year occurred. for annual data as the end year not ; and to use more recent estimates of the Turningsupply to natural gas we estimate that in aNewell no-shale scenario the price elasticity of natural gas from Prest and Vissing ( ) of natural gas would be $ per thousand cubic feet which is given by the Both prices by arefinding estimated finding price that solves similar basic equation : Quantity Supplied Both prices are estimated the by price that the solves a similar basica equation : Quantity ( P ) Imports Net Imports ( P ) = Residential ( P ) Commercial ( P ) Industrial Demand ( P ) Supplied ( P ) Net ( P ) = Residential DemandDemand ( P ) Commercial DemandDemand ( P ) Industrial ElectricPower Power Demand where is the price of natural demand Demand ( P ) Electric Demand ( P ) ( P ) where P isP the price of natural gas.gas The The demand and and supply curves are where is elasticity.The The net import function is supply curves areassumed assumedto totake takethe the form = ( ) / where is an elasticity assumed to be to linear in price and is estimated using datadata fromfrom to net import function is assumed be linear in price and is estimated using to Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM intersection of the natural gas supply curve and the demand curve With the shale-driven outward shift in the supply curve the price falls to $ per thousand cubic feet a percent decrease. Put differently natural gas prices in were percent lower than they would have been if the shale revolution had never occurred and they were far less variable. This is roughly the same percentage change in the Henry Hub price of natural gas over the period Based on the estimates by Linn Muehlenbachs and Wang ( ) the lower price of natural gas implies that shale gas led to a percent decrease in the wholesale price of electricity as of This estimated decline is also consistent with the wholesale futures price data listed by the EIA from the Intercontinental Exchange. In real terms the weighted-average wholesale price across market hubs fell by percent from to We note that retail electricity prices did not decline during the same period in part because of State renewable portfolio standards mandating that a certain percentage of a State s electricity must come from renewable sources like wind or solar. At least States have adopted such standards with the first being Iowa in The most recent study of these standards finds that even modest renewable electricity targets bring considerable retail price increases ( Greenstone and Nath ) They find that years after a State adopted a renewable portfolio standard retail electricity prices increased by an average of percent. Over the same period the standards raised the proportion of renewable electricity generation by at most percentage points.6 Innovation-Driven Consumer Savings Energy Independence and Environmental Benefits This section first explores methods of estimating consumer savings from lower energy prices. Then it examines the salient findings related to these consumer savings. Next it delineates the United States path toward energy independence. And finally it discusses the environmental benefits of the shale revolution Consumer Savings Methods Lower energy prices can benefit consumers in diverse ways through lower bills for heating or lighting less spending at the gas pump and lower prices for goods or services that require considerable energy inputs such as airline travel or building materials. The standard approach to estimating the total consumer This assumes that the state started with zero renewable electricity generation which is why it is a generous estimate of the increase in renewable generation caused by the standard. The percent is based on the finding by Greenstone and Nath ( ) that the gross renewable requirement increased to roughly percent years after adopting a standard and that the actual level of renewable generation was about percentage points below the grow requirement | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM benefit from a price decline is to calculate the savings for those consuming before the price decline whose value is represented in figure above by the rectangle formed by areas A B and C and the savings on additional consumption spurred by the price decline represented by area D.7 We take this approach for oil multiplying the shale-induced change in the price of oil ( $ per barrel ) with the pre-shale quantity consumed ( about billion barrels annually ) and adding it to one-half the product of the price change and the price-induced change in consumption ( billion barrels ) We modify this approach for natural gas to account for the spillover effects in the electricity market. First we estimate savings using the standard approach described above and following Hausman and Kellogg ( ) who break total demand into its sectoral components including the electricity sector. We first estimate savings for the electric power sector in the same manner as Hausman and Kellogg ( ) ; call this SHK. Their approach assumes that each $ saved because of cheaper natural gas translates into $ saved for electricity consumers. This is a reasonable approach for the share of the power sector with cost-of-service regulation in which case regulators would only reduce compensation to natural-gas-fired generators not to other generators and only by as much as such generators had cost reductions For the share of the sector without cost-of-service regulation however we translate the lower natural gas prices into lower wholesale electricity prices following Linn Muehlenbachs and Wang ( ) The price-setting effect of natural-gas-fired electricity generators magnifies the effect of lower natural gas prices because the gas-driven decline in wholesale electricity prices applies to all electricity consumed in deregulated markets not just the electricity generated by natural gas. We then assume that wholesale market savings pass through to retail savings dollar for dollar which is consistent with the research of Borenstein and Bushnell ( ) who find high rates of pass-through in deregulated markets One-third of the electricity generated in the United States in was generated in States without cost-of-service regulation of generators.8 Based on this share we estimate total electric power sector savings to be the sum of the savings in regulated markets ( = x SHK ) and the savings from unregulated markets ( = x SWholesale ) The supply shift and price change will also affect producer surplus ( not shown in figure ) which is the difference between revenue and cost across all units produced and all producers Whether producers benefit from innovation ( as measured by producer surplus ) depends in large part on how much prices fall and quantities increase. It is likely that there is a net loss in producer surplus for natural gas producers ( Hausman and Kellogg ) but a gain for oil producers whose production has increased greatly with only a modest price decline The EIA provided the CEA with an analysis of data from EIA Form which collects detailed information from the electric power sector. The analysis showed that in percent of electric power supply occurred in regional transmission organizations in unregulated states Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM The approach to estimating natural gas savings which involves sectorspecific consumption amounts and demand curves permits calculating savings for the residential commercial industrial and electric sectors which we collapse into two sectors : the nonelectric sector and the electric sector. For oil we break savings into transportation and nontransportation sector savings allocating savings to the transportation sector based on its share of total petroleum consumption in the United States ( percent ) as reported by the EIA for Regarding the pass-through of energy savings to household income groups we first allocate residential natural gas and residential electricity savings based on each income group s share of spending on natural gas and electricity as reported in the Consumer Expenditure Survey of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. We then estimate the oil-related transportation sector savings associated with direct household consumption by multiplying the total oil savings by the share of transportation sector energy use accounted for by light-duty vehicles such as cars and sport utility vehicles. These direct household savings are then distributed to household income groups based on each group s spending on gasoline other fuels and motor oil as reported in the Consumer Expenditure Survey Finally we allocate the natural gas electricity and oil-related savings that initially occur in the commercial and industrial sectors. We assume that the savings are eventually passed through to households in the form of lower product prices with savings allocated to each household income group according to its share of total household expenditures as reported in the Consumer Expenditure Survey. This is a common approach in the literature on the incidence of carbon taxes which increase energy prices ( Mathur and Morris ) It also has empirical support in important product markets ( e.g. Muehlegger and Sweeney ) The exporting of some of the industrial sectors output to global markets would suggest that the approach overstates savings to U.S. consumers. The shale revolution however has also reduced global energy prices which would lower the costs of foreign producers some of whom serve the U.S. market. We assume that these competing effects offset each other Consumer Savings Findings By lowering energy prices the shale revolution is saving U.S. consumers $ billion annually or an average of $ for a family of four. Nearly percent of the savings stem from a substantially lower price for natural gas of which more than half comes through lower electricity prices ( figure ) The large decline in the price of natural gas and therefore large savings is because domestic supply has overwhelmed domestic demand and the capacity to liquefy and export natural gas to global markets has expanded too slowly to absorb the supply growth. Oil in contrast is economical to transport and is traded on a | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    #  '  $ '   )       * ) (    $ ) "          / *  Dollars ( billions )  * /  '    $ ' ' $ * )  * /  '   ) )  '   $ ) "    $ ' ' $ * )  *   ! *   )    "  !  ( $ '4  * !  ! *    * ) '  /- $  $ /4  / *    $ ' ' $ * )  * ) /-  ) * -/  / $ * )  * /  '    $ ' ' $ * )  / *    $ ' ' $ * )  '  /- $  $ /4  / *    $ ' ' $ * )   ) * -/  / $ * )  / *    $ ' ' $ * )   /0-  '  g   $ '  *   ) "  ) ! * (  / $ * )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )  $ ' $  )     '  a-   /   '        '  '  / $ * ) Figure Total Consumer Savings as a Share of Income by Quintile Percent Lowest percent Second percent Third percent Fourth percent Highest percent Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : Values represent the CEA s estimates of consumer savings as a share of pretax income in Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Box Economic Effects Linked to Drilling and Production Although much of this chapter focuses on the shale revolution s effect on consumers growth in drilling and production has also brought employment income and public revenues to producing regions and beyond. Relative to the State of New York s border counties which have not had shale development Komarek ( ) found that counties in the Marcellus region that were developed had a percent increase in earnings. Across the United States Feyrer Mansur and Sacerdote ( ) estimate that new extraction increased aggregate employment by as much as jobs. In addition to creating wage-earning opportunities expanded drilling in places like North Dakota and Pennsylvania has also brought large payments to landowners holding rights to subsurface resources. Energy firms typically compensate resource owners by paying them a share of the value of production from their land. In production from major shale formations generated nearly $ billion in payments to resource owners ( Brown Fitzgerald and Weber ) Drilling and production can also generate revenue for some State and local governments and local school districts. Between and State revenues from taxes on oil and gas production in the lower states nearly doubled reaching $ billion in real terms ( Weber Wang and Chomas ) At the local level increases in revenues have largely outweighed costs for local governments in most producing states ( Newell and Raimi ) In certain states such as Texas oil and gas wells are also taxed as property and can therefore provide revenues to local school districts. For example shale development in Texas s oil formations increased the property tax base by over $ million per student in the average shale district leading to percent more spending per student ( Marchand and Weber ) massive global market which domestic oil production has influenced but not overwhelmed. As a result oil accounts for the other percent of the savings most of which are transportation sector savings on fuel Because lower-income households spend a larger share of their income on energy bills the savings have greater relative importance for them. Energy savings represent percent of income for the lowest fifth of households compared with percent for the highest fifth ( figure ) In other words lower energy prices are like a progressive tax cut that helps the lowest households the most. The variation in savings stems heavily from differences in spending on electricity ; according to the Consumer Expenditure Survey the bottom percent of households account for percent of expenditures in general but for percent of electricity expenditures. We also considered the economic benefits of increased drilling and production on employment income and public revenues in differing regions as well ( box ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Energy Independence Historically a rise in energy prices increases the trade deficit and costs for firms and households sometimes pushing the U.S. economy into a recession For example a sudden rise in the price of oil preceded of the postwar recessions in the United States ( Hamilton ) The vulnerability of the U.S economy to price shocks motivated a long-standing goal of U.S. Presidents : U.S. energy independence President Richard M. Nixon began the push for energy independence announcing Project Independence in when the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries halted oil shipments to the United States. In the ensuing years Congress and the executive branch directed much attention and resources to pursue energy independence including the Energy Policy and Conservation Act ( ) the establishment of the Department of Energy ( ) the Energy Policy Act ( ) and the Energy Independence and Security Act ( ) By a common measure of independence net exports ( Greene ) the United States essentially achieved independence in both natural gas and oil at the end of and net exports are projected to grow in and beyond Today s achievement however does not stem primarily from these government efforts but rather from private sector innovation that few expected. The shale-driven growth in domestic production documented earlier in this chapter reduced imports and most recently led to a surge in exports of both oil and gas. Fewer imports and more exports caused U.S. net imports of natural gas to fall below zero in making the United States a net exporter of natural gas for the first time since ( figure ) And in September net imports of crude oil and petroleum products fell below zero on a monthly basis ( figure ) The United States is projected to remain a net exporter of crude oil and petroleum products for all of for the first time since at least Energy independence as measured by positive net exports and by increased sectoral diversification of the U.S. economy especially in places like Texas means that higher global energy prices have a negligible or perhaps positive effect on the U.S. economy in the aggregate. With a large domestic energy sector increases in investment by the domestic energy sector offset the effect of higher prices on consumers ( Baumeister and Kilian ) If for example higher oil prices induce substantial new investment in drilling wells with its associated demands for steel and equipment GDP would likely increase as long as the reduced disposable income of consumers has a small effect on their overall spending ( see box for an in-depth explanation of the economic impact of increased drilling and production ) This does not mean that the typical U.S. consumer is unaffected by higher oil prices or benefits from them Rather it means that the country s total output may expand as prices rise Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM  $ "       * ) / # '4   /   * -/. * !    /0-  '      '  / $ * )  ) /  * -/  * ./ '  / $ * )  ) /  * -/  * %  /   ) /  * -/ Cubic feet per day ( billions )    /  * -/  /  $ ( * -/  *   ) "  ) ! * (  / $ * )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )        '  '  / $ * )  $ "       * ) / # '4  /   * -/.  * !      $ '   )    /- * ' (   *   /.   '  / $ * )  ) /  * -/  * ./ '  / $ * )   /   * -/  * %  /   ) /  * -/ Barrels per day ( millions )    /  * -/  /  $ ( * -/  *   ) "  ) ! * (  / $ * )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )        '  '  / $ * ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Changes in Price of Oil ( Prior Month ) and Changes in the Goods Trade Balance and Change in goods deficit ( dollars billions ) $ increase in oil prices reduces the trade balance by $ billion $ increase in oil prices reduces the trade balance by $ billion Sources : Energy Information Administration ; Wall Street Journal ; Census Bureau ; CEA calculations In addition if net imports are near zero large changes in the global price of oil will have negligible effects on the U.S. trade balance which directly affects the country s GDP ( Cavallo ) Figure shows that over the period when the United States imported record amounts of oil and petroleum products a $ per barrel increase in the price of oil reduced the trade balance in goods by $ billion. In the period which saw falling net imports the same price increase reduced the trade balance by only $ billion. As U.S. net exports increase higher prices should eventually increase the trade balance reflecting greater transfers from foreign consumers to domestic producers Energy independence also brings geopolitical benefits such as more influence abroad and fewer constraints on foreign policy. The rise of the United States as a net contributor to the global oil market has reduced oil prices ( Kilian ) and has also reduced the dependence of the global market on particular producers. Currently the United States has sanctions on two major oil-producing countries Iran and Venezuela. These sanctions combined with internal factors in the case of Venezuela have taken millions of barrels of oil per day off the market. Since the United States announced sanctions in November Iranian exports have declined by million barrels per Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM day an percent decrease from their pre-sanction level ; since sanctions on Venezuela took effect in January exports have fallen by million barrels per day a percent decrease. Energy independence increases the feasibility of such sanctions. In addition it reduces the incentive to expend foreign policy resources on efforts to lower global energy prices Geopolitical gains also stem from net exports of U.S. natural gas. For example exports of U.S. LNG to Europe have and will continue to provide a diversified source of competitively priced natural gas to reduce the continent s dependence on Russian gas supplies. The U.S. share of Europe s total natural gas imports increased from percent in the first five months of to percent in the first five months of The potential for greater exports of U.S natural gas to Europe gives U.S. leaders greater influence when discouraging them from supporting the controversial new Nord Stream pipeline project from Russia to Germany. Poland s and Lithuania s leaders are the most recent heads of state to denounce the project as a threat to energy security that would increase European dependence on Russian natural gas supplies Environmental Benefits In addition to bringing energy independence and saving the average family of four $ the shale revolution has brought several environmental benefits The shift to generating more electricity from natural gas and renewable energy sources reduced energy-related carbon dioxide emissions at the national level to a degree that was not predicted before these innovations. In its Annual Energy Outlook the EIA projected a percent increase in carbon dioxide emissions from to ( figure ) Actual emissions decreased by about percent Actual energy-related carbon emissions for were percent lower than projected in Some of the decline is because projections assumed greater GDP growth and therefore greater electricity demand than what actually occurred in part because of the Great Recession and slow recovery. An important part of the decline however stems from lower natural gas prices reducing reliance on electricity generated from coal. Over the period the proportion of generation from coal-fired power plants fell from percent to percent while the share from natural gas increased from percent to percent Low natural gas prices also aided growth in the generation of wind power which expanded from less than percent of generation to percent. Although Federal and State policies such as renewable portfolio standards and tax credits contributed to the increase in wind power generation Fell and Kaffine ( ) document the important role of lower natural gas prices in spurring greater market penetration by wind generation. The complementarity stems from the ability of natural gas generators to quickly ramp up or slow down in response to the intermittent wind generation from gusts or lulls in wind | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Actual versus Projected Carbon Dioxide Emissions Metric tons ( millions ) Projected Actual Source : Energy Information Administration ( EIA ) Note : Carbon dioxide emissions represent total emissions from the consumption of energy as reported by the EIA. Projections are from the EIA Annual Energy Outlook We estimate that from to the shale revolution lowered annual electric power carbon dioxide emissions by million metric tons a percent decline relative to electric power sector emissions in ( figure ) For the estimate we assume that coal emissions in the electricity sector would have otherwise remained constant and we calculate the observed decline in coal emissions which is million metric tons. We assume that percent of the decline is from shale-driven decreases in natural gas prices. This percentage is from Coglianese Gerarden and Stock ( ) who estimate the share of the decline in coal use attributable to the decline in the price of natural gas relative to the price of coal apart from other factors such as environmental regulations which accounted for another percent of the decline.9 Finally we subtract the increase in emissions from greater use of natural gas in electricity generation ( million metric tons = x ) The shale-driven reduction in electric power emissions is larger than what the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) projected its Note that the decline in coal use and coal emissions is linked to the decline in the price of natural gas relative to the price of coal not to the number of coal plants that are replaced with natural gas plants. Natural-gas-driven changes in electricity prices have caused coal plants to close and the retired generation capacity has been replaced with a mix of natural gas plants and renewable sources. Also we note that Coglianese Gerarden and Stock ( ) look explicitly at coal production not consumption but the two are similar. Over most of their study period more than percent of production was consumed domestically A more detailed analysis could be done to estimate the net greenhouse gas ( GHG ) effects from shale gas. For example the CEA estimate does not include leaks from natural gas wells or pipelines According the EPA s emissions inventory total GHG emissions from natural gas systems declined from to Alvarez et al. ( ) estimate that emissions are percent greater than what the EPA reports. Even if this were true for the and EPA measurements emissions from natural gas systems would have still declined over the period. If emissions were understated in but not in the shale-driven declines in emissions would still be larger than those from the policies mentioned in figure In general innovation in leak detection has lowered leak rates over time ( see box ) Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Annual GHG Emission Reductions from Shale Innovation and Major Environmental Policies Metric tons ( millions ) Shale innovation Fuel standards ( projected for ) Clean power plan ( projected for ) Sources : Environmental Protection Agency ; Stock ( ) ; CEA calculations Note : The Fuel Standards refer to the Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards which applied to the period Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards would achieve in ( million metric tons ) following a considerable increase in stringency. The shale reduction is also more than double what the EPA initially projected that the now-rescinded Clean Power Plan would achieve by ( million metric tons ) The shale-driven decline in emissions allowed the United States to have a greater rate of decline in total greenhouse gas ( GHG ) emissions than the European Union holding constant the size of the two economies ( figure ) From to the European Union has developed and expanded an increasingly stringent cap-and-trade system for GHG emissions across its member countries. Although it substantially raised electricity prices for consumers ( Martin Muuls and Wagner ) the system helped the European Union achieve a percent decline in GDP-adjusted emissions from to the most recent year of data. Over the same period emissions fell by percent in the United States which did not implement a national cap-and-trade system although various States have pursued policies to cap emissions If policymakers had averted the shale revolution through a ban on hydraulic fracturing or other integral components of shale development energy sector GHG emissions would most likely be higher today. Absent low natural gas prices renewable electricity sources are unlikely to have enabled similar emissions reductions. A megawatt-hour of coal-fired electricity generates about metric ton of GHG emissions. Achieving the million metric ton decline in GHG emissions is roughly equivalent to reducing coal-fired electricity generation by about million megawatt-hours and replacing it with renewable power generation. This amounts to a percent increase in wind and | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure U.S. versus EU GDP-Adjusted Carbon Dioxide Emissions Metric tons of C per billion dollars of GDP ( = ) United States European Union Sources : Environmental Protection Agency ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; European Environment Agency ; Statistical Office of the European Communities ; CEA calculations Note : Data are total CO2 emissions per $ billion ( ) of each region s GDP solar generation above their level an increase that is not projected to happen until the 2040s.11 During the shale era the percentage decline in coal-fired generation has roughly equaled the percentage decline in the wholesale price of electricity suggesting that prices would need to fall percent below their pre-shale level to reduce coal generation by million megawatt-hours ( percent ) This decline would leave wholesale electricity prices about one-third above their level. This higher price is unlikely to have supported a percent increase in wind and solar generation over their level ( and an even larger percentage increase over their pre-shale level ) It implies an elasticity of supply close to roughly twice as large as the empirical estimate by Johnson ( ) Shale-driven declines in emissions have been large as well as economical. Many policies seek to reduce emissions. Most of them however impose a cost on the economy. Gillingham and Stock ( ) summarize research on the cost of reducing a ton of carbon emissions by various methods. They report that renewable fuel subsidies cost $ per ton of carbon abated Renewable Portfolio Standards cost up to $ per ton and vehicle fuel economy standards cost up to $ per ton. By comparison shale innovation brings emissions savings without requiring greater public spending ( e.g. subsidies ) or costly regulations or mandates The year is estimated using the EIA s Annual Energy Outlook forecast of wind and solar generation in the electric power sector through ( EIA 2019c ) Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure U.S. versus EU GDP Adjusted Particulate Emissions Particulate tons per billion dollars of GDP ( = ) European Union United States Sources : Environmental Protection Agency ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; European Environment Agency ; Statistical Office of the European Communities ; CEA calculations Note : Values are total particulate matter emissions that are microns or less in size per billion U.S dollars of each respective region s GDP. Values are normalized such that is equal to U.S. emissions exclude miscellaneous sources Lower natural gas prices have also affected emissions of particulates such as soot which can affect heart and lung health especially for those with asthma or heart or lung disease. As with GHG emissions GDP-adjusted particulate emissions have declined faster in the United States than in the European Union over the period ( figure ) The difference in the rate of reduction is considerable with U.S. particulate emissions per $ of GDP declining by percent and EU emissions declining by percent. The decline has brought health benefits. Johnsen LaRiviere and Wolff ( ) estimate that as of the shale-driven decline in particulate and related emissions had $ billion in annual health benefits ( see box ) The Value of Deregulatory Energy Policy This section explores the value of deregulatory energy policy. First it shows how deregulation allows innovation to flourish. Then it explains the private sector s part in the critical responsibilities of building and maintaining energy infrastructure Allowing Innovation to Flourish Government deregulation of natural gas markets including the Natural Gas Policy Act the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission s Open Access Order and the Natural Gas Wellhead Decontrol Act helped encourage | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Box Innovation in Pipeline Leak Detection Pipelines are one of the most effective methods of transporting oil and gas but they require monitoring and maintenance. Traditionally monitoring has required that people travel along pipelines by foot automobile plane or all-terrain vehicle. Innovation in technologies such as drones and advanced acoustics has allowed the industry to prevent leaks and more quickly find and stop them when they occur. For example a Shell pilot drone program illustrates how well-equipped drones can identify pipeline corrosion abnormal heat signatures and any effects on wildlife. This helps the company identify leaks but also reveals areas where preventive maintenance is most needed With improvements to technology for monitoring pipeline leaks and other improvements across the supply chain the leak rate for natural gas and petroleum systems fell percent from to ( figure 4-ii ) Figure 4-ii. Methane Production and Leakage Rates Metric tons ( millions ) Leakage rate ( percent ) Methane production ( left axis ) Leakage rate ( right axis ) Sources : Environmental Protection Agency ; Energy Information Administration ; CEA calculations Note : The leakage rate was calculated by assuming that wellhead gas is about percent methane by volume and assuming that the methane density is pounds per cubic foot the innovation that brought the shale revolution. In the same vein the Trump Administration has sought to identify and remove regulations that unduly stifle energy development. This is seen in the Presidential Executive Order on Promoting Energy Independence and Economic Growth and the Executive Order on Promoting Energy Infrastructure and Economic Growth. It is also seen in actions such as permitting for the Keystone XL Pipeline and the DOE s Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM approval of a record amount of Liquefied Natural Gas export capacity to non free trade agreement countries The laboratory of State policy experiments provides examples of contrasting policy approaches and their effects. State governments have the primary responsibility to regulate oil and gas development on non-Federal lands specifying where wells can be drilled how they must be drilled and monitored and how they are to be reclaimed at the end of their useful life. Subject to such regulations most States allow shale development. Maryland Vermont and New York however have banned hydraulic fracturing a practice integral to shale development. Of the three States the New York ban is most consequential because the Marcellus Shale formation which is the most prolific shale gas formation in the United States extends into much of Southern New York. Since New York s initial moratorium on fracking which morphed into a ban in energy firms have drilled more than wells in Pennsylvania counties adjacent to the New York border ( see box for further discussion on the risks and benefits of shale development ) The difference in energy-related outcomes in the two States is stark Development of the Marcellus and Utica Shale in Pennsylvania caused natural gas production to increase 10-fold from to Over the same period New York s production fell by nearly percent. Pennsylvania leads the country in net exports of electricity to other States and produces more than twice the amount of energy it consumes. New York in contrast has grown more dependent on electricity generated elsewhere ; and in the State consumed four times as much energy as it produced Despite the growth in energy production in Pennsylvania total energyrelated carbon dioxide emissions fell percent from to the most recent year of data twice as much as in New York ( percent ) The greater decline in Pennsylvania stems from larger reductions in the electric power sector Innovation however can create challenges for particular sectors. Despite substantial and sustained Federal support including a mid-2000s expectation of a nuclear renaissance low wholesale electricity prices have reduced the profitability of the nuclear power sector. As a result a wave of early retirements from existing nuclear power plants has occurred with more closures planned in coming years ( CRS ) Given that changes in the market are impossible to predict a diversified research-and-development portfolio for new energy technologies will best prepare the economy for tomorrow s market realities The Critical Role of Energy Infrastructure Pipelines electric transmission lines and export facilities allow energy resources to flow from resource-rich places to resource-scarce ones. The growth in oil and gas supply documented above increases demand for pipelines. For example with a dramatic rise in production over the last decade | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Box Shale Development and Local Communities Many academic studies have explored the effects of shale oil and gas development on nearby communities. Two studies estimate measures of local net benefits across all major shale regions and reach a similar conclusion : on average local wage and income effects from development exceed increases in living costs or deterioration in local amenities ( Bartik et al. ; Jacobsen ) Jacobsen ( ) finds that wages across all occupations increased in response to the growth in drilling regardless of whether they had direct links to the oil and gas industry. Similarly Bartik and others ( ) estimate that shale development generated $ in net benefits to households in surrounding communities It is also evident that local effects can vary greatly which is illustrated in the diverse effects of development on housing values. Housing values reflect an area s standard of living including earnings opportunities and amenities such as good roads. Shale development affects both creating jobs but also truck traffic and associated disamenities particularly during times of drilling ( Litovitz et al. ; Graham et al. ) In addition development when poorly managed can pose a risk to groundwater and health and improper disposal of wastewater can induce earthquakes when best management practices are not followed ( Darrah et al. ; Keranen et al. ; Wrenn Klaiber and Jaenicke ; Hill and Ma ; Currie Greenstone and Meckel ) Development has had large positive effects on average housing values over time in many places ( Boslett Guilfoos and Lang ; Weber Burnett and Xiarchos ; Bartik et al. ; Jacobsen ) Drilling itself however has depressed property values at least temporarily for groundwater-dependent homes in Pennsylvania or properties without mineral rights in Colorado ( Muehlenbachs Spiller and Timmins ; Boslett Guilfoos and Lang ) Welfare effects can also vary across households in shale areas based on the value that households place on greater earning opportunities relative to disamenities such as noise and congestion The nuisances and risks that can come with drilling and fracturing wells highlight the value of prudent State and local policies that match local realities safeguard the environment and human health and allow private landowners to contract with energy firms to bring valuable energy resources to market. Almost all major producing States have revised oil and gas laws to address hydraulic fracturing and shale development more generally. North Dakota for example adopted rules limiting the flaring of natural gas in a practice that is especially common in the State because oil producers there have limited infrastructure to deliver to market the natural gas that accompanies oil production. Similarly as shale development grew in Pennsylvania the State adopted a policy that effectively ended the treatment of fracking wastewater at publicly owned treatment plants which were shown to be poorly equipped to properly treat the water Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Pennsylvania has switched from being a major importer of natural gas to being a major exporter. Acquiring regulatory approval and building the necessary pipelines has taken time progressing to completion in some places but not others In and private firms finished two major pipeline projects the Rover and Nexus pipelines to take Appalachian gas into Michigan and beyond with the projects adding nearly miles of pipeline and billion cubic feet of gas per day of capacity. The first phase of the Rover pipeline was finished in August and ran from Southeastern Ohio ( near the Pennsylvania border ) to Northwestern Ohio ( near the Michigan border ) The second phase was finished in May and extended the pipeline through Michigan and into Canada. The Nexus pipeline was also completed in and follows a similar route eventually connecting with existing pipelines near Detroit No new interstate pipelines were built from Pennsylvania into New York ( and therefore into New England ) over the same period. Total expansions or extensions of existing pipelines that transit New York totaled miles in length and billion cubic feet per day in additional capacity. The 125-mile Constitution Pipeline which would take Pennsylvania gas to New York and beyond has been repeatedly delayed since the project s inception in with a major source of delay being the refusal of the New York Department of Environmental Conservation to grant a necessary certification Natural gas price differences across States and over time illustrate the implications of new investments in pipelines. As natural gas production grew in Pennsylvania Ohio and West Virginia citygate prices in Michigan fell relative to the national average price plausibly reflecting the benefit of being closer to a place of burgeoning supply growth. ( The citygate price measures local wholesale natural gas prices ) From to when two main pipeline projects were being completed the Michigan price relative to the national average price fell percent. The New York price went in the opposite direction increasing by percent potentially reflecting the interaction between high demand ( from an above-average number of cooling-degree days in ) and pipeline constraints ( figure ) The percent decline in the Michigan citygate price relative to the national price provides a credible estimate of the price effect of expanded pipeline capacity. It is similar to estimates of the effect of major capacity expansions ( Oliver Mason and Finnoff ) or the price premium associated with insufficient capacity ( Avalos Fitzgerald and Rucker ) A percent decline in the New York and New England citygate price would save consumers in the region an estimated $ billion annually or $ for a family of four. Some of the savings would be from residential commercial and industrial consumers paying less for the natural gas that they consume but the bulk of savings would be from lower electricity prices. New York and most of New England have deregulated electricity markets where | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    $ /4 "  /    /0-  '      $  $ )   $  # $ "  )   )      * -&   '  / $  / *    / $ * )  '    "   $    * #   State price / national average price ( dollars )  * ( ' /  * #    * ( ' /    * -&  $  # $ "  )  *    ) "  ) ! * (  / $ * )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )        '  '  / $ * )  * /   #  *   $ ' $ )  #       * ( ' /   $ )   " 0./    )   #       * ( ' /   $ )       -/ $   '     ) / / #   " $ ) ) $ ) "  * !  / #    # en  / #  $ ' $ )     * ( ' /   " $ )   ) )  '    /  electricity-generating firms sell into competitive markets. Linn Muehlenbachs and Wang ( ) find that for New York and New England a percent decrease in the price of natural gas lowers the price of electricity by percent. Applying this gas-driven decline in wholesale prices to the region s consumption of electricity in provides $ billion of the total $ billion in savings Other infrastructure investments could provide similar value. The Atlantic Coast Pipeline for example would take natural gas from West Virginia to North Carolina where citygate prices have been about percent higher than in West Virginia in We also note that pipelines are not the only means of transporting natural gas domestically. The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration recently approved a permit request to transport LNG by rail Just as pipelines allow producers to reach high-price markets in other states facilities for exporting LNG allow U.S. producers whose production now exceeds domestic consumption to reach high-price markets abroad. In response export volumes have surged averaging billion cubic feet per day ( Bcf/d ) in the first months of compared with less than Bcf/d in the first months of Under the Natural Gas Act exports of LNG must be approved by the DOE on the basis of whether the exports are consistent with the public interest. Under the Trump Administration the DOE has doubled the volume of LNG approved for export increasing capacity from Bcf/d to more than Bcf/d as of October Energy : Innovation and Independence | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Conclusion The shale revolution provides a striking example of the potential of private sector energy innovation and the resulting implications for consumers and the environment. In less than a decade productivity in oil and gas extraction has increased several-fold. As a result production costs have fallen making energy goods and services more affordable for consumers especially lower-income households. By several measures the shale revolution has led to greater environmental progress in the United States than in the European Union which exercises more government control and has more stringent emissions policies The Trump Administration s deregulatory policies aim to support private sector innovation and initiative by reducing excessively prescriptive government regulation. In doing so the Administration seeks to further unleash the country s abundant human and energy resources. This policy stance is consistent with the approach taken by most States which have allowed shale production to flourish as long as companies meet updated State policies that limit risks to human health and the environment. However some States have taken a more command-and-control approach which has had predictable effects In particular New York State has taken an alternative unsafe-at-any-speed approach to shale development. As it has done so its natural gas production has fallen its imports of electricity have increased and its rate of GHG emissions reduction has been less than that of neighboring Pennsylvania State and Federal policy questions related to shale will persist in debates about environmental and energy policy. The shale revolution will continue to influence energy prices because the private sector has shown that large amounts of oil and gas can be extracted from shale and similar formations at moderate prices. The knowledge and capability gained from innovation will remain through periods of low energy prices that drive overleveraged firms into bankruptcy. In addition policies that would severely constrain use of this capability come with large forgone benefits in large part the consumer savings and environmental gains documented in this chapter. The Trump Administration s deregulatory energy agenda in contrast seeks to overcome government barriers to private sector innovation that lowers energy prices and benefits the environment | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM x Chapter Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition Driven by unparalleled medical innovation the American healthcare system remains the envy of the world. However its past success does not mean that healthcare in the United States always delivers the value that it should. Costs for many procedures and medications are too high access to the healthcare that patients demand is limited and competition is lacking. But these challenges do not mean that the only solution is increased government intervention. These improvements can be accomplished by enhancing healthcare choice and competition in ways that embrace the value of the market while focusing on patients needs The Trump Administration has already made major progress in delivering high-quality lower-cost healthcare by creating more choice in health insurance markets and more competition among healthcare providers. In other words it is possible to keep what works and fix what is broken. For example the Administration has sought to make healthcare more affordable by lowering out-of-control prescription drug prices and expanding access to more affordable healthcare options. Additional policy changes put patients in control of their healthcare by ensuring price transparency and allowing Americans to pick the care that fits their needs. At the same time accelerating medical innovation has provided new treatment options for patients living with disease Under the Trump Administration the Food and Drug Administration approved more generic drugs than ever before in U.S. history and updated its approval process for new lifesaving drugs. This past year prescription drug prices experienced the largest year-over-year decline in more than years. Whether 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM it is through reforms that seek to expand association health plans promote health reimbursement arrangements or give terminally-ill patients access to potentially lifesaving drugs among many other successes every healthcare reform that lowers costs and increases quality allows American workers to live longer healthier lives and keep more of their paychecks The Administration s focus on consumer-centric health policies will make the healthcare marketplace more competitive and protect as well as enable consumers to obtain life-enhancing technologies. For example the Administration s recent policy change to permit insurers to offer policies with additional benefits covered before a deductible is met and allow enrollees to maintain health savings accounts are real changes already helping those with preexisting conditions. And with future changes under way to enable patients using the real price for major medical services the effect of the free market to lower health care costs for all consumers has just begun Healthcare regulations at all levels of government can increase price limit choice and stifle competition which in combination lead U.S. healthcare to fail to provide its full value. These regulations can also harm the broader economy. For example the Affordable Care Act has impeded economic recovery by introducing disincentives to work. The Trump Administration s successes in addressing these policies over the past three years show the value of empowering the market to deliver the affordable healthcare options that Americans rightly expect. Further patient-centered reforms will provide Americans with improved healthcare through enhanced choice and competition T he United States healthcare system relies more on private markets to provide health insurance and medical care than do those of other countries. And the U.S. system is supplemented by public sector programs to finance the care of vulnerable populations which include low-income and senior populations. Most Americans are in employer-sponsored group health plans and are often satisfied with the insurance coverage and medical care they receive. However the U.S. system does not always deliver the value it should Market competition leads to an efficient allocation of resources that should | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM lower prices and increase quality. But every market has features that deviate from optimal conditions and healthcare is no exception. Last year ( CEA ) we discussed obstacles in healthcare markets and concluded that they are not insurmountable problems that mandate the government s intervention This chapter identifies government barriers on the Federal and State levels to healthcare market competition that lead to higher prices reduce innovation and hinder quality improvements. The chapter proceeds with a review of barriers to competition and choice and then it provides a summary of the accomplishments and expected effects of Administration health policy in reducing these impediments and creating competitive innovation in the healthcare markets for all Americans. The Administration s reforms aim to foster healthcare markets that create value for consumers through the financing and delivery of high-quality and affordable care. Government mandates can reduce competitive insurance choices and raise premiums By focusing on choice and competition the Administration is encouraging States to provide flexibility to develop policies that accommodate numerous consumer preferences for healthcare financing and delivery. The Administration has addressed these problems through a series of Executive Orders deregulatory measures and signed legislation. By we estimate that million Americans will have new insurance coverage that was previously unavailable due to high prices and overregulation.1 Building a High-Quality Healthcare System A key goal for the healthcare marketplace is to provide effective high-value care to all Americans. Achieving this goal requires careful consideration and revision of specific Federal and State regulations and policies that inhibit choice and competition. This section identifies two ways to increase choice and competition : creating more choice in health insurance markets and creating more competition among healthcare providers Creating More Choice in Health Insurance Markets The majority of Americans obtain health insurance coverage through private sector employer-sponsored group plans and other private ( individual or nongroup ) plans ( see figure ) The public sector Medicaid program provides coverage to people with low incomes while Medicare provides coverage to older Americans. Figure shows the percentages of Americans that have various The CEA previously released research on topics covered in this chapter. The text of this chapter builds on the Economic Report of the President ; the CEA report Measuring Prescription Drug Prices : A Primer on the CPI Prescription Drug Index ( CEA 2019c ) ; the CEA report Mitigating the Impact of Pandemic Influenza through Vaccine Innovation ( CEA 2019d ) ; the report Reforming America s Healthcare System through Choice and Competition from the Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) ; and policy announcements from the Executive Office of the President Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Health Insurance Coverage by Type of Insurance Employment based Marketplace Other private Medicare Medicaid Other public Uninsured Percentage of Americans covered Sources : Census Bureau ; CEA calculations Note : Numbers do not sum to percent due to overlap for individuals with multiple health insurance plans. Other private plans include nongroup direct-purchase plans and TRICARE. Other public plans include veterans health insurance. Blue indicates private health insurance plan types and red indicates public health insurance plan types types of health insurance coverage but many people have multiple coverage sources ; for instance many older adults on Medicare purchase private supplemental insurance plans. In more than percent of all Americans were covered by private health insurance plans while just over percent were covered by public plans. Among the insured population percent had more than one type for all of ( Census Bureau ) Employer-sponsored insurance dominates most of the private health insurance market. The individual insurance market accounts for a smaller share of the insured population. In the individual market consumers buy their insurance through the insurance exchanges established by the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) or through ACAcompliant individual policies Since earlier in the 2000s when private health insurance premiums grew rapidly growth rates have moderated especially since ( Claxton et al ) Figure shows the inflation-adjusted growth in the average premium for family coverage through employer-sponsored group plans. The total premium is paid partly through the employer contribution and partly through the employee contribution. We focus on the total premium because health economists agree that ultimately employees also pay the employer-contribution in the form of reduced wages. In the individual insurance market after the Affordable Care Act established health insurance exchanges the premiums almost doubled in the first few years. From to the benchmark ACA premiums dropped by percent. From to the benchmark ACA premiums dropped by an additional percent ( CMS ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Annual Change in Average Family Premium Including Employee and Employer Contributions Percent change ( year-over-year ) Sources : Kaiser Family Foundation s Employer Benefits Survey ; CEA calculations Recent health policy changes at the Federal and State levels have sought to give consumers more control over their medical expenditures so they can seek greater value for their health investment. Two of the best illustrations of these consumer-focused policies are health saving accounts ( HSAs ) and health reimbursement arrangements ( HRAs ) As described in the Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) report Reforming America s Healthcare System through Choice and Competition the promotion and expansion of these policies combined with price and quality transparency initiatives will encourage consumers to make better and more informed care choices to enhance their health ( HHS ) Consumer-directed health plans ( CDHPs ) is an all-encompassing term for HRAs HSAs and similar medical accounts that allow patients to have greater control over their health budgets and spending. The growth of CDHPs has been substantial especially by large employers that offer these highdeductible plans HRAs and HSAs in a larger strategy to introduce consumerism in employer-sponsored health insurance. HRAs allow employees to shop in the individual market for their preferred plans. Expanding consumer choice in health plans decreases the deadweight loss associated with poor plan matching and leads to gains in consumer surplus ( Dafny Ho and Varela ) HSAs may be especially attractive to consumers because they may be used for nonmedical healthcare expenses and are portable ( Greene et al. ) In an analysis of firms that completely replaced traditional managed care plans with Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Percentage of Covered Workers Enrolled in a Plan with a General Annual Deductible of $ or More for Single Coverage Percentage of covered workers All small firms All firms All large firms Source : Kaiser Family Foundation s Employer Benefits Survey Note : Small firms have to workers and large firms have or more workers CDHPs for their employees Parente Feldman and Yu ( ) saw significant decreases in total healthcare costs though they were inconsistent among firms that offered different mixes of HRAs and HSAs. CDHPs may also be beneficial for low-income families and high-risk families where total health spending significantly decreased for vulnerable ( low-income or high-risk ) families with CDHPs ( Haviland et al. ) Healthcare costs are also lower for employers offering CDHPs whose costs in the first three years after a CDHP is offered are significantly lower relative to firms that do not offer a CDHP ( Haviland et al. ) As seen in figure the share of individuals enrolled in high-deductible health plans in the employer-sponsored health insurance market has risen substantially. This has led consumers to have greater incentives to shop for medical services that are not reimbursed before their deductible is met Although the growth of CDHPs has increased out-of-pocket medical expenses on average the plans are available with significantly lower premiums than other health insurance choices as seen in figures and Furthermore with the Administration s new options to cover predeductible care for the chronically ill with little to no out-of-pocket expense as discussed later is this chapter more choices are available for more vulnerable populations than before | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Average Annual Worker and Employer Premium Contributions for Single Coverage Employer contribution Worker contribution Premium contributions ( dollars ) HMO PPO POS HDHP/SO Type of health insurance All plans Source : Kaiser Family Foundation s Employer Health Benefits Survey Note : HMO = health maintenance organization ; PPO = preferred provider organization ; POS = pointof-service plan ; HDHP/SO = high-deductible health plan with savings option Figure Average Annual Worker and Employer Premium Contributions for Family Coverage Employer contribution Worker contribution Premium contributions ( dollars ) HMO PPO POS HDHP/SO Type of health insurance All plans Source : Kaiser Family Foundation s Employer Health Benefits Survey Note : HMO = health maintenance organization ; PPO = preferred provider organization ; POS = pointof-service plan ; HDHP/SO = high-deductible health plan with savings option Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Creating More Competition among Healthcare Providers Recent studies of variation in health service pricing suggest that the market lacks needed competition. If competition is reduced among providers ( e.g. physicians or hospitals ) and in addition there is no change in patient demand then higher prices and fewer choices are likely to result. These can also lower overall healthcare quality and limit the efficient allocation of resources Government policies can diminish competition by adversely limiting the supply of providers and the scope of services they offer Choice and competition can be limited by State policies that restrict entry into provider markets. This in turn can stifle innovation that could lead to more cost-effective care provision. Higher healthcare prices and fewer incentives for quality improvement by providers can be the results of these market-stifling State policies. In particular state-specific certificate-of-need laws could reduce provider access and create unnecessary monopoly pricing where there is limited competition. In chapter of this Report we discuss advocacy efforts by the Trump Administration to limit the harmful effects of certificate-of-need regulation Since the 1990s markets for a variety of healthcare services have become more consolidated ( NCCI ) Some consolidation involves cross-market mergers as for example when hospitals operating in different regions form a system but there is also evidence of increasing concentration in local markets. As discussed in chapter the Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) and the Department of Justice s ( DOJ ) Antitrust Division classify markets using the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ( HHI ) Between and the proportion of metropolitan statistical areas ( MSAs ) with hospital market HHIs classified as highly concentrated ( i.e. with an HHI above ) rose from percent to more than percent ( Gaynor Ho and Town ) Concentration has also risen significantly in health insurance markets. Even when consolidation occurs between close competitors consumers can benefit from substantial efficiency gains However the trends of rising concentration have properly drawn attention to the question of how consumers are affected. A recent but growing body of literature has linked increasing concentration in hospital markets to rising prices markups and falling quality. A number of studies have found that mergers between hospitals that are close competitors leads to significantly higher prices without improving quality ( Vogt and Town ; Gaynor and Town ) or in settings with regulated prices to lower quality ( Kessler and McClellan ; Cooper et al. ) This literature is still young and more needs to be done particularly to assess what is driving the consolidations Fuchs ( ) argued that the rise of health maintenance organizations is a contributing factor as hospitals seek to offset the bargaining power of large | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM insurers by becoming large themselves ; but as discussed by Gaynor Ho and Town ( ) the empirical evidence for this is mixed More generally it is important to understand if rising concentration is associated with factors such as rising fixed-cost investments or economies of scale that may benefit consumers. This causality issue is discussed in chapter At a minimum however these results suggest that market structure is an important aspect of healthcare markets Consolidation is also seen in the prescription drug market. The growth in importance of pharmacy benefit managers ( PBMs ) to serve as intermediaries between drug manufacturers and health insurers also increased the size of the largest PBMs their purchasing power and their ability to obtain rebates and discounts from manufacturers ( Aitken et al. ) PBMs are resistant to list drug price increases as their profits are usually a percentage of drug list prices thus there is little incentive to reduce the amount charged to insurers As discussed later in this chapter the three largest PBMs hold percent of market share One way to gauge the uneven competition among healthcare providers is to examine the degree of competition ( or lack thereof ) in major metropolitan markets. Data made available by the Health Care Cost Institute ( HCCI ) used negotiated provider price data to illustrate the degree of lack of competition present in the market at the national and regional levels. Using data from HCCI Newman and others ( ) examined variations in the negotiated rates of providers from possible medical services. They calculated the ratio of the average price paid in each State to the average national price for a given medical service by ratio categories for each of the services. Figure presents a map depicting variation in cataract surgery prices by state The map illuminates both regional patterns and variations among Statelevel average cataract removal prices. For example Iowa Illinois and Indiana all have prices between and percent of the national average price Alternatively across four States in the Southeast the ratio of State average price to national average price decreases from through percent in the Carolinas to a ratio of less than percent in Florida Kansas and New York have prices close to the national average price for cataract surgery at $ and $ respectively compared with $ ( HCCI ) However the average prices in the neighboring States of Nebraska and Connecticut are $ and $ more. With respect to knee replacements New Jersey and Kansas have the lowest average prices ; and Washington Oregon and South Carolina have the highest average prices Prices in Connecticut and Iowa are about the same as the national average price of roughly $ The data show that Arizona Texas Rhode Island and West Virginia have the lowest average prices for a pregnancy ultrasound while Oregon Wisconsin and Alaska have some of the highest average prices Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Ratio of State Average Price to National Average Price of Cataract Removal Sources : Newman et al. ( ) ; Health Care Cost Institute Insufficient data Less than % % to % % to % % to % % to % Greater than % Although the national average price for a knee replacement is more than times larger than a pregnancy ultrasound there is greater variation in average prices for ultrasounds. For example in South Carolina the average knee replacement price is more than percent higher than the national average while in Wisconsin the average pregnancy ultrasound is more than percent greater than the national average. This suggests that relative to the average price there are higher high prices and lower low prices among the pregnancy ultrasound prices. Much of this variation could be due to the lack of transparency in shoppable services to create a truly competitive market There is also variation within regions or States in price trends. HCCI ( ) also calculated the ratio of each State s average price relative to the national average price for each medical service. The percentages of services within eight ranges of ratios were then graphed for each state ( Newman et al ) Figure provides a visual representation of the distribution of all care medical services and can be compared across States Figure shows the distribution of prices for four States : Florida Ohio Connecticut and Minnesota. Of the care bundles calculated for Florida the prices for percent of them were at or below the national averages. Ohio with care bundles had higher prices on average than Florida ; but roughly percent of all prices were at or below the national averages. Connecticut with care bundles estimated on average had higher prices than Florida and Ohio with percent of its care bundle prices being at least percent | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Distribution of Average State Price Relative to Average National Price of Care Bundles in Four States Florida Ohio Connecticut Minnesota Percentage of care bundles Percentage of average national price > Source : Health Care Cost Institute Note : Price data for Florida include care bundles ; for Ohio bundles ; for Connecticut bundles ; and for Minnesota bundles higher than the respective national averages. Minnesota with estimated care bundles had the highest prices on average with more than percent of the care bundles having prices percent or more above the national average Table presents the highest average and lowest average price for a knee replacement reported for a metropolitan statistical areas in States.2 Sacramento has the highest average price ( $ ) more than twice as high as Tucson Miami Saint Louis Syracuse Toledo Allentown Knoxville and Lubbock. California also has the largest within-State difference in average price ( $ ) across any paired set of MSAs in the State. Though the two California markets are miles apart it is worth noting that a three-hour drive from Palm Bay Florida to Miami could potentially save $ on knee replacement surgery a difference of roughly $ per mile driven assuming one s insurance plan design covered the individual in both locations. Absolute dollar differences across MSAs were small in Connecticut South Carolina and Virginia for the MSAs for which we had sufficient data to calculate prices These findings demonstrate that there is wide geographic variation in prices within the privately insured population. Although some of the variation may be a result of the differences in the costs of doing business ( e.g. supplies These are indicative differences because prices could not be calculated for every MSA in a State There could have been higher or lower prices in an unreported MSA in a State. These reported prices should drive inquiries into why these differences exist and whether any differences are justified by local differences or other evidence Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Table Variation in Knee Replacement Prices across MSAs within States Number of MSAs State Difference between Distance Highest MSA- Lowest MSAhighest and lowest between level average level average MSA-level average MSA cities price ( dollars ) price ( dollars ) ( miles ) price ( dollars ) Arizona California Connecticut Florida Missouri New York Ohio Pennsylvania South Carolina Tennessee Texas Virginia Source : Health Care Cost Institute Note : MSA = metropolitan statistical area wages and rent ) the remaining variation could be attributable to other factors such as a lack of transparency market power or alternative treatments A patient-centered healthcare policy s goal would be the least unjustified price difference as possible and a low average price for a service. For example Arizona has the sixth-largest price difference ( $ ) in the pregnancy ultrasound prices a service that should be similar in scope and quality across providers care settings cities and States. The average of the average prices paid in Tucson and Phoenix is the lowest ( [ $ $ ] / = $ ) To address how competition can lower prices more broadly the Administration s report Reforming America s Healthcare System through Choice and Competition outlined many other important measures to increase competition for the entire healthcare sector including hospitals and doctors which make up the bulk of total spending. For example a recent Executive Order set the way for increasing price transparency in healthcare which allows competition to more effectively operate | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Healthcare Accomplishments under the Trump Administration Since the beginning of his Administration President Trump has sought to make healthcare more affordable by lowering prescription drug prices and making new affordable healthcare options available. Policies have been advanced to provide transparency and choice so patients can choose the care that fits their needs. In addition pathways have been sought to unleashing American innovation that will provide new treatment options for patients living with disease To increase choice the Administration has increased insurance options and reduced the regulatory burden. To increase competition the Administration has focused on three major areas : ( ) accelerating innovation ( ) increasing access to valuable therapies and ( ) making the health market stronger with greater transparency. Efforts in each of these areas are discussed in this section with the goal of setting out how to keep what works and fix what is broken Increasing Choice This subsection addresses a number of key aspects of how to increase choice These include reducing regulatory burdens stabilizing health insurance exchanges lowering the individual mandate penalty to zero encouraging State innovation in insurance design expanding association health plans and short-term limited-duration insurance strengthening Medicare expanding health reimbursement arrangements and modernizing high-deductible health plans Reducing regulatory burdens. In our Report we estimated the impact of deregulated health insurance markets to provide more plan competition and choice for small businesses and American consumers through expanding association health plans and short-term limited duration plans. These deregulations in addition to eliminating the individual mandate were estimated to generate $ billion in benefits over the next decade. We estimated that the reforms will benefit lower- and middle-income consumers and all taxpayers but will impose costs on some middle- and higher-income consumers who will pay higher insurance premiums. The benefits of giving a large set of consumers more insurance options will far outweigh the projected costs imposed on the smaller set who will pay higher premiums. In we provided estimates supporting the claim that these reforms do not sabotage the ACA but rather provide a more efficient focus of tax-funded care for those in need Stabilizing health insurance exchanges. In April HHS issued a final rule aimed at stabilizing the exchanges. Among other provisions this rule made it more difficult for consumers to wait until they needed medical services to enter the exchanges. This limits gaming of the program and the driving up of premiums for those who maintain continuous coverage Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM The HRA rule is expected to cause a significant increase in individual market enrollment in the early 2020s. The rule is projected to do so through additional choice and market competition and without any new government mandates. Younger and healthier employees may be more likely to prefer the typical individual market coverage of relatively high deductibles and more limited provider networks due to their lower premiums so it is possible that the HRA rule could lead to an improved individual market risk pool ( Effros ) This would occur if the HRA rule generates greater demand in the individual market and from younger and older workers given the relative attractiveness of lower premium cost generated by the HRA contribution to the employee when they purchase insurance Lowering the individual mandate penalty to zero. In December President Trump signed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act which set the ACA s individual mandate penalty to zero. This benefits society by allowing people to choose not to have ACA-compliant health coverage without facing a tax penalty and by saving taxpayers money if fewer consumers purchase subsidized ACA coverage. As we discussed last year the CEA estimates that from through setting the mandate penalty to zero will yield $ billion in net benefits for consumers ( CEA ) Encouraging State innovation in insurance design. As of seven States operated State Innovation waivers under Section of the ACA that utilized a reinsurance component. As a way to lower risk the State establishes a fund to subsidize insurers for a certain amount of the expenses from people with costly claims. These waivers lead to lower ACA plan premiums and thus lower associated premium tax credit costs. These seven States had a median premium decline of percent compared with an increase in nonwaiver states of percent ( Badger ) Compared with what would have occurred if the States had not passed waivers the decrease in premiums has likely caused increased enrollment in these States. By the end of States received back roughly percent of savings of their initial contribution in Federal pass-through funding ( Blase 2019a ) Expanding association health plans and short-term limited-duration insurance. In June the Department of Labor ( DOL ) finalized a rule to expand the ability of employers including sole proprietors to join together and purchase health coverage through association health plans ( AHPs ) For many employers employees and their families AHPs offer more affordable premiums by reducing the administrative costs of coverage through economies of scale. The AHP rule also gave small businesses more flexibility to offer their employees health coverage that is more tailored to their needs In August HHS the Department of the Treasury and DOL finalized a rule to expand Americans ability to purchase short-term limited-duration The revised definition of an employer for bona fide AHPs established under this rule is being adjudicated | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM insurance ( STLDI ) STDLI premiums generally cost less than premiums for individual insurance on the ACA exchanges. Because of lower costs additional choice and increased competition millions of Americans including middleclass families that can not afford ACA plans stand to benefit from this reform Recently the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) stated that is will count some short-term plans as health coverage just as it did with pre-ACA plans with benefit exclusions or annual and lifetime limits ( Aron-Dine ) Though these plans are more limited in coverage than the ACA-compliant insurance plans they are priced at up to percent less than the unsubsidized premium cost of ACA exchange plans and give consumers more insurance protection than being uninsured As a result of STDLI and AHP rules the CBO and the U.S. Congress s Joint Committee on Taxation estimates that over the next decade roughly million more people are projected to be enrolled in AHPs or short-term plans. Of this increase almost percent constitute individuals who would otherwise have purchased coverage in the small-group or nongroup markets. The remaining percent ( roughly million people ) are made up of individuals who are projected to be newly insured as a result of the rules ( CBO ) Strengthening Medicare. The Administration s reforms to Medicare include payment policies that align with patients clinical needs rather than the site of care simplified processes for physicians documentation of evaluation and management visits new consumer-transparency measures and increased flexibility for insurers so that they can offer more options and benefits through Medicare Advantage In President Trump signed an Executive Order to improve seniors healthcare outcomes by providing patients with more plan options additional time with providers greater access to telehealth and new therapies and greater alignment between payment models and efficient healthcare delivery ( White House 2019b ) In addition a priority will be streamlining the approval coverage and payment of new therapies while reducing obstacles to improved patient care. Finally the effort improves the fiscal sustainability of Medicare by eliminating waste fraud and abuse Expanding health reimbursement arrangements. In June HHS the Treasury Department and DOL issued a final rule expanding the flexibility and use of health reimbursement arrangements to employers ( FR ) The rule issued two new types of tax-advantaged HRA plans excepted benefit HRAs ( EBHRAs ) and individual coverage HRAs ( ICHRAs ) to be offered as early as January EBHRAs may be offered to employees with traditional group plans to receive an excepted benefit HRA of up to $ a year in ( indexed to inflation afterward ) for the purchase of certain qualified medical expenses such as short-term limited duration vision and dental plans. ICHRAs allow employers to reimburse employees who purchase their own health plans and Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM equalizes the tax treatment of a traditional employer-sponsored insurance plan and an individual market plan paid by employer contributions The Treasury Department performed microsimulation modeling to evaluate the coverage changes and transfers that are likely to be induced by the final rules. The Treasury s model of health insurance coverage assumes that workers are paid the marginal product of their labor. Employers are assumed to be indifferent between paying wages and payroll taxes and paying compensation in the form of benefits. The Treasury model therefore assumes that total compensation paid by a given firm is fixed and the employer allocates this compensation between wages and benefits based on the aggregated preferences of their employees. As a result employees bear the full cost of employersponsored health coverage ( net of the value of any tax exclusion ) in the form of reduced wages and the employee share of premiums The Treasury Department s model assumes that employees preferences regarding the type of health coverage ( or no coverage ) are determined by their expected healthcare expenses and the after-tax cost of employer-sponsored insurance exchange coverage with the premium tax credit ( PTC ) or exchange or other individual health insurance coverage integrated with an individual coverage HRA and the quality of different types of coverage ( including actuarial value ) When evaluating the choice between an individual coverage HRA and the PTC for exchange coverage the available coverage is assumed to be the same but the tax preferences are different. Hence an employee will prefer the individual coverage HRA if the value of the income and payroll tax exclusion ( including both the employee and employer portion of payroll tax ) is greater than the value of the PTC. In modeling this decision the Federal departments assume that premiums paid by the employee are tax-preferred through the reimbursement of premiums from the individual coverage HRA with any additional premiums ( up to the amount that would have been paid under a traditional group health plan ) paid through a salary reduction arrangement In the Treasury Department s model employees are aggregated into firms based on tax data. The expected health expenses of employees in the firm determine the cost of employer-sponsored insurance for the firm Employees effectively vote for their preferred coverage and each employer s offered benefit is determined by the preferences of the majority of employees Employees then decide whether to accept any offered coverage and the resulting enrollment in traditional or individual health insurance coverage determines the risk pools and therefore premiums for both employer coverage and individual health insurance coverage Based on microsimulation modeling the Federal departments expect that the final rules will cause some participants ( and their dependents ) to move from traditional group health plans to individual coverage HRAs. As noted above the estimates assume that for this group of firms and employees | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM employer contributions to individual coverage HRAs are the same as contributions to traditional group health plans would have been and the estimates assume that tax-preferred salary reductions for individual health insurance coverage are the same as salary reductions for traditional group health plan coverage. Thus by modeling construction there is no change in income or payroll tax revenues for this group of firms and employees ( other than the changes in the PTC discussed below ) Although the tax preference is assumed to be unchanged for this group after-tax out-of-pocket costs could increase for some employees ( whose premiums or cost sharing are higher in the individual market than in a traditional group health plan ) and could decrease for others. A small number of employees who are currently offered a traditional group health plan nonetheless obtain individual health insurance coverage and the PTC because they can not afford a traditional group health plan or such a plan does not provide minimum value. Some of these employees would no longer be eligible for the PTC for their exchange coverage when the employer switches from a traditional group health plan to an individual coverage HRA because the HRA is determined to be affordable under the final PTC rules The regulatory impact analysis conducted by the Treasury Department concluded that the benefits of the HRA rule substantially outweigh its costs The Treasury Department estimated that employers are expected to provide HRAs after being fully ramped up. In addition it is estimated that there will be a reduction in the number of uninsured by by From these employers HRA contributions it is expected that firms will cover more than million employees with individual health insurance by Modernizing high-deductible health plans. A major component of the Trump Administration s health policy has been a focus on consumer-directed health plans in particular modernizing high-deductible health plans ( HDHPs ) and their accompanying HSAs. As directed by the President the Treasury released a new Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) guidance ( Notice ) on July that allows high-deductible health plan issuers to permit coverage of prevention therapies for those with certain chronic conditions including diabetes asthma heart disease and major depression. The impact could be profound. For example these plans could now cover all or nearly all the cost of insulin for diabetic patients before the deductible being met HSA-eligible plans are a growing proportion of the overall HDHP market In about million Americans were enrolled in HSA-eligible HDHPs up from an estimated million in ( AHIP ) In nearly percent of all firms offered an HDHP with a savings option such as an HSA ( KFF ) Among companies studied in by a survey of the National Business Group on Health percent offered a full replacement HSA-type plan to employees in ( NBGH ) HSA market growth is expected to continue Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) about percent of Americans have a chronic disease such as heart disease or diabetes. The economic burden of chronic diseases in the United States is estimated to be about $ trillion per year ( Waters and Graf ) Decreasing financial barriers to evidence-based care for chronic conditions provides opportunities to enhance clinical outcomes and reduce the long-term growth rate of healthcare spending. Because about percent of total U.S. health spending is due to chronic diseases appropriate chronic disease management is key to lowering long-term healthcare cost growth ( NACDD n.d. ) The IRS guidance allows for the creation of an enhanced HSA-eligible plan to provide predeductible coverage for targeted evidence-based secondary preventive services that prevent chronic disease progression and related complications This can improve patient outcomes enhance HDHP attractiveness and add efficiency to medical spending The creation of these new high-deductible health plans plus secondary prevention coverage ( HDHP+ ) will give patients with certain conditions better access. VBID Health ( ) estimated that it could increase tax revenue in a variety of scenarios dependent on the updating of the new plan. Note that VBID Health s analysis was performed before Congress repealed the Cadillac tax in December The authors of this report ( VBID Health ) used the ARCOLA microsimulation model to gauge the Federal tax revenue and insurance take-up impact of an HDHP+ among those under and not in the Medicare market The model assumes bronze plans in health insurance exchanges migrate into the new HDHP+ design. That said it is challenging for HSA-eligible plans in the exchanges to meet bronze level actuarial value given their lower out-of-pocket maximum required in statute compared with the out-of-pocket maximum limits for the individual market. Providing more predeductible coverage will make this more challenging. The model also assumes that everyone in the individual market has the option of an out-of-exchange HSA-eligible plan that does not switch to the HDHP+ design. The results are split into four scenarios for firms that offer an HSA-HDHP : all firms additionally offer HDHP+ half of all firms additionally offer HDHP+ all firms replacing current plans with HDHP+ and half of all firms replacing current plans with HDHP+. Differences across employer scenarios illustrate a range of possibilities that may play out Across all employer scenarios the initial uptake and forecasted growth of the novel HDHP+ are positive as people switch plan types. What varies by employer scenario however are the magnitude and growth of uptake over time. The HDHP+ generally has high initial uptake across employer scenarios The lowest uptake is in the scenario where half of employers additionally offer the HDHP+ with other HDHP options. Because of the higher HDHP+ premiums due to selection this result is expected ( figure ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Health Insurance Enrollment across Employer Scenarios All PPOs HDHP+ Change in enrollment ( millions of people ) HDHP Full addition Half addition Full replace Employer scenario Half replace Sources : VBID Health ( ) ; CEA calculations Note : PPOs = preferred provider organizations ; HDHP+ = enhanced high-deductible health plan ; HDHP = high-deductible health plan Figure The Net Revenue Impact of Expanding High-Deductible Health Plans Dollars ( billions ) Full addition Half addition Full replace Employer scenarios Half replace Source : VBID Health ( ) Note : Scenarios apply to the percent premium for enhanced high-deductible health plans Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Net revenue effects can be seen in three of the four scenarios modeled after introducing HDHP+ to employer and individual markets and the migration of people across plan types ( figure ) Different employer decisions regarding plan offerings as seen in the scenarios modeled may lead one scenario to have a larger effect than another one ( VBID Health ) More than the magnitudes of the different budget effects is the clustering of each scenario around budget neutrality. The one scenario that shows a small net reduction in tax revenue ( full replacement ) was modeled as an extreme case. The net effects of each scenario are small relative to the net impact of tax subsidy of the entire employer-sponsored insurance market Thus the net impact of expanding the secondary prevention safe harbor is likely close to zero if not modestly positive Increasing Competition This subsection explores how to increase competition in providing healthcare The topics it covers include enforcing antitrust laws accelerating generic drug approvals creating price and quality transparency promoting new vaccine manufacturing and clarifying the Physician Self-Referral Law and the Federal Anti-Kickback Statute Enforcing antitrust laws. Chapter discusses the importance of sound antitrust policy which protects consumers from anticompetitive mergers. As discussed there the Antitrust Division of the DOJ and the FTC collectively the Agencies share responsibility for enforcing the Nation s antitrust laws Although the vast majority of mergers do not raise competitive concerns the Agencies use their investigative powers to identify those that do by obtaining and analyzing the detailed evidence that is needed to make this distinction Challenging a merger is often risky as evidenced by the fact that between and the Agencies lost all seven lawsuits that they filed to block hospital mergers ( Moriya et al. ) In response to this the FTC engaged in a retrospective study of hospital mergers that advocated against the outdated methodology that the courts had been using to evaluate these mergers. Joseph Simons the FTC chairman recently reported to Congress that the FTC has successfully defended in blocking a merger between healthcare providers ( FTC v. Sanford Health ) This was the FTC s fifth straight appellate victory involving health provider mergers The DOJ has worked to stop anticompetitive mergers among health insurers. In the DOJ successfully blocked two proposed mergers that would have combined four of the largest health insurers ( Anthem Cigna Aetna and Humana ) into two companies. More recently the DOJ reached a settlement with CVS in its bid to acquire Aetna. The DOJ raised concerns relating to the sale of individual prescription drug plans ( PDPs ) under Medicare s Part D program. CVS and Aetna competed head-to-head in U.S. regions covering million PDPs of which million had coverage from CVS or Aetna | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM The DOJ alleged that this competition had led to lower premiums and lower out-of-pocket-expenses and had improved formularies and service in many regional markets. To preserve competition the DOJ required Aetna to divest its individual prescription drug plan. As discussed in an earlier report ( CEA ) CVS Express Scripts and OptumRx are the three largest pharmacy benefit managers in the United States. The American Medical Association ( ) expressed concern to the DOJ that but for the CVS-Aetna merger Aetna might become a disruptive competitor in PBM markets. At the time Aetna engaged in some PBM activities while outsourcing other activities to CVS. The DOJ did not raise concerns along these lines The DOJ also recently reached a settlement in a conduct case against Atrium Health ( formerly the Carolinas HealthCare System ) The DOJ was concerned about provisions in Atrium s contracts with health insurers that were preventing insurers from offering financial incentives to their customers to choose providers that offer better value than Atrium in terms of lower prices better service or both. The restrictions undercut the efforts of health insurers to induce competition between providers by creating health plans that provide incentives for consumers to use providers that qualify for preferred tiers or in-network status. As discussed by Gee Peters and Wilder ( ) the DOJ s economic analysis was consistent with academic research suggesting that these plans help to reduce premiums Accelerating generic drug approvals. HHS has taken a number of actions to empower consumers and promote competition building on accomplishments such as the Food and Drug Administration s ( FDA s ) record pace of generic drug approvals ( CEA ) Initiatives to clarify regulatory expectations for drug developers coupled with internal review process enhancements improved the speed and predictability of the generic drug review process at the FDA resulting in a record number of generic drug approvals in the first three years of the Trump Administration. In fiscal year the FDA approved a record generic drugs after record approvals from the previous two years ( HHS 2019c ) These actions contributed to the recent decrease ( see box ) in prescription drug prices ; in June these prices saw their largest year-over-year decrease in years ( see chapter for more discussion of the Administration s deregulatory actions ) Creating price and quality transparency. On June the President signed an Executive Order to promote price and quality transparency through a set of new initiatives ( White House 2019b ) A major problem in the healthcare market is that patients often do not know the price or quality of healthcare services. This lack of transparency denies patients the vital information they need to make informed choices and exacerbates increased costs suppressed competition and lower quality. As a result there are wide variations in prices across healthcare markets even for the same services as was described earlier in this chapter. Accurate accessible price and quality information will allow Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Box The Consumer Price Index for Prescription Drugs Despite arguments that prescription drug prices have increased in drug prices according to the Consumer Price Index for prescription drugs ( CPI-Rx ) have declined ( year-over-year ) in of the past months as of the October release of CPI. The CPI is designed to provide an empirical measure of the impact of price changes on the cost of living. As a component of the general CPI the CPI-Rx measures how prices are changing in the prescription drug market by indexing the weighted average of the price changes in a random sample of prescription drugs ( see figure ) The CPI-Rx has several strengths ( CEA 2019c ) First it includes a random sample of prescription drugs and provides a summary measure that is representative of the entire market of prescription drugs. Even if prices are increasing for a large number of rarely prescribed drugs the CPI-Rx can show an average decrease if the prices of the most commonly prescribed drugs are decreasing. A second strength of the CPI-Rx is that it accounts for generic drugs. Lower-cost generic bioequivalents of many prescription drugs are widely available and are often purchased over name brands and the CPI-Rx captures price decreases from new generic entries. The CPI-Rx also measures transaction prices instead of list prices. The transaction price includes all payments received by the pharmacy including out-of-pocket payments and payments from insurance companies and it corresponds to the negotiated price and reflects discounts though not rebates. The list price does not include discounts and rebates and is less representative of what the customer pays Though the CPI-Rx is the best measure of overall prescription drug inflation it is not a perfect measure. One of its main limitations is that it does not account for the improvement in consumer value that occurs with the entry of new goods particularly when they are of a higher quality than existing goods. This bias is believed to cause the CPI-Rx to overstate the true level of prescription drug inflation and has been estimated to be as high as percentage points a year ( Boskin et al. ) A comparison between the CPI-Rx and a separately constructed large alternative data set of drug prices from the research firm IQVIA showed larger price increases in the IQVIA index indicating that the CPI-Rx may not be fully representative of a larger sample ( Bosworth et al. ) Additionally even though the CPI-Rx for drug prices indicates reasonable increases or declines there may be some drug products for which price changes can appear extreme patients to identify savings by shopping for healthcare services and make choices that fit their healthcare needs and financial situations. Additionally transparency in healthcare prices and quality will lead to better value and more innovations by facilitating increased competition among healthcare providers One of the first results of this initiative is a rule requiring hospitals to publish their negotiated hospital charges ( FR ) The new Executive Order | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM directs providers as well as insurers to reveal negotiated prices on a routine basis to aid consumers in their purchase of competitively priced medical care and treatments The Executive Order also includes the development of the Health Quality Roadmap ( HHS 2019a ) The Roadmap will align and improve reporting on data and quality measures across Medicare Medicaid the Children s Health Insurance Program the Health Insurance Marketplace the Military Health System and the Veterans Affairs Health System. To accomplish this goal the Roadmap will provide a strategy for advancing common quality measures aligning inpatient and outpatient measures ; and eliminating low-value or counterproductive measures The Executive Order also calls for increased access to de-identified claims data from taxpayer-funded healthcare programs and group health plans Healthcare researchers innovators providers and entrepreneurs can use these de-identified claims which will still ensure patient privacy and security to develop tools that enable patients to access information that helps with decisions about healthcare goods and services. Increased data access can reveal inefficiencies and opportunities for improvement including performance patterns for medical procedures that are outside the recommended standards of care The Price and Quality Transparency Executive Order seeks to make all healthcare prices negotiated between payers and providers non-opaque and to help those shopping for healthcare to get the best value and lowest price as they do in other markets outside healthcare. The policy execution of revealing negotiated prices between payers is currently under way and the impact will be able to be assessed in future analyses. One estimate places the potential savings from common medical procedures to be nearly percent on a nationwide basis ( Blase 2019b ) Promoting new vaccine manufacturing. In September the President signed an Executive Order promoting new influenza vaccine manufacturing technologies to reduce production times and increase vaccine effectiveness Millions of Americans suffer from seasonal influenza every year and new vaccines are formulated each year to decrease infections from the most prevalent influenza viruses. Vaccines are incredibly effective against influenza with one study finding that vaccines prevented over influenza-related deaths between and ( Foppa et al. ) Despite their effectiveness current methods of vaccine production are often very slow and can diminish vaccines efficacy in protecting against seasonal influenza infection. Production delays could be even more important in the event of a pandemic influenza outbreak The CEA ( 2019d ) found that the cost of delay in vaccine availability in the case of a pandemic is $ billion per week for the first weeks and $ billion per week for the next weeks Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM The new Executive Order identifies the weaknesses in current methods of vaccine production and promotes new technologies such as cell-based and recombinant vaccine manufacturing to speed vaccines development and improve their efficacy. Additionally the new initiative establishes a task force to increase Americans access to vaccines. If sufficient doses of vaccines are delivered at the outset of an influenza pandemic the CEA ( 2019c ) estimates that $ billion in economic benefits could be gained by Americans primarily due to the prevention of loss of life and health Clarifying the Physician Self-Referral Law and the Federal Anti-Kickback Statute. The Administration proposed two rules in to provide coordinated care for patients ( FR ) and to ensure that there are safeguards and flexibility for healthcare providers in value-based arrangements ( FR ) The first rule proposed by CMS is part of the Administration s efforts to promote value-based care by lifting Federal restrictions on healthcare providers so that they have greater ability to work together on delivering coordinated patient care The second proposed rule issued by the HHS Office of the Inspector General focuses on the Federal Anti-Kickback Statute and the Civil Monetary Penalties Law. This proposal addresses the concern that these laws needlessly limit how healthcare providers can coordinate patient care. Expanding flexibility could for example encourage outcome-based payment arrangements that reward improved health outcomes. The changes would also offer specific safe harbors to make it easier for healthcare providers to ensure they are complying with the law ( HHS 2019b ) Increasing Access to Valuable Therapies This section covers a number of key topics on how to increase access to valuable therapies. These include ending the HIV epidemic expanding kidney disease treatment options combating the opioid crisis and expanding the right to try clinical trials Ending the HIV epidemic. For the last four decades the Human Immunodeficiency Virus ( HIV ) has been one of the most prominent health risks confronting people in our country and around the world. In President Trump announced a plan to end the HIV epidemic within years. This epidemic has claimed the lives of about Americans since The new initiative is designed to reduce the number of new HIV infections in the United States by percent over the next five years and by at least percent over the next decade. Through efforts across HHS an estimated HIV infections could be averted over the next years. The Administration also facilitated a large private donation of pre-exposure prophylaxis ( PrEP ) medication which will help reduce the risk of HIV infection for up to patients per year for up to years to provide critical PrEP medication to uninsured individuals who might otherwise be unable to access or afford it | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Expanding kidney disease treatment options. In July the President signed an Executive Order to enable better diagnosis treatment and preventive care for Americans suffering from chronic kidney disease. In line with the Administration s broader deregulatory agenda a key focus of the Executive Order is an effort to remove regulatory barriers to the supply of kidneys Currently the Federal Government bears most of the cost paying for chronic kidney disease and end-stage renal disease care which affect more than million Americans ( White House 2019d ) More than Americans begin dialysis each year to treat end-stage renal disease half of whom die within five years. The Executive Order seeks to modernize and increase patient choice through affordable treatment options that are too expensive and fail to provide a high quality of life As directed by the Executive Order the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services issued a proposed rule to hold organ procurement organizations more accountable for their performance ( FR ) More than Americans are currently on the waiting list for an organ transplants a number that far exceeds the number of organs available. The rule raises performance standards for organ procurement organizations to reduce discarding viable organs encourage higher donation rates and shorten transplant waiting lists ( CMS 2019a ) Additionally the Health Resources and Services Administration issued a proposed rule to alleviate financial barriers of organ donations ( FR ) This rule would allow for reimbursement of lost wages and childcare and eldercare expenses for living donors lacking other means of financial support potentially increasing the number of transplant recipients over a shorter time period Combating the opioid crisis. The Trump Administration is using Federal resources to fight against the opioid crisis in U.S. communities. Actions are focused on supporting those with substance use disorders and involving the criminal justice system to crack down on illicit opioid suppliers both foreign and domestic. Over $ billion in funding was secured in fiscal years and for preventing drug abuse treating use disorders and disrupting the supply of illicit drugs ( OMB ) Investments include funding for programs supporting treatment and recovery drug diversion and State and local assistance Chapter outlines in more detail many of the Administration s accomplishments in combating the opioid crisis Expanding the right to try. The Administration has made increased access to new and critical therapies a priority. One of the new bold programs in was the passage of Right-to-Try legislation for patients with terminal illnesses such as cancer. The National Cancer Institute ( n.d. ) estimates that million new Americans will be diagnosed with cancer and will die from cancer in Currently only to percent of adult cancer patients are enrolled in clinical trials an indication of the limited options for patients with life-threatening diseases ( Unger et al. ) For these patients who are Free-Market Healthcare Promotes Choice and Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM ineligible to participate in clinical trials and have exhausted all approved treatment options this bill amended Federal law to provide a new option in addition to the FDA s long-standing expanded access program for unapproved experimental drugs ( including biologics ) to potentially extend their lives. To ensure safety and transparency manufacturers or sponsors of an eligible drug that has undergone the FDA Phase I ( safety ) testing are required to provide annual summary reports to the FDA on any use of the drug under Right-to-Try provisions Conclusion This chapter has identified Federal and State barriers to healthcare that increase prices reduce innovation and hinder improvements in quality. It also provided a summary of the accomplishments and expected effects of the Trump Administration s policies to address these barriers and deliver a healthcare system that offers high-quality care at affordable prices. By we estimate that million Americans will have new insurance coverage that was previously unavailable due to high prices and overregulation In contrast to the Administration s focus on improving consumerdirected healthcare spending government mandates often reduce consumer choice. At all levels of government healthcare regulations that limit choice stifle competition and increase prices should be updated so that the U.S healthcare system can provide greater value. These regulations can also harm the broader economy. For example the Affordable Care Act has impeded economic recovery by introducing disincentives to work ( Mulligan ) Though market competition leads to an efficient allocation of resources that should lower prices and increase quality every market has features that deviate from optimal conditions and healthcare is no exception. Although the U.S healthcare system has challenges they are not insurmountable problems that mandate greater government intervention. The healthcare policy successes over the past three years show the value of empowering the market to deliver the affordable healthcare options that Americans rightly expect and further reform will provide Americans with improved healthcare through enhanced choice and competition | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM x Part II Evaluating and Addressing Threats to the Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM x Chapter Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition America s economic strength has always been driven by private sector competition. When large corporations small businesses and entrepreneurs all must innovate to compete for market share on a level playing field American consumers win and the economy grows stronger Yet even with the economic expansion becoming the longest in U.S. history wage growth consistently meeting or exceeding percent unemployment falling to a 50-year low and small business optimism within the top percent of historical results there is growing concern that the playing field is no longer level harming innovation and thus the American economy. The increasing size of many of the Nation s largest companies and the growing importance of economies of scale has led some to hold the mistaken simplistic view that Big Is Bad. Though anticompetitive behavior by companies of any size should lead to investigations and specific enforcement actions against offenders an across-the-board backlash against large companies simply because of their size is unwarranted. Antitrust enforcers should continue to be particularly vigilant where firms have significant market power given the harm they can cause if they engage in anticompetitive conduct. Moreover under U.S. antitrust law conduct that may be procompetitive for a small firm can become problematic if undertaken by a monopolist. However the focus must be on the conduct and not on size alone. Successful companies benefit the economy and consumers and they are not necessarily the threat to competition and economic growth that they are sometimes perceived to be. Instead companies that achieve scale 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM and large market share by innovating and providing their customers with value are a welcome result of healthy competition As this chapter explains the Trump Administration understands the vital role competition plays in growing the economy promoting new business and serving consumers. This understanding is underpinned by a deep appreciation of economic evidence and the best available evidence shows that there is no need to hastily rewrite the Federal Government s antitrust rules. Federal enforcement agencies which are already empowered with a flexible legal framework have the tools they need to promote economic dynamism ; as ongoing investigations and resolved cases show they are well equipped to handle the competition challenges posed by the changing U.S. economy This does not mean that the Trump Administration s work promoting competition is finished. In addition to vigorously combating anticompetitive behavior from companies the Administration is especially focusing on government policies that distort and limit competition. As historic regulatory reform across American industries has shown cutting government-imposed barriers to innovation leads to increased competition strong economic growth and a revitalized private sector V igorous competition is essential for well-functioning markets and a dynamic economy. Therefore the Trump Administration has championed policies that promote competition such as reforming the tax code and removing costly and burdensome regulations. The Administration also promotes competition through sound antitrust policy which protects consumers from anticompetitive mergers and business practices. Effective antitrust enforcement supports the Administration s deregulatory agenda by fostering self-regulating competitive free markets. The Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice ( DOJ ) and the Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) collectively the Agencies share responsibility for enforcing the Nation s antitrust laws. This chapter evaluates antitrust policy and the Agencies roles in light of recent trends in the U.S. economy and pressing debates about competition In recent years new technologies and business models have revolutionized the relationships between firms and consumers. Some of these changes such as rapidly improving information technology have enabled firms to | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM grow expanding their offerings from local markets to national ones and from national markets to international ones These changes have exacerbated concerns about rising concentration That is in some parts of the economy the largest firms appear to account for an increasing share of revenues. An influential Obama-era CEA report Benefits of Competition and Indicators of Market Power ( CEA ) argued that competition may be decreasing. This report is part of a broader debate currently taking place in government academia and policy circles about the state of competition in the economy. Proponents of the view that competition is declining ( e.g. Faccio and Zingales ; Guti rrez and Philippon ; Philippon ) argue that big businesses face little competition and are earning profits at the expense of consumers and suppliers. Advocates such as Furman ( ) and the Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms ( ) have called for changes to competition policy that would broaden the scope of antitrust enforcement. Others have cautioned that these proposals are not supported by the economic evidence ( Syverson ) or that current antitrust rules are adequate to address legitimate concerns about anticompetitive behavior ( Yun ) Calls for changing the goals of the antitrust laws are based on empirical research that misinterprets high concentration as necessarily harmful to consumers and reflective of underenforcement. That argument was discredited long ago when economists such as Demsetz ( ) and Bresnahan ( ) articulated the fundamental reasons why high concentration is not in and of itself an indicator of a lack of competition. The main point is that concentration may result from market features that are benign or even benefit consumers For example concentration may be driven by economies of scale and scope that can lower costs for consumers. Also successful firms tend to grow and it is important that antitrust enforcement and competition policy not be used to punish firms for their competitive success. Finally antitrust remedies may not be required even when firms exercise market power because monopoly profits create incentives for new competitors to enter the market unless substantive entry barriers or anticompetitive behavior stand in their way Moreover recent empirical arguments that competition is in decline have been based on broad cross-industry studies. The findings from these studies are both problematic and incomplete and their implications for competition remain speculative. In contrast the methods that the Agencies use to analyze competition are rooted in microeconomic empirical evidence and involve detailed analyses of competitive conditions in specific industries. Any conclusions about the state of competition should be made on the basis of this type of careful research In addition criticisms about the capabilities of antitrust enforcement to address novel enforcement challenges in dynamic markets fail to account for the flexibility of antitrust rules to accommodate a range of market conditions Effective antitrust enforcement takes account of the evidence and economics Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM appropriate to particular markets and in turn adapts to innovation and development in the markets over time In short we argue that major policy initiatives to completely rewrite antitrust rules and to create a new regulator for the digital economy are premature In this chapter we discuss and critique proposals for such initiatives advanced by proponents in the debate. As we explain because these proposals are likely to impose significant costs they should not be undertaken on the basis of current evidence Finally we discuss competition policy beyond antitrust law and the Administration s efforts to combat the negative impact of overly burdensome regulation on competition. We highlight the Trump Administration s successful efforts to streamline the process by which new drugs are brought to market particularly generic drugs. We also discuss the Agencies efforts to advocate for the removal of unnecessary occupational licensing requirements that limit entry into professions certificate-of-need laws that limit entry by new hospitals and automobile franchising laws that limit the ability of car manufacturers to sell cars directly to consumers. Here we also discuss the Agencies work at the intersection of intellectual property law and antitrust law The structure of the chapter is as follows. We first provide an overview of antitrust policy and the economic analyses that the Agencies do to evaluate whether there is a need for the Federal Government to be involved to prevent anticompetitive mergers or other similar conduct. We then discuss the claims of rising concentration and the evidence on which they are based contrasting this to the type of analysis that the Agencies do. Next we discuss the proposals for regulation with a focus on the digital economy. In the last section we discuss the Trump Administration s policies to spur competition outside the context of antitrust rules The Origin and Principles of Antitrust Policy The Agencies follow the guiding principle that the role of antitrust law is to protect the competitive environment and the process of competition. The Agencies use their given authority for robust enforcement of antitrust law to prevent anticompetitive behavior by firms. They also seek to avoid undue interference by the Federal Government in the competitive process The main antitrust statutes are the Sherman Antitrust Act of the Clayton Act of and the Federal Trade Commission Act of Together these laws address three categories of conduct : mergers monopolization and anticompetitive agreements. First under the Clayton Act both Agencies challenge mergers that have a reasonable likelihood of reducing competition. They also challenge acts of monopolization under Section of the Sherman Act or the equivalent provision of the Federal Trade Commission Act. Finally both Agencies challenge agreements among separate economic actors that place | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM unreasonable restraints on trade under Section of the Sherman Act or the Federal Trade Commission Act ( FTC 2019d ) Certain types of conduct such as collusion among competitors to fix prices or rig bids are considered so harmful to competition that they are categorized as criminal violations of the Sherman Act. The DOJ has long prioritized criminal enforcement of the antitrust laws and violations carry significant financial fines and for culpable individuals jail time For noncriminal conduct whether for mergers or monopolization a central challenge facing the Agencies is determining when conduct is procompetitive and when it is anticompetitive. It can be difficult to distinguish between the two and optimal enforcement is often a balancing act. The Agencies and the Courts want to avoid mistakenly prohibiting conduct that is procompetitive and they also want to avoid allowing conduct that is anticompetitive To understand these challenges consider a merger between direct competitors ( i.e. a horizontal merger ) The reduction in competition could encourage the merged firm and also perhaps its competitors to raise prices. If higher prices or other competitive types of harm to consumers are the likely outcome of a merger then the Agencies may file a lawsuit to seek to block the transaction. Conversely a merger even one between close competitors can enhance competition by creating a stronger competitor. Mergers often allow firms to combine complementary assets to realize a variety of efficiencies For example they may realize cost reductions improve the quality of their products or develop new products. Cost reductions in particular create an incentive to reduce prices that can offset or even reverse any incentives to raise prices. As a result horizontal mergers may in some cases lead to lower prices not higher ones. As we discuss in the next section when the Agencies review mergers they conduct a detailed economic analysis to assess these complex issues Most mergers do not raise competition issues. For example the merging firms may not operate in the same or even related markets. Antitrust concerns are usually greatest when the merging parties are direct competitors. In rarer cases antitrust concerns can arise when the merging firms are vertically related such as when one firm sells inputs to the other. This was the case in the DOJ s challenge of the merger between AT&T and Time Warner as is discussed by Gee Peters and Wilder ( ) When mergers are large enough the merging parties must notify the Agencies in advance of merging. In the most recent year for which data are available the Agencies received notice of mergers that were potentially subject to review ( DOJ and FTC 2019a ) Most deals were allowed to proceed after an initial review that takes place within days of the notification. In matters the reviewing agency identified competition issues and sought additional discovery from the parties to allow an in-depth investigation in what is referred to as a Second Request. As figure shows the number Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Summary of Transactions by Fiscal Year Mergers receiving second-stage review Total mergers potentially subject to second-stage review Number of firms Source : Federal Trade Commission and Department of Justice ( 2019a ) of second requests conducted by the Agencies has remained relatively stable over time Economic Analysis at the Agencies To aid in distinguishing between procompetitive and anticompetitive conduct the Agencies employ Ph.D. economists who specialize in the analysis of competition. The Agencies also hire outside economic experts to examine evidence in particular cases. Here we provide an overview of how economic analysis is used in merger enforcement. Similar methods are used in other areas of antitrust enforcement The central question in any merger review is whether the merger may substantially lessen competition. As explained in the Horizontal Merger Guidelines ( DOJ and FTC ) this means that one or more firms affected by the merger are reasonably likely to raise prices reduce output decrease quality reduce consumer choice diminish innovation or otherwise harm consumers. This is sometimes referred to as a consumer welfare standard because the focus is on economic harm to consumers. Usually this means harm to downstream customers of the merging firms but the Agencies may also evaluate harm to upstream suppliers if there is a concern that the merger will enhance monopsony power leading to lower prices or other types of economic harm for the suppliers deprived of competition for the sale of their goods or services ; see box Importantly for the digital age the consumer welfare | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Box Antitrust and Monopsony : George s Foods and Tyson Foods Although most merger reviews focus on types of harm to downstream consumers the Agencies may also investigate antitrust concerns relating to monopsony. In the DOJ challenged George s Foods acquisition of a chicken-processing complex in Harrisonburg Virginia that was owned by Tyson Foods. Both companies provide chicken-processing services for birds that are raised by the surrounding area s farmers. The processors own the birds provide the chicks and feed and transport the birds between the farm and processing plants. The farmers ( growers ) work under contract with the processors providing chicken houses equipment and labor for raising the chickens Before the merger George s Foods and Tyson Foods competed directly with each other for purchasing the services of growers in the Shenandoah Valley. The merger reduced the number of competitors from three to two leaving George s Foods with about percent of local processing capacity The DOJ raised concerns that the merger would allow George s Foods to decrease prices or degrade contract terms to growers in the region. The other competing processor lacked the capacity to take on significant numbers of growers if George s were to depress prices. To remedy these concerns George s agreed to invest in improvements in Tyson s chicken processing facilities giving it an incentive to operate at a greater scale than before the merger. With an increased demand for chickens George s also had an increased demand for the local growers ( DOJ 2011a 2011b ) standard considers harm beyond price effects including harm to innovation quality and choice. The consumer welfare standard is also different from a total welfare standard which would focus on overall efficiency or outcomes that maximize the joint surplus of consumers and firms.1 To evaluate the likelihood of consumer harm the Agencies analyze a variety of evidence. They may seek documents testimony and data from the merging parties. They may also seek information from other affected parties including customers suppliers and rival firms An important part of the analysis is to determine the nature of competition. Competition takes a variety of forms and the effect of a merger depends on how competition works in the affected markets. For example firms set prices in a variety of ways. They may be posted as is common in the retail sector or they may be negotiated as is common in business-to-business services In some cases negotiations between buyers and sellers are structured with a formal auction process. These and other differences shape the nature of competition. In some markets competition is so fierce that two competing firms Wilson ( ) has a discussion of the pros and cons of alternative antitrust standards Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM are enough to drive prices down to the marginal cost. In other markets many firms can profitably set prices significantly above the marginal cost The strength of competition between any firms depends on the extent to which consumers view their products as substitutes. Firms often sell differentiated products. This means that their products are similar but not identical and consumers may have strong ( or weak ) preferences between them. An important part of the economic analysis is assessing how close the merging firms products are to each other in the view of consumers. Concerns about a lessening of competition will usually be greatest if many consumers view the firms products as each other s closest substitutes. For example some brands of breakfast cereal are so different in flavor nutrition and other attributes that few consumers regard them as substitutes and competition between them is weak. Other brands of breakfast cereal probably compete head-to-head. To assess the closeness of products economists at the Agencies review evidence such as win/loss reports discount approval processes customer switching patterns and consumer surveys Based on such evidence the Agencies identify relevant markets where competition is likely to be harmed. This analysis is based on demand substitution or how consumers would respond to the increase in the price of a product For example if the evidence were to show that few people would switch to eating sugary breakfast cereals if the price of heart-healthy breakfast cereals were to rise the Agencies might define a market for heart-healthy breakfast cereals that excludes the sugary alternatives. How broadly or narrowly to define markets can be a source of contention as the shares of the merging firms will appear lower in broader markets. If markets are defined too broadly they will contain products that do not significantly constrain the prices of the merging firms. The lower shares of the merging firms may then wrongly suggest that there is more competition than actually exists The Agencies also identify the relevant geography for a market. Markets may have a limited geography based either on consumers preferences or on sellers ability to serve them. For example for most people restaurants in Los Angeles and New York are probably not close substitutes. Nor would a flight from Los Angeles to New York be a good substitute for a flight from New York to Washington. In mergers of airlines the DOJ often defines markets consisting of origin and destination pairs. A relevant market might include nonstop flights from San Francisco to Los Angeles if the merging parties both offer such flights The Agencies use a methodological tool known as the hypothetical monopolist test to delineate relevant markets. The test imagines that a single profit-maximizing firm monopolizes the candidate market and then analyzes whether the monopolist would impose at least a small but significant and non-transitory increase in price ( DOJ and FTC ) The Agencies usually define markets to be the smallest ones that satisfy the test. When a market is | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM defined this way products in the market significantly constrain each other s prices but products outside the market do not After defining a relevant market the Agencies calculate shares for all firms in the market and assess the level of concentration. Markets are classified as unconcentrated moderately concentrated or highly concentrated based on thresholds of the HHI ; see box Markets with HHIs above are considered highly concentrated. In such markets the Agencies presume that mergers that increase the HHI by more than points are likely to be anticompetitive. However the merging parties can rebut this presumption with persuasive evidence To illustrate the role of market definition consider the recent merger of the Walt Disney Company and Twentieth-Century Fox. The DOJ was concerned about competition between ESPN which was owned by Disney and the Fox Regional Sports networks. A key question was how much competition these cable sports networks faced from the sports programming shown on the major broadcast networks. The DOJ alleged that the licensing of cable sports programming to multichannel video programming distributors such as Comcast and FIOS was a relevant market and one in which the merging parties had high shares. In excluding broadcast programming from the market the DOJ alleged that the broadcast networks did not provide sufficiently close competition to prevent competitive harm. As stated in the complaint multichannel video programming distributors do not typically consider broadcast network programming as a replacement for cable sports programming because broadcast networks offer limited airtime to sports programming and are focused on marquee events with broad appeal. The DOJ approved the merger only after the parties agreed to divest Fox s interests in its regional sports networks ( DOJ 2018a 2018b ) The inquiry into market share is a starting point for economic analysis but the ultimate goal is to assess whether the merger is likely to have adverse competitive effects. A merger may harm competition because there are fewer competitors competing ( unilateral effects ) or it could harm competition by encouraging explicit or tacit coordination between rivals ( coordinated effects ) As noted above mergers may harm competition in prices or they may harm competition in nonprice dimensions such as quality or innovation To evaluate competitive effects the Agencies use a variety of evidence Market shares are one type of evidence but other evidence is also considered For example the Agencies may analyze how a recent merger in the same market affected competition. Or if the merging firms compete in some local markets but not others the Agencies may compare prices across regions where the firms do and do not compete. In markets with differentiated products such as breakfast cereal the Agencies may estimate diversion ratios. A diversion ratio is a measure of how closely two products compete. For a first product sold by one of the merging firms and a second product sold by the other merging Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Box Measuring Concentration and the HHI Concentration is a measure of the number and size of firms competing in a market. When markets are delineated around competition concentration can be a useful reflection of competitive conditions. In highly concentrated markets those markets with a small number of large firms mergers between large firms are relatively likely to enhance market power leading the merged firm to raise prices reduce quality reduce innovation or otherwise harm consumers The Agencies usually measure concentration in terms of a firm s share of market revenues but concentration can be defined around other measures such as unit sales. The Agencies use the measure that best reflects the competitive significance of firms in the market. For example if physical capacity limits the ability of firms to expand their production market shares may be measured in terms of physical capacity. A firm that is poised to enter a market but is not yet selling anything may be assigned a market share based on projected revenues The Agencies measure concentration using the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ( HHI ) which is calculated as the sum of the squares of the individual firms market shares in a relevant market. In a monopolized market with only one firm the firm s share is percent and the HHI is ^ or In a market with firms each with percent share the HHI is much lower at A higher HHI corresponds to a more concentrated market. A merger between two firms combines their shares so the HHI increases. For example if a market has four equal-sized firms and two of the firms merge the HHI increases from to firm the diversion ratio is the percentage of sales that the first product would lose to the second product if the price of the first product increases. The higher the diversion ratio the closer the competition. The Agencies sometimes use diversion ratios in the context of economic models that simulate how firms would change their prices after a merger. The Agencies also consider whether efficiencies or entry are likely to offset or reverse adverse competitive effects The analysis of competitive effects has become more important over time. As discussed by Shapiro ( ) the Agencies revised the Horizontal Merger Guidelines in to downplay the emphasis on market shares and to increase the emphasis on competitive effects.2 With this change in emphasis antitrust enforcement also became less interventionist. Shapiro ( ) observes that the Horizontal Merger Guidelines stated that the Agencies ordinarily challenge mergers between an acquiring firm with at least percent market share and an acquired firm with at least percent market share Shapiro ( ) See also Lamoreaux ( ) ; Berry Gaynor and Morton ( ) ; and Peltzman ( ) | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Mergers of this sort would be unlikely to be challenged today because the analysis of competitive effects is rarely supportive of antitrust enforcement in such cases However many people argue that the Agencies intervene too rarely in the modern era. Opponents of this view argue that antitrust overenforcement is more harmful than antitrust underenforcement. This is because if markets become overly concentrated to the point that profits are excessive new firms are likely to enter to take up the slack. Proponents of more aggressive enforcement argue that new firm entry is often not guaranteed. In markets where entry is difficult ( i.e. there are high barriers to entry ) established firms may reap excessive profits for long periods of time ( Baker ) In the next section we turn to this debate A Renewed Interest in Concentration and the State 0f Competition Some observers of the U.S. economy have raised concerns that it is becoming less competitive. As noted above in an influential CEA policy brief ( CEA ) argued that competition may be decreasing in many sectors and President Obama issued an executive order directing Federal Government agencies to promote competition ( White House ) Similar diagnoses and calls to regulatory action have been sounded by pundits and economists alike.3 In this section we first discuss problems with the evidence presented in the CEA report and then we explain how similar issues are manifested in other research on this topic. We explain why drawing inferences about the state of competition or antitrust enforcement from this weak evidence is problematic. Finally we discuss alternative approaches to assessing if there is in fact a competition problem in the United States Problems with the CEA s Report A central argument made in the CEA report Benefits of Competition and Indicators of Market Power is that the rising market shares of the largest firms in many industries constitute evidence of declining competition. This argument is flawed both in terms of the evidence on market shares and the inference about competition Table which is taken from the CEA report examines trends in the revenue share of the largest firms known as the CR50 in different industry segments. For background the U.S. Census Bureau classifies firms using the North American Industry Classification System ( NAICS ) which divides the entire economy into sectors classified with two-digit numerical codes or Examples include Furman ( ) ; Grullon Larkin and Michaely ( ) ; Krugman ( ) ; Kwoka ( ) ; Lamoreoux ( ) ; Wessel ( ) ; Wu ( ) ; and the Economist ( ) Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Table Change in Market Concentration by Sector Industry Transportation and warehousing Retail trade Finance and insurance Wholesale trade Real estate rental and leasing Utilities Educational services Professional scientific and technical services Administrative and support Accommodation and food services Other services Arts entertainment and recreation Healthcare and assistance Change in revenue Revenue earned by Revenue share earned share earned by largest by largest firms in largest firms from firms in ( dollars ( percent ) to ( percentage billions ) points ) Source : Census Bureau Note : Data represent all North American Industry Classification System sectors for which data were available from to two-digit sectors. These sectors are further divided into three- four- five- and six-digit subsectors. The CEA ( ) and Furman ( ) examine concentration in of the two-digit NAICS sectors. Table shows that sectors became concentrated by this measure over the 15-year period from to A key problem with table is that the two-digit sectors are aggregations of overly broad geographic and product markets that shed little light on the state of competition. For example retail trade includes all grocery stores hardware stores and gasoline stations among many others across the Nation. But grocery stores in Florida and Wisconsin do not compete for the same customers and hardware stores and gas stations even those in the same local area largely sell products that are unrelated in demand. Concentration measures defined by national segments also miss the dimension of local competition Rossi-Hansberg Sarte and Trachter ( ) find that the expansion of national firms into local markets has been a factor both in increasing concentration at the national level and in decreasing concentration at the local level This approach contrasts with how the Agencies define relevant markets for antitrust analysis. As discussed above the Agencies and antitrust economists more generally analyze data on demand that reveal the extent to which consumers regard products as substitutes. In this way markets are defined to include products that are in competition with each other in the local product markets where they compete. Even the finest six-digit NAICS sectors are far broader than typical antitrust markets. Werden and Froeb ( ) calculate the volume of commerce of the relevant markets alleged in DOJ merger complaints | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM between and as a share of industry shipments in the six-digit NAICS sector. They find that in most cases the antitrust markets accounted for less than percent of the six-digit NAICS sector. In many cases this is because the antitrust markets where the DOJ identified a competition problem involved single localities such as a city State or region whereas the NAICS sectors are national. Although studies of broad swaths of the economy such as the CEA report are necessarily limited by the data that are publicly available the coarseness of the data limits what they can say about competition A second problem with table is the use of the CR50. The Agencies and other economists often find evidence of robust competition in markets with only a few firms engaged in head-to-head competition. Either the HHI ( discussed above ) or a four-firm concentration ratio ( known as the CR4 ) would be more appropriate for a competition study. Note that in table the CR50 are also usually much less than meaning that there are more than firms operating in the segment Because of the overly broad market definition and the use of the CR50 the data presented in table tell us nothing about competition in specific markets let alone across the entire economy. Carl Shapiro a former CEA member and Deputy Assistant Attorney General for Economics under the Obama Administration concluded that table is not informative regarding overall trends in concentration in well-defined relevant markets that are used by antitrust economists to assess market power much less trends in competition in the U.S. economy ( Shapiro ) Problems with Related Research The CEA s report Benefits of Competition and Indicators of Market Power is part of a larger body of recent research arguing that competition may be in decline. Much of this literature tries to infer the state of competition from correlations between flawed concentration measures such as those presented in table and market outcomes such as prices profits and markups. This methodology rests on a problematic assumption that increases in concentration create conditions of softer competition. That is if undesirable outcomes such as higher prices profits and markups are correlated with concentration then the cause of these outcomes is assumed to be weaker competition. Recent papers in this vein include the CEA report ; and those by Furman ( ) ; Furman and Orszag ( ) ; Guti rrez and Philippon ( 2017a 2017b ) ; and Grullon Larkin and Michaely ( ) Problems with this assumption have been understood since at least the 1970s ( Demsetz ; Bresnahan ) The most fundamental problem is that there are alternative explanations for why a market might demonstrate both high concentration and high markups that are consistent with For a recent in-depth discussion see Berry Gaynor and Morton ( ) ; and Syverson ( ) Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM procompetitive behavior by firms. These include fixed costs scale economies and globalization To see that this is true consider the issue of fixed costs. In many markets firms make upfront investments in assets such as physical plant equipment research and product development and information technology. Firms will make these investments only if they anticipate earning sufficient profit margins to recoup them. In terms of basic economics if a firm has substantial fixed costs then its average cost may be substantially higher than its marginal cost. A firm may earn a profit close to zero when fixed costs are accounted for but still maintain a positive margin between price and marginal cost The Agencies do not regard this as inherently problematic. As the Horizontal Merger Guidelines state High margins commonly arise for products that are significantly differentiated. Products involving substantial fixed costs typically will be developed only if suppliers expect there to be enough differentiation to support margins sufficient to cover those fixed costs. High margins can be consistent with incumbent [ established ] firms earning competitive returns ( DOJ and FTC ) ; see box Even if high concentration and high markups are not inherently problematic what about rising concentration and rising markups ? This depends on why the markups and concentration are rising. Suppose that fixed costs are rising If they are rising for anticompetitive reasons such as if new and unnecessary government regulations are raising the cost of entry then the trend may be associated with higher prices and consumer harm. But fixed costs could also be rising because firms are making increasingly expensive investments to become more competitive. Information technology in particular can involve upfront investments in business systems that help to reduce a firm s marginal cost of production or improve product quality. A firm that makes such investments may outcompete less efficient firms and grow its market share. Through such a process information technology could transform a market to one with fewer more efficient firms. Because the surviving firms have lower marginal costs their prices may fall even as their markups rise. This scenario is procompetitive because consumers derive benefits from the lower prices or improved quality Berry Gaynor and Morton ( ) review recent research providing evidence that investments in intangible assets such as software and business processes are becoming more important. Crouzet and Eberly ( ) in particular find a positive correlation between firms market shares ( in broad industry segments ) and their investments in intangible assets. In the view of Berry Gaynor and Morton ( ) the broad category of increasing investments in fixed and sunk costs may be the most important source of rising global markups. Autor and others ( ) find evidence that increases in concentration reflect a reallocation of output toward large productive firms. They argue that this could be the result of globalization and technological change and further observe that their explanation for rising concentration has starkly different | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Box Concentration Innovation and Competition Industries that rely on innovation often provide dramatic examples of high fixed costs. Consistent with this situation concentration is often high. The relationship between concentration competition efficiency and consumer welfare is complex. Competition can spur firms to innovate but it can also weaken their incentives to innovate by making it difficult for them to recoup their investments. In research spanning decades economists have found that different models give different answers about whether higher concentration increases or decreases innovation and results about the optimal level of concentration are often sensitive to market conditions ( Marshall and Parra ) To illustrate Igami and Uetake ( ) study these trade-offs in the hard disk drive industry. As shown in figures 6-i and 6-ii the period had waves of entry and exit as the industry matured and consolidated. Innovation was of central importance as the industry followed Kryder s law that the storage capacity of hard disk drives doubles roughly every months. After estimating a model of dynamic oligopoly Igami and Uetake ( ) simulate the effect of alternative merger policies on expected social welfare. They conclude that a policy to block mergers if there are three or fewer firms would have found approximately the right balance between pro-competitive effects and valuedestruction side effects. Although such a policy might not be optimal in Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM other industries or for any particular merger this study helps to illustrate why competition can be robust in markets with relatively few firms The proposed acquisition of Baker Hughes by Halliburton provides an example of when innovation was central to a merger review ( DOJ ) Halliburton Baker-Hughes and Schlumberger were the three leading firms in the oilfield services industry providing sophisticated drilling technology and related services for drilling oil wells. Each invested hundreds of millions of dollars annually in research and development ; for products where innovation was most important there were few other competitors. The DOJ sued to block Halliburton s proposed acquisition of Baker-Hughes delineating relevant products and services where the proposed merger would result in markets dominated by the merged firm and Schlumberger. The DOJ was not satisfied that Halliburton s proposed divestitures would remedy the potential harm and the parties ultimately abandoned their plans ( Chugh et al. ) implications for welfare than explanations based on weakened competition or antitrust enforcement. That is if rising concentration and markups are driven by conduct that benefits consumers such as can be the case for investments in intangible assets then there may be no competition problem and no antitrust implications In addition to the fundamental error of equating concentration with a lack of competition there are also other problems with the recent literature on | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM concentration. Similar to the CEA s report these studies use of Census and other macroeconomic data limits them to examining concentration in NAICS industry segments that are too broad to shed light on competitive conditions in properly defined antitrust markets. Many of the studies use data for three-digit or four-digit NAICS segments ( e.g. Guti rrez and Philippon 2017a 2017b ; Grullon Larkin and Michaely ) ; but as discussed above even the finest six-digit NAICS segments are far broader than antitrust markets Another problem is that many of the studies explore links between concentration and financial measures such as markups and profits that are difficult to measure especially across broad industry segments. Price-cost markups in particular are a basic measure of market power but firm-level data on markups are rarely available. Accounting data are sometimes informative about the markup of price over average variable cost but they do not accurately measure the economic profit margins that are relevant to economic analysis. Basu ( ) reviews different approaches to estimating markups used in the recent research discussed above. He discusses problems with the methods including that most of the estimates of markups are implausibly large Connecting Concentration and Markups with Antitrust Law The assessment of the competitive health of the economy should be based on studies of properly defined markets together with conceptual and empirical methods and data that are sufficient to distinguish between alternative explanations for rising concentration and markups. This continues to be the approach of the Agencies In line with this Berry Gaynor and Morton ( ) call for a wave of industry-level econometric studies to help us understand shifts in markups the underlying causes and more broadly how markets in our modern economy are functioning and evolving. In their view regressions of market outcomes on measures of concentration should carry little weight in policy debates because they do not and can not illuminate causal relationships. Syverson ( ) is more optimistic that economy-wide studies can be helpful to identify patterns of increasing concentration for further research but he concludes that the evidence does not yet support conclusions that rising aggregate market power exists and is causing problematic trends in the economy. Like Berry Gaynor and Morton ( ) Syverson ( ) calls for more careful research The airline industry provides an example where detailed publicly available data have enabled insightful research. Werden and Froeb ( ) review this literature to conclude that since deregulation in the late 1970s studies have not found systematic increases in concentration at the route level Berry Carnall and Spiller ( ) note that investments in hub-and-spokes networks enabled airlines to earn high markups but also benefited consumers Moreover Berry Gaynor and Morton ( ) cite Borenstein ( ) to observe that for many years the large fixed costs associated with hub-and-spokes Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM networks were just offset by high markups leaving the major airlines with near-zero profits Other useful studies focus on how consummated mergers have affected market outcomes. In these studies the increase in concentration is explicitly caused by a merging of competitors so there is no question about why concentration has increased. For example Ashenfelter Hosken and Weinberg ( ) study the joint venture between the beer giants Miller and Coors. The DOJ approved the deal in part because it was expected to significantly reduce the costs of shipping and distribution ( Heyer Shapiro and Wilder ) Ashenfelter Hosken and Weinberg ( ) find little effect on prices because the efficiencies created by the merger nearly exactly offset the realized price increases in the average market. However in an analysis of the same market Miller and Weinberg ( ) find evidence that the joint venture may have facilitated price coordination between competitors. These conflicting results illustrate some of the important nuances related to competition that broad industry studies can not assess At this point the evidence that the United States has a broad competition problem is inconclusive. However the CEA s report and the related literature discussed above have spurred debate in government academia and policy circles about ways to strengthen antitrust enforcement to deal with the perceived competition problem. We now turn to this debate Calls for a Broader Interpretation of Antitrust Policy The CEA report Benefits of Competition and Indicators of Market Power and the related literature discussed above are part of a broader movement that is concerned with the growth of large firms across the U.S. economy Lamoreaux ( ) provides a useful overview. Some of these observers want to amend or rewrite the antitrust laws to expand the Federal Government s involvement beyond its traditional scope to consider outcomes unrelated to market competition including the political influence of large corporations control of advertising and news media and rising income inequality. For example Furman and Orszag ( ) raise the question of whether a rising share of firms earning supernormal returns on capital might increase wage inequality due to workers at these firms sharing in the supernormal returns Also as we discuss in the next section some observers are calling for regulations specifically for the digital economy Other observers are focused on traditional antitrust law but would like enforcement to be expanded by lowering the threshold for an act to be considered anticompetitive. For example one Senate bill would change the language of the Clayton Act which prohibits mergers where the effect may be substantially to lessen competition. The bill would change the standard of | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM substantially to a standard of materially. This would mean that the Federal Government could block a merger that has a smaller effect on competition ( U.S. Congress 2019a ) As we have discussed the argument that the U.S. economy is suffering from insufficient competition is built on a weak empirical foundation and questionable assumptions. Antitrust law has evolved through careful development of its case law based on the legal system s accumulated experience with enforcement actions and the effects of specific types of acts on industries characterized by specific competitive dynamics. Throughout its development antitrust law has consistently proven flexible to the evolving market conditions presented by new industries and business models in the ever-changing American economy. Before making radical changes to the law the case for such change should be better grounded Moreover the antitrust laws are a poor tool for addressing issues that go beyond questions of anticompetitive market conduct. Using antitrust law to regulate markets in the absence of competition problems will exact costs on the economy by preventing efficient market organization. If society wants to pursue goals such as rising income inequality or the political power of large firms there are better policy tools to deal with these issues ( Shapiro ) We next turn to the related debate about whether more expansive antitrust enforcement is needed for the digital economy Antitrust Enforcement for the Digital Economy In this section we focus on the rapidly evolving issue of antitrust enforcement and competition in the digital economy. In recent years digital platforms have come under increasing scrutiny. In the United Kingdom the government commissioned an expert panel to review competition policy for the digital economy ( Digital Competition Expert Panel 2019c ) Since the panel made its recommendations the U.K. has been working to create its Digital Markets Unit. The European Union has also commissioned an expert report ( Cr mer Montjoye and Schweitzer ) and has introduced several regulations for digital platforms.5 In the United States the FTC has conducted hearings to examine whether new technologies and business practices including those associated with digital platforms require adjustments to competition policy ( FTC 2019b ) .The House and Senate Judiciary Committees have also held hearings related to competition policy for digital platforms ( U.S. House 2019a 2019b 2019c ; U.S The U.K. Digital Markets Unit would develop and enforce regulations related to data interoperability data mobility and data openness. It would have the authority to designate certain platforms as having strategic market status. Such platforms would be subject to stronger regulations. In July the European Union issued new regulations governing how platforms interact with businesses ( European Commission ) Rules on data portability and privacy known as the General Data Protection Regulation ( GDPR ) went into effect in Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Senate ) Independently the Stigler Center at the University of Chicago has organized a committee on digital platforms that has developed recommendations for stronger antitrust enforcement and a digital regulator ( Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms ) The Agencies have also opened reviews into market-leading online platforms focusing on antitrust and related issues ( Bloomberg ; DOJ ) Although this chapter focuses on competition concerns we note that some of these reviews also consider whether consumer protection regulations are warranted for issues such as data privacy and the moderation of media content Background Digital platforms are intermediaries that enable interactions between users They include search engines online market places social networks communication and media platforms and home-sharing and ride-sharing services among other examples. Many of these platforms have been enormously successful and have reshaped the economy over the last years Some concerns about digital platforms rest on the idea that they often operate in markets with economic features that naturally tend toward high concentration. One such feature is network effects which arise when consumers place more value in a platform because many other people use it. For example the more people one can reach with a messaging service the more valuable that service is to users. When network effects are important the largest platforms enjoy an advantage over their rivals simply because they have more users regardless of the quality of their services. In some cases the advantage may be so great that other firms are unable to compete. For example in the videocassette recording industry the Betamax technology essentially disappeared after VHS technology pulled ahead ( Werden ) In markets with network effects or other types of economies of scale firms may compete for the entire market rather than for shares in the market The resulting monopolies may not be permanent. Bourne ( ) gives many examples of firms that achieved dominance through network effects or production economies of scale only to eventually lose out to competition from innovative rivals. His examples range from the Great Atlantic & Pacific Tea Company in the 1920s to MySpace and Nokia in the early part of this century One of the current debates is about the extent to which digital platform industries are characterized by high barriers to entry. A barrier to entry is an obstacle that puts new firms at a disadvantage relative to firms already in the market.6 Network effects can be a barrier to entry particularly if an entrant must simultaneously attract two groups of users. For example in the payments The formal definition of a barrier to entry has a long history of debate among economists. For a discussion see Werden ( ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM industry a new payment system might need to sign up thousands of merchants before consumers see it as valuable and vice versa. However network effects are not always sufficient to deter entry. If an entrant has an offsetting advantage it may be able to overcome the advantage enjoyed by the established platform. For example when Microsoft introduced the Xbox platform for video gaming it was able to overcome the network effects enjoyed by the Sony PlayStation by focusing on a few blockbuster games ( Lee ) There is also a debate about the extent to which access to data can be a barrier to entry. Mahnke ( ) discusses the issue in the context of the DOJ s investigation of the merger of the media firms Thomson and Reuters. The DOJ alleged that the merger would lead to higher prices for data sets related to company fundamentals earnings and aftermarket research and that entrants would not be able to replicate the high quality of these data sets. The DOJ approved the merger but only after the parties agreed to divest copies of the data sets along with supporting assets ( DOJ ) Data can also be a barrier to entry in the digital economy. Because dominant platforms have more users they often have access to much more data than new entrants and this can give them an insurmountable advantage ( Rubinfeld and Gal ) For example dominant platforms may be better able to target advertising at their users and so earn more revenues from advertising. However a lack of access to data does not always deter entry. Lambrecht and Tucker ( ) observe that Airbnb Uber and Tinder entered markets where established firms ( e.g. Expedia ) had better data. They were able to succeed because of their innovative products. Lambrecht and Tucker ( ) also observe that data are nonrivalrous in the sense that data can be shared and consumed by many users in contrast to rivalrous goods such as food which are consumed only once. Because of this entrants can sometimes buy data as a substitute for collecting them internally from their users. However this is not always the case and the role of data as a barrier to entry depends on the facts and context of each market Finally another debate asks whether dominant platforms are harming competition by buying too many smaller firms such as start-ups funded with venture capital. It is common for large platforms to acquire smaller firms The digital economy relies heavily on innovation and being acquired by an established firm can be an important exit path for initial investors. Acquisition can also be important for a start-up s success. The acquiring firm may bring marketing financing and other business assets that enable the start-up to grow. However if a start-up is not acquired it might instead grow into an independent full-fledged competitor. Some acquisitions may occur precisely to prevent such competition as Cunningham Ederer and Ma ( ) find to Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM be the case in the pharmaceutical industry.7 However as we discuss further below it can be challenging for the Agencies to assess whether acquisitions of nascent competitors are procompetitive or anticompetitive in light of the benefits associated with them In summary many digital platform markets have demand and supply features suggesting that high concentration is efficient. The concentration has led to concerns about market dominance anticompetitive behavior and a lack of competition. But concentration can also be efficient and there may be robust competition for the market even in the face of high concentration Proposals for Intervention Advocates of stronger regulation for digital platforms recommend a range of measures encompassing both antitrust reform and regulation see for example the Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms ( ) ; the Digital Competition Expert Panel ( 2019c ) ; and Cr mer Montjoye and Schweitzer ( ) Here we consider proposals related to data portability and interoperability acquisitions of nascent competitors and the creation of a digital regulatory authority Data portability and interoperability. Proposals to increase data portability and interoperability involve new regulations and legislation. Portability regulations would require digital platforms to enable customers to access their data from different platforms on request. Interoperability legislation would require digital platforms to enable their customers to switch their data from one platform to another. For example a bill recently proposed in the Senate would require large communication platforms that generate income from their users data to enable data portability and interoperability with other communication platforms. The goal is to reduce entry barriers for competitors to these platforms by making it less costly for customers to switch from one platform to another and also by allowing customers of dominant platforms to communicate easily with customers of rival platforms ( U.S. Congress 2019b ) As with any regulation however this would impose costs on the regulated platforms. Jia Jin and Wagman ( ) study the effect of the recent rollout of rules on data privacy and portability in Europe known as the General Data Protection Regulation ( GDPR ) on venture capital funding. They find negative effects on European firms relative to their U.S. counterparts in terms of total funding the number of deals and the amount raised per deal with more pronounced effects for newer and data-related firms Acquisitions of nascent competitors. As discussed above proponents of stronger antitrust enforcement raise concerns that dominant platforms are protecting themselves by acquiring small firms that would otherwise develop In a study of the pharmaceutical industry Cunningham Ederer and Ma ( ) conclude that about percent of acquisitions in their sample were killer acquisitions that forestalled the development of new drugs that would otherwise have competed with the acquirer s existing products | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM into future competitors. Antitrust law has an existing framework to challenge such mergers under theories of potential competition and disruptive entrants ( DOJ and FTC ) In the FTC challenged a merger between CDK Global and Auto/Mate. The acquiring firm CDK was a market leader in specialized business software for franchise automotive dealers. Auto/Mate was a much smaller competitor with an innovative business model that was an emergent threat. Although Auto/Mate was already competing the FTC was largely concerned about the competition it would likely provide in the future ( FTC 2018b ; Ohlhausen ) Predicting future competition can be difficult in the digital economy because products and services evolve rapidly. Dominant platforms may acquire start-ups that offer no competing products but that could compete with them in the future through expansion into adjacent markets. To address this issue some proposals for revising the antitrust laws would weaken the evidentiary standards when a dominant firm seeks to acquire a firm in a separate but adjacent market. For example the Agencies might meet their initial burden of proof by showing that there is a reasonable likelihood that the target firm would compete with the acquiring firm in the future even if the target firm has no specific plans to do so ( Shapiro ) Such policies could have important downsides. More aggressive standards for blocking mergers of nascent competitors would raise the likelihood that procompetitive mergers would be blocked. As discussed above the digital economy relies heavily on innovation. If dominant platforms were routinely deterred from acquiring start-ups such a policy could reduce venture capital funding in this segment. During the U.K. panel review a variety of organizations and individuals raised these concerns ( Digital Competition Expert Panel 2019a 2019b ) At a minimum the potential effect of any new policy on venture capital deserves study. More research including merger retrospectives focused on acquisitions in the digital economy would also be helpful Creation of a digital regulatory authority. The Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms ( ) found that the strongest indication emerging from the four reports is the importance of having a single powerful regulator capable of overseeing all aspects of [ digital platforms ] In terms of competition goals the digital regulator would have a mandate to design and enforce regulations aimed to enhance competition such as standards for data portability and interoperability. The authority would be able to designate dominant platforms as bottlenecks and subject them to stronger regulations. For example such platforms might need to obtain approval from the authority for any acquisition no matter how small and the digital authority would be able to challenge these acquisitions under a legal standard that imposes a lower burden of proof on the Agencies than does current antitrust law The Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms ( ) also makes recommendations that fall outside antitrust and competition policy. A subcommittee Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM on politics in particular recommends that a digital authority have the power to take actions to limit concentration not due to concerns about economic harm to consumers but due to concerns about the political power of large platforms. A subcommittee on data privacy and security recommends that a digital authority oversee consumer protection regulation that would develop among other regulations rules similar to the GDPR in Europe Proposals to establish a new digital authority raise a host of issues. A basic concern is that the breadth of the mandate is far from obvious. As noted above digital platforms provide a wide-ranging set of goods and services from search engines to operating systems to ride-sharing services. The Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms ( ) points to the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) as a model for a digital regulator but the scope of the FCC s authority is the telecommunications sector. The scope of a digital authority would likely be harder to delineate and firms in some of the most innovative sectors of the economy would face uncertainty as to whether they fall under its regulations Perhaps the most serious concern is for the possibility of regulatory capture. In a speech FCC chair Ajit Pai ( ) relays a cautionary tale of FCC regulatory capture describing how AT&T made commitments to the FCC in that effectively allowed it to divide up territories with independent local telephone companies. These commitments tamed competition that had emerged after the patents of Alexander Graham Bell began to expire. The Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms ( ) discusses the need to deter regulatory capture and cites Pai s speech. It also cites the foundational work on regulatory capture by the Nobel laureate economist George Stigler for whom the Stigler Center is named. Though there is some irony here the point is that the downsides of new far-reaching regulation need to be taken seriously Although today s digital economy warrants further study and where necessary vigilant antitrust enforcement a cautious approach to regulation is clearly warranted. As we have discussed there is a fundamental problem in inferring that high concentration is indicative of a lack of competition. The nature of competition also varies across markets so one-size-fits-all policies may not work well. Instead fact-specific investigations along the lines of what the Agencies already do are more sensible Competition Policy to Reduce Entry Barriers In the preceding sections we have argued for caution in responding to calls for Federal Government intervention to address increasing concentration in the U.S. economy. However it is true that entry barriers can protect firms from competition. Sometimes these entry barriers are structural in that they are associated with the nature of the market itself such as products that require large investments in research and development. In other cases entry barriers | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Box The Effects of Deregulation within the Pharmaceutical Drug Market As noted some barriers to entry are purposefully constructed. To illustrate consider the pharmaceutical drug industry where the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) plays a crucial role in supplying drugs through the management of drug application reviews. The FDA ultimately determines if and when a drug will be available on the market. Although the stringent evaluations conducted by the FDA are necessary to ensure the safety and efficacy of drugs they are also partly responsible for raising entry barriers for many generic and new drugs. This has led to a higher concentration of brand name drugs in some markets along with higher prices that reduce consumer welfare The Trump Administration realizes the significance of improving competition in markets for pharmaceutical drugs and it has implemented a series of deregulatory reforms with the hope of reducing costs for consumers. One of its proposals highlights the need for the transparency of negotiated discount rates with insurers requiring hospitals to disclose this information to their patients ( CEA 2018a ) The Administration also signed the Food and Drug Administration Reauthorization Act in which reauthorized the FDA to collect user fees from generic drug applications and to process applications efficiently for another five years. Since the start of the Trump Administration aspects of the FDA s drug application process most prominently that for generic drugs have been streamlined to encourage quick market entry. In the first months of the Administration an average of percent more generic drugs were approved each month than were approved during the previous 20-month period ( CEA 2018b ) In the FDA expanded its Strategic Policy Roadmap in efforts to not only increase efficiencies in the drug review process but also reduce anticompetitive behavior from brand name drug makers that try to inhibit generic market entry. The FDA is also taking steps to address scientific and regulatory barriers that are obstacles to entry of some complex generic medicines. The FDA s efforts to lower barriers and have a more predictable and efficient development process may enable new and innovative drug makers to enter the market. Consumers would benefit both from the development of new classes of drugs and from new therapies for conditions treated by existing drugs. Such new therapies could discipline the prices of existing drugs. This was the case for drugs such as simvastatin which held a large portion of the market for lowering cholesterol in the 1990s. However starting in after the introduction of the therapy drug atorvastatin competition flourished and cholesterol-lowering drugs are now affordable ( CEA 2018b ) are purposefully constructed by governments in situations where private markets may fail ; see box However as discussed in chapter of this Report Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM even if a regulatory action addresses a private market failure a deregulatory action is still warranted if the costs of the regulation outweigh the regulatory benefits. This section describes the Agencies efforts to call attention to regulations that harm consumers by creating entry barriers that limit competition It also discusses how the Agencies apply the antitrust laws to intellectual property rights to promote sound competition Other Government-Created Barriers to Entry As we discuss in chapter of this Report occupational licensing requirements impose an additional cost on a person entering a given occupation. Some licensing requirements may be justified on public safety grounds ; but in many professions they also function as barriers to entry that artificially inflate wages by protecting those already in the profession from competition. To support the claim that the majority of State occupational licensing requirements are unnecessary to protect public safety the FTC points out that occupations require a license in at least one State but only occupations are licensed by every State. If an occupation poses a substantiated threat to public safety the argument goes then that occupation would be universally licensed ( FTC 2018a 2019c ) The Agencies have long advocated measures to limit the competitive harm associated with occupational licensing. In the FTC established a task force on the issues and in it released a report outlining options to mitigate the harm. These options include interstate pacts that allow groups of States to recognize a common license as well as other portability and mutual recognition measures ( FTC 2018a ) Certificate-of-need ( CON ) laws were originally designed in the 1970s to discourage overinvestment in healthcare markets ( e.g. building too many hospitals ) in an attempt to limit costs. A CON law requires a firm to convince a State regulator that there is an unmet need for the new services. Over years of review the Agencies have found that these laws often harm competition and they regularly advocate for their removal. In for example staff at the Agencies sent letters to legislatures in Alaska and Tennessee in support of their plans to revise these laws ( DOJ and FTC 2019b 2019d ) The Agencies analysis of evidence accumulated over decades finds that instead of reducing healthcare costs CON laws tend to create inefficiencies by suppressing healthcare supply to the benefit of established suppliers preventing investment that would stimulate competition and lower consumer prices Many States require car manufacturers to distribute vehicles through independent franchised dealerships. The Agencies have long advocated against such automobile franchising laws. They argue that when manufacturers are free to choose their method of distribution the competitive process aligns their interests with those of consumers so the products and services are brought to market as efficiently as possible. In Nebraska took up a bill | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM that would remove restrictions on direct vehicle sales to consumers but only for vehicle manufacturers that had not used independent franchised dealers in the State before. The Agencies sent a joint letter to the Nebraska Legislature encouraging it to remove the restrictions for all vehicle manufacturers ( DOJ and FTC 2019c ) Promoting Innovation through Sound Enforcement of Competition Law As we have discussed consumers often benefit most from dynamic competition as driven by investment and innovation in new products inventions and technologies. Intellectual property rights such as patents trademarks and copyrights limit competition from infringing products in order to encourage this dynamic competition. However in certain circumstances intellectual property rights like any asset may be used in a manner that unlawfully limits competition. To prevent this the Agencies apply the same antitrust principles to conduct involving intellectual property as they do to conduct involving other forms of property ( DOJ and FTC ) They apply an effects-based economic analysis to conduct involving intellectual property that considers its efficiencies and weighs procompetitive benefits of the conduct against any competitive harm. The Agencies also engage in advocacy for the correct application of antitrust law to intellectual property rights The DOJ has emphasized the need to avoid rigid presumptions in the intellectual property area that could deter innovation. In particular it has cautioned against the misapplication of antitrust laws which carry the specter of treble damages to commercial disputes involving the exercise of patent rights. In December the DOJ withdrew its support from its joint policy statement with the Patent and Trademark Office on remedies associated with standard essential patents because the statement had been construed to suggest that the antitrust laws should limit patent holders from seeking injunctions or exclusionary remedies to defend their intellectual property rights. The DOJ s work in this area ensures that there are strong incentives to invest in developing technologies and thus fostering dynamic competition A top priority of the FTC is to oppose pay-for-delay patent settlements whereby branded drug manufacturers pay generic drug producers to stay out of the market. In in FTC v. Actavis Inc. the Supreme Court held that in certain circumstances the FTC can challenge such settlements under the antitrust law provided that courts weigh anticompetitive effects against the procompetitive benefits of such conduct. Since that year the FTC has regularly reported on these settlements. In its most recent report the FTC found that the number of pay-for-delay payments of the type that are likely to be anticompetitive has been decreasing ( FTC 2019a ) Evaluating the Risk of Declining Competition | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Conclusion The Trump Administration understands the vital role that competition plays in the economy promoting new businesses and serving consumers. Timely antitrust enforcement is an important tool for protecting the competitive process By contrast confusion surrounding the effects of rising concentration appears to be driven by questionable evidence and an overly simple narrative that Big Is Bad. When companies achieve scale and large market share by innovating and providing their customers with value this is a welcome result of healthy competition This chapter has explained why recent calls for changing the goals of the antitrust laws and expanding the scope of regulations are based on inconclusive evidence that competition is in decline. These calls also ignore the flexibility of the existing legal system to accommodate changing market circumstances. Research purporting to document a pattern of increasing concentration and increasing markups uses data on segments of the economy that are far too broad to offer any insights about competition either in specific markets or in the economy at large. Where data do accurately identify issues of concentration or supercompetitive profits additional analysis is needed to distinguish between alternative explanations rather than equating these market indicators with harmful market power Antitrust actions and any major changes to competition policy should be based on sound economic evidence including evidence on consumer harm Research based on broad industry studies may be helpful for indicating trends in concentration but is unable to diagnose the underlying causes or determine whether consumers in relevant antitrust markets have been harmed Ultimately today s detailed evidence-based approach to antitrust remains the most powerful lens available to protect consumers and suppliers by accurately diagnosing and responding to anticompetitive behavior For these reasons this chapter argues that the DOJ s Antitrust Division and the FTC are well-equipped to protect consumers from anticompetitive behavior. The Agencies have maintained their focus on illegal or anticompetitive actions by businesses while expanding their scope to advocate against government policies that harm competition. Vigorous competition is essential for building upon the economy s record expansion and the Trump Administration will continue following the economic evidence and using the Federal Government s authority to promote competition in ways that lead to greater consumer benefits | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM x Chapter Understanding the Opioid Crisis The opioid crisis poses a major threat to the U.S. economy and America s public health. Since more than people have lost their lives because of opioids. This staggering number of deaths has pushed drug overdoses to the top of the list of leading causes of death for Americans under the age of years and has cut months from U.S. life expectancy. The Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) has previously estimated that the annual economic cost of the opioid crisis is substantially higher than previously thought at over half a trillion dollars in Using a similar methodology the CEA estimates that the crisis cost $ billion in or percent of gross domestic product There are signs that the opioid crisis is past its peak because the growth in opioid overdose deaths has stopped during the Trump Administration stopping the upward trend that has persisted since at least From January through May the CEA estimates that there were fewer opioid overdose deaths representing an economic cost savings of over $ billion relative to the number of deaths expected based on previous trends. Actions taken by the Trump Administration to reduce the supply of opioids reduce new demand for opioids and treat those with current opioid use disorder may have contributed to the flattening in overdose deaths involving opioids The Trump Administration understands that the crisis is ongoing and that there is much more work to do to combat this threat to American lives and the American economy. In order to continue mitigating the cost of the opioid crisis it is crucial to understand all its underlying factors. We describe and analyze two separate waves of the crisis the first wave from to which was characterized by growing overdose deaths involving the misuse of prescription 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM opioids ; and the second wave from to which was characterized by growing overdose deaths involving illicitly manufactured opioids ( heroin and fentanyl ) We find that in the first wave between and out-of-pocket prices for prescription opioids declined by an estimated percent. This dramatic drop in prices was a consequence of the expansion of government healthcare coverage which increased access to all prescription drugs including opioids We argue that these falling out-of-pocket prices effectively reduced the price of opioid use in the primary market and in the secondary ( black ) market for diverted opioids from which most people who misuse prescription opioids obtain their drugs. We estimate that the decline in observed out-of-pocket prices is capable of explaining between and percent of the growth in the death rate involving prescription opioids from to However falling out-of-pocket prices could not have led to a major rise in opioid misuse and overdose deaths without the increased availability of prescription opioids resulting from the new specialty of pain management the creation of pain management practices that encouraged liberalized dispensing practices by doctors illicit pill mills increased marketing and promotion efforts from industry and inadequate monitoring or controls against drug diversion. The subsidization of opioids is in stark contrast to the taxation of other addictive substances such as tobacco and alcohol. The dilemma this poses is how to make available the appropriate medical use of opioids for pain relief while preventing nonmedical use of subsidized products We find that the second wave of the opioid crisis likely started in because of efforts to limit the misuse of prescription OxyContin enabling a large market for the sale and innovation of illegal opioids. Although these efforts eventually successfully reduced prescription opioid-involved overdose deaths they had the unintended consequence of raising demand for cheaper substitutes in the illicit market among misusers of prescription drugs. An expansion in foreignsourced supply was also important for the growth of illicitly manufactured | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM opioids as evidenced by falling quality-adjusted prices largely due to expanded heroin trafficking from Mexico and relatively inexpensive synthetic opioids from both Mexico and China specifically fentanyl and its analogues which can be many times more potent than heroin.1 T he Trump Administration has undertaken serious efforts to tackle the ongoing opioid crisis that continues to threaten the American economy and American lives. This is demonstrated by the declaration of the opioid epidemic as a public health emergency the establishment of the President s Commission on Combating Drug Addiction and the Opioid Crisis the highest expenditures in history directed toward the opioid epidemic and ongoing efforts throughout the Federal government to address the crisis. The damage resulting from the opioid crisis is dramatic in its proportions compared with other health crises. For example in the number of people who died of an opioid-involved drug overdose ( ) exceeded the number of deaths from the HIV/AIDS epidemic at its peak in ( CDC ) Additionally since the United States has lost as much of its population to the opioid crisis as it lost to World War II with both causing more than fatalities ( DeBruyne ) This staggering number of deaths has pushed drug overdoses to the top of the list of leading causes of death for Americans under the age of years and has cut months from U.S. life expectancy ( Dowell et al. ) To assess the full damage caused by this crisis the CEA has previously assessed its full economic cost. In alone the CEA estimated that the total cost of the opioid crisis was $ billion several times larger than previous cost estimates ( CEA ) The CEA s approach constituted a more complete assessment of the costs because it incorporated the full cost of increased morbidity and mortality from the crisis. We also adjusted opioid-involved deaths which had been underreported upward and incorporated nonfatal costs. Using similar methods as in the earlier CEA assessment the annual cost of the opioid crisis has only risen since amounting to $ billion in The annual number of reported opioid-involved overdose deaths increased from in to in a percent increase. According to preliminary data deaths have since decreased slightly in an indication of a flattening in 1The CEA previously released research on topics covered in this chapter. The text that follows builds on this research paper produced by the CEA : The Role of Opioid Prices in the Evolving Opioid Crisis ( CEA 2019b ) We identify overdose deaths throughout the report using the 10th revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems ( ICD-10 ) underlying cause-ofdeath classification codes : X40 X44 ( unintentional ) X60 X64 ( suicide ) X85 ( assault ) and Y10 Y14 ( undetermined ) Deaths involving opioids are identified using ICD multiple cause-of-death classification codes : T40.0 T40.4 and T40.6 Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM the trend of increasing annual deaths that has persisted since ( see figure ) When President Trump took office in January monthly overdose deaths involving opioids had reached an all-time record high a percent increase from the number of deaths months earlier in January Since then the growth in opioid deaths may have finally stopped. Monthly overdose deaths fell by percent between January and May the latest month for which provisional data are available ( see figure ) If the growth rate in opioid overdose deaths from through had continued additional lives would have been lost due to opioid overdoses between January and May a percent increase over the actual number of deaths that occurred over this period. The economic cost savings since January from reduced mortality compared with the preexisting trend was over $ billion.4 In order to continue mitigating the large costs imposed by the opioid crisis through appropriate policy measures it is crucial to understand the forces that underlie it. We separate our analysis into two sections : The first one analyzes the first wave of the crisis lasting through which was characterized by growth in prescription opioid-involved overdose deaths ; and the second analyzes the period since which has been characterized by growth in illicit opioid-involved overdose deaths.5 During the first wave between and the annual populationbased rate of overdose deaths involving prescription opioids increased by percent ( CDC WONDER n.d. ) Throughout this period opioid manufacturers aggressively promoted the safety and effectiveness of opioids and guidelines for the treatment of pain were liberalized to encourage physicians to prescribe Official estimates of opioid-involved overdose deaths are extracted from the CDC s WONDER Multiple Cause of Death Database ( https : //wonder.cdc.gov/mcd.html ) As of December official data were available through December Preliminary estimates of opioid-involved overdose deaths are extracted from Ahmad et al. ( ) The provisional data include deaths of foreign residents and include approximately additional drug overdose records compared with data from CDC WONDER that is limited to residents of the United States The number of lives saved is calculated from the difference between the projected trend in deaths from January to May the most recent month of preliminary data as of December ( see figure ) The calculated number of lives saved is sensitive to the assumption that the projected trend is nonlinear. We use the value of a statistical life to estimate the value of lives saved adjusting the Department of Transportation s value of a statistical life to about $ million in dollars ( DOT ) We use illicit opioids throughout the chapter to refer to illicitly produced opioids such as heroin and fentanyl which excludes the misuse of prescription opioids such as OxyContin. It is important to note that data on overdose deaths do not distinguish between illicitly manufactured synthetic opioids such as illicitly manufactured fentanyl and synthetic prescription opioids such as prescription fentanyl. This analysis includes this broader category of synthetic opioids other than methadone in the illicit opioid category given that illicitly manufactured fentanyl is commonly believed to have dominated this category in recent years and that the category was much less important in the earlier years of the crisis | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Opioid-Involved Overdose Deaths Monthly number of deaths Inauguration May-19 Trend Sources : Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) ; CEA calculations Note : Data from before January are compiled from the CDC WONDER database and monthly data beginning in January are calculated using the provisional reported number of deaths from the CDC. The preinauguration trend is calculated for January to January Shading denotes a recession more opioids ( Van Zee ) Over the same period we estimate that the out-of-pocket price of prescription opioids fell by percent ( see also Zhou Florence and Dowell ) We argue that the falling out-of-pocket price translated into a lower price of misuse not only for those who obtain prescriptions in the primary market but also for the majority of misusers who obtain prescription opioids from the secondary ( black ) market The decline in out-of-pocket prices between and occurred in conjunction with a rising share of generic opioids in the market as well as increased public subsidies. Though we do not attempt to apportion their respective roles these two factors may have contributed significantly to the out-of-pocket price decline. With regard to a rising generic share in the prescription opioid market we note that supply prices paid to pharmacies fell by percent between and fueled by an increase in the cheaper generic opioid share from percent to percent In addition we document a large increase in the share of prescription opioids funded by public programs. As shown in figure the share of prescribed opioids purchased with public subsidies increased from percent in to percent in rising further to percent in Public programs accounted for three-fourths of the growth in total prescription opioids between and ( data from the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey MEPS ) The introduction of the Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit in January Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Share of Potency-Adjusted Prescription Opioids by Primary Payer Share ( percent ) Self Private Public Sources : Medical Expendtiure Panel Survey ; National Drug Code Database ; CEA calculations Note : The primary payer is the third-party payer with the highest payment for a given prescription In addition to Medicare Medicaid and private insurers the other possible primary payers include veterans benefits workers compensation other Federal government insurance other State or local goverment insurance or other public insurance. All prescriptions are converted into morphine gram equivalents based on the quantity of pills prescribed and their potency coincided with a growing share of prescriptions reimbursed by the program including for many opioids. Additionally Social Security Disability Insurance ( SSDI ) enrollment has rapidly increased since the late 1990s ( see figure ) More than half of SSDI recipients received drug coverage before the start of Medicare Part D through Medicaid and other programs. After SSDI recipients along with the general Medicare population were for the most part eligible for prescription drug coverage through Medicare Part D Expansions in insurance coverage that reduce out-of-pocket prices make misused prescription opioids more affordable for patients with prescriptions and users who purchase the drugs on the secondary market. Before generics were as widely available it was very costly for the average American with opioid use disorder to afford prescription opioids if not subsidized through insurance. In Americans could buy gram of OxyContin one of the most common brand name opioids prescribed for an average of $ without health insurance. Some individuals on opioids may require up to a gram or more per day of OxyContin for pain relief ( Schneider Anderson and Tennant ) Without insurance a person with an opioid use disorder consuming between gram and gram of OxyContin every day for a year would have spent between $ and $ in which could be more than the median household income of about $ in ( in dollars ) ( Fontenot | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Semega and Kollar ) To put this in perspective a person on Medicare would only pay $ per gram or between $ and $ per year ( in dollars ) to support an opioid use disorder in the same year The subsidization of opioids is in stark contrast to the taxation of other addictive substances such as tobacco and alcohol. The challenge this poses is how to ensure access to opioids for legitimate medical needs such as for pain relief when other substances are contraindicated or insufficient while not subsidizing nonmedical uses Given the role the government played in subsidizing the purchase of prescription opioids through the expansion of health insurance we examine the possible roles of specific public programs. We find that the number of potency-adjusted opioids per capita subsidized by Medicare increased by percent between and the largest increase among all thirdparty payers. SSDI rolls also expanded over this period. We estimate that SSDI recipients who are generally eligible for Medicare ( including prescription coverage in Part D starting in ) were prescribed a disproportionate share of to percent of total potency-adjusted opioids in across all payer types ( while representing under percent of the U.S. population ) Of course any role of SSDI expansion in the opioid crisis would be attributable to the design of the program rather than program recipients. SSDI recipients generally have debilitating conditions that prevent them from working and these conditions are often associated with high levels of pain. These conditions are the primary reason SSDI recipients are prescribed a disproportionate share of opioids ; indeed SSDI benefits in conjunction with Medicare coverage provide vital protection for these disabled workers. Additionally the majority of SSDI recipients prescribed opioids use them appropriately and do not contribute to opioid misuse directly or indirectly As a calibration exercise we take published estimates of the price elasticity of prescription opioid sales to estimate the increase in sales resulting from an percent price decline. This exercise suggests that without the price decline per capita opioid sales would have increased by half as much or less than the actual increase between and In order to estimate the size of the price decline as a factor in the increase in the number of deaths involving prescription opioids we assume that ( ) secondary market prices are proportional to out-of-pocket prices in the primary market and ( ) the price elasticity of opioid use ranges from the elasticity of prescriptions at the low end to the own-price elasticity of heroin use at the high end. This second calibration Due to heightened risk to patients the CDC recommends that physicians avoid prescriptions at or above morphine milligram equivalents per day equivalent to milligrams of oxycodone or gram or carefully justify a decision to titrate dosage to or more milligram equivalents per day ( CDC n.d. ) Schneider Anderson and Tennant ( ) observe that some chronic pain patients require doses that may range from to or more milligram equivalents per day. These doses would be equivalent to to milligrams ( to grams ) of oxycodone per day Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM exercise suggests that the observed decline in out-of-pocket prices for prescription opioids which makes physicians prescriptions more affordable for beneficiaries to fill was a factor in between and percent of the increase in overdose deaths involving prescription opioids between and However falling out-of-pocket prices could not have led to a major rise in opioid misuse and deaths without the increased availability of prescription opioids resulting from changes in pain management practice guidelines that encouraged liberalized dispensing practices by doctors illicit pill mills increased marketing and promotion efforts from industry and inadequate monitoring or controls against diversion. Without these factors patients would have been unable to respond to lower prices by obtaining prescription opioids and diverting them to the secondary market. In other words the change in the environment for obtaining prescription opioids was a precondition for the effect of falling out-of-pocket prices on opioid misuse. In addition it is important to emphasize that the falling price of the medical use of opioids due to expanded insurance coverage and generic entry benefited patients because they could access needed drugs at a lower out-of-pocket cost. By contrast the falling price of the nonmedical use of opioids enabled by a lax prescribing environment in conjunction with lower out-of-pocket prices may have played an important role in fueling the opioid crisis More generally these findings of increased opioid misuse associated with the growth of public programs do not imply that these programs lack social value but rather show the importance of instituting safeguards to ensure the appropriate prescribing and use of opioids and measures to reduce the misuse of opioids.7 Government policy for other addictive products such as cigarettes deliberately discourages consumption by raising prices through sales taxes and placing restrictions on purchase and sales ; most analysts agree that such policies successfully reduced cigarette use and made new addiction cases less likely ( HHS ) Unlike cigarettes which are not safe or beneficial for anyone in any quantity opioids have legitimate medical uses. The challenge of prescription opioids is balancing the goal of subsidizing opioids when they are prescribed for appropriate use with the need to discourage overprescription and misuse Next we analyze the second wave of the opioid crisis which was characterized by the growth of illicit opioid-involved overdose deaths between and In this case demand-side expansions due to efforts to curtail prescription opioid use disorder along with supply-side expansions appear to have been important. Most notably on the demand side an abuse-deterrent formulation of the widely abused prescription opioid OxyContin was released in and the original formulation was no longer made available from the manufacturer. Research has found that although the reformulation stemmed See HHS ( ) for further discussion | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Opioid-Involved Overdose Death Rate by the Presence of Prescription Opioids Deaths ( per ) Second wave Involved prescription opioids Did not involve prescription opioids Sources : CDC WONDER ; CEA calculations Note : Prescription opioids include both natural and semisynthetic opioids ( T40.2 ) and also methadone ( T40.3 ) the rise of overdose deaths involving prescription opioids it led opioid misusers to substitute toward cheaper more available heroin resulting in increased heroin-involved deaths ( Alpert Powell and Pacula ; Evans Lieber and Power ) Thus the buildup of a pool of people with addictions to prescription opioids during the first wave ultimately facilitated the increase in demand for illicit opioids in the second wave. This large pool of new demand created additional profit opportunities for illegal sellers entering the market. Supply increased as Mexican heroin traffickers increased shipments to the United States in response to shrinking markets for cocaine and other foreign manufacturers especially in China introduced cheaper and more potent synthetic opioids like fentanyl. Figure illustrates how overdose deaths involving prescription opioids leveled off after while other opioid deaths ( those only involving illicit opioids and possibly nonopioid drugs ) escalated rapidly In an attempt to assess the relative importance of demand and supply expansions in driving the second wave of the opioid crisis we estimate the price of illicit opioids over time. Though these estimates are subject to a number of highly imperfect assumptions we find that the price of illicit opioids was roughly constant between and before falling by about half by due to the increased supply of illicit fentanyl ( see figure ) starting in about ( increasingly available via shipment from China and from other foreign sources ) Given the extreme potency and low cost of fentanyl it dramatically reduced the cost of a high for users. It is notable that even though demand for Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM illicit opioids increased beginning in the price of illicit opioids remained constant until about implying that in these first years of the illicit wave the heroin supply must have also expanded to keep prices steady ; if supply had remained constant prices would have risen. Falling prices between and imply that supply expansions of illicit opioids were more important drivers of the crisis in these later years Due to constraints on data availability for prices of both prescription and illicit opioids this analysis focuses on the period ending in However provisional mortality data are available through part of The rest of the chapter proceeds as follows. The next section presents our basic methodology in assessing how demand supply and government policies can affect quantities and prices of opioids. The subsequent section analyzes the first wave of the crisis based on prescription opioids and the section after that analyzes the substantial growth in public subsidies for opioids during this period. The last section turns to the second wave which spawned the rise of illicit opioids The Supply-and-Demand Framework Although we can not quantify the extent to which government-subsidized drugs are diverted and resold for nonmedical use a simple supply-and-demand framework can provide powerful insights into how changing prices and quantities reflect the underlying forces driving the opioid crisis. Figures and consider the case of prescription opioids showing how market dynamics and government subsidies in the primary market ultimately affect market prices and quantities in the secondary market. First a supply expansion ( e.g. due to generic entry ) in the primary market for patients obtaining opioids via prescription reduces the price of prescription opioids ( from P0 to P1 ) and increases the quantity prescribed ( from Q0 to Q1 ) assuming of course that prescribers are willing to provide additional pills to patients as their demand rises. This expansion has the effect of reducing the price of prescription opioids in the secondary market because individuals purchasing prescription opioids in the primary market now face a lower acquisition cost if pills are diverted to family members friends and others. On top of a supply expansion the introduction of a government subsidy for prescription opioids in the primary market drives a wedge between the price consumers pay ( the demand price P2,D ) and the price prescription drug suppliers receive ( the supply price P2,S ) with the difference made up by the amount of the subsidy. The demand price is lower than the price paid by patients before the introduction of the subsidy ( P1 ) which further reduces the price of prescription opioids in the secondary market. Thus both supply expansions and government subsidies in the primary market for prescription opioids decrease the price and increase the quantity of opioid misuse in the secondary market especially in an environment where there is overprescribing. As noted above however whether secondary market prices | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Effect of Supply Expansions and Government Subsidies on the Price and Quantity of Prescription Opioid Misuse Primary Market Prescription opioid price Supply Demand Supply ( new ) P2,S P0 Government subsidy P1 P2,D Q0 Q2 Q1 Prescription opioid quantity Note : This figure shows the impact on prices and quantities of an outward supply shift and government subsidy in the primary market for prescription opioids Figure Effect of Supply Expansions and Government Subsidies on the Price and Quantity of Prescription Opioid Misuse Secondary Market Prescription opioid price Demand P0 Supply P1 Supply ( new ) P2 Supply ( postsubsidy ) Q0 Q1 Q2 Prescription opioid quantity Note : This figure shows the corresponding impact of an outward supply shift and government subsidy in the primary market ( shown in figure ) on prices and quantities in the secondary market Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM can actually respond to changes in the primary market depends on an environment in which obtaining prescriptions is relatively easy Figures and consider the case of illicit opioids ( i.e. heroin and illicitly manufactured fentanyl ) for which a legal market does not exist Because the quantity of illicit opioid use increased substantially between and it stands to reason that demand or supply expanded or both did However whether it was demand or supply that drove the increase in illicit opioid misuse has a testable implication. If demand expansions dominate then the price of illicit opioids must rise whereas if supply expansions dominate then the price must fall.8 In fact we find that illicit opioid prices were relatively stable between and suggesting that both demand itself fueled in part by efforts to curtail the prescription opioid wave of the crisis and supply expansions were important during this period. Then between and the price of illicit opioids fell markedly with the influx of illicitly manufactured fentanyl suggesting that supply expansions were most important during this later period Our findings suggest that subsidies and supply expansions in combination with changes in prescribing behavior can account for much of the rise in opioid overdose deaths. Some have argued that demand-side factors such as economic stagnation in past years was an important driver of increasing mortality from drug use and other causes ( Stiglitz ) However there is direct evidence that demand growth due to worsening economic conditions was not the primary factor driving the growth of the opioid crisis First the hypothesis that lower incomes raise demand does not explain the aggregate time series within the United States. If worsening economic conditions increase demand then one would expect that the Great Recession would have fueled a substantial increase in opioid-involved overdose fatalities However figure suggests that the growth rate of opioid-involved overdose deaths was unaffected by the Great Recession. The crisis grew at roughly the same pace straight through one of the greatest recessions experienced in the last century and in fact picked up growth well after the recession ended More important two of the four lowest growth rates in opioid deaths occurred between and in the midst of the Great Recession. It was not until and that growth rates again rose significantly but that was in a period of lower unemployment the opposite prediction of demand growth of opioids being fueled by lower incomes unless effects are lagged by several years Despite this lack of association between aggregate economic conditions and opioid deaths Hollingsworth Ruhm and Simon ( ) do report a positive association between county-level unemployment and opioid-involved overdose deaths a 1-percentage-point increase in a county s unemployment The relative price elasticities of demand and supply also affect which expansion dominates | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Effect of Demand Expansions on the Quantity and Price of Illicit Opioids Illicit opioid price Supply P1 Demand ( new ) P0 Demand Q0 Q1 Illicit opioid quantity Note : This figure shows the impact of demand shifting outward while the supply curve remains in place ; in this case the price must rise Figure Effect of Supply Expansions on the Quantity and Price of Illicit Opioids Illicit opioid price Supply P0 Supply ( new ) P1 Demand Q0 Illicit opioid quantity Q1 Note : This figure shows the impact of supply shifting outward while the demand curve remains in place ; in this case the price must fall. If the price falls while the quantity increases then the supply must have expanded Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Opioid Overdose Death and Unemployment Rate Unemployment rate ( percent ) Deaths ( per ) Unemployment rate ( right axis ) Opioid overdose rate ( left axis ) Sources : CDC WONDER ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations rate is associated with a 0.19-person increase in the rate of opioid-involved overdose deaths per However this association does not appear quantitatively large enough to be a primary driver of the massive growth in opioid deaths. It would take a 54-percentage-point increase in the unemployment rate between and to explain the 10.2-person increase in the rate of opioid-involved overdose deaths during this period. However the unemployment rate increased by a net percentage point ( from to percent ) between and In addition Ruhm ( ) formally tests whether a number of demandside factors that reflect changing economic conditions can explain the growing crisis during this period. He finds that very little of the rise in opioid overdose deaths during this period can be explained by economic conditions. Instead he points to changes in the drug environment reflective of supply conditions as being central. Consistent with Ruhm s findings Currie Yin and Schnell ( ) find no clear evidence of a substantial overall effect of the employment-topopulation ratio on the amount of opioids prescribed in a county The First Wave of the Crisis : Prescription Opioids The opioid crisis unfolded in two waves. The first wave beginning in about and lasting until about was characterized by a rising misuse of | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM prescription opioids.9 The second wave began in about when prescription opioids were made more difficult to abuse and illicit opioids including heroin and more recently illicitly manufactured fentanyl grew in the market This and the next sections focus on the first wave and the subsequent section focuses on the second wave Between and the rate of overdose deaths involving prescription opioids ( which we define as natural and semisynthetic opioids and methadone ) increased by percent while other opioid-involved deaths grew much more slowly ( figure ) In order to analyze the potential roles of expanded supply of prescription opioids we first estimate the out-of-pocket price of prescription opioids. We then conduct a calibration exercise in which we assume that secondary market prices for prescription opioids are proportional to outof-pocket prices and that prescription opioid misusers respond to these prices of misuse in the same way that heroin users respond to heroin prices. We also assume that prescription opioid deaths are proportional to prescription opioid misuse. If falling prices suggest a large quantity response relative to the magnitude of the observed increase in prescription opioid-involved overdose deaths then this would suggest that these price declines when combined with other factors may have played a role in the first wave of the opioid crisis An environment in which opioid prescriptions were promoted and easier to obtain and fill is a necessary precondition for falling out-of-pocket prices to have played a substantial role otherwise it is unlikely that secondary market prices could have responded to falling out-of-pocket prices. This environment was created by a campaign to persuade doctors that pain was being undertreated and that opioids were the solution. Pain-alleviation societies patient advocacy groups and professional medical organizations urged physicians to treat pain more aggressively ( Max et al. ) Pain was labeled the 5th Vital Sign which should be regularly assessed and treated ( VA ) Starting in the Joint Commission an accrediting body for hospitals and other health facilities instituted new standards requiring facilities to establish procedures to assess the existence and intensity of pain and to treat it with effective pain medicines. At the same time multiple medical organizations promoted opioids as a safe and effective treatment for chronic noncancer pain ( DuPont Bezaitis and Ross ) This coincided with aggressive marketing efforts by opioid manufacturers starting in the late 1990s to assure physicians that their products were safe with little abuse potential ( Van Zee ; President s We focus on the period throughout the chapter due to the unavailability of consistent overdose data before the unavailability of illicit drug seizure data before used for estimating the illicit opioid price series and the substantial volatility in the out-of-pocket price series before Some opioid-involved deaths include both prescription and other opioids. Figure distinguishes between opioid-involved overdose deaths with prescription opioids present versus those without prescription opioids present. Similarly figure distinguishes between opioidinvolved overdose deaths with illicit opioids present versus those without illicit opioids present Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Commission ) Because of space limitations this chapter does not provide a comprehensive review of either the change in medical guidance regarding the appropriate use of opioids or the marketing and promotion efforts by opioid manufacturers We use the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey to construct a time series of the out-of-pocket price per potency-adjusted unit of prescription opioids The MEPS asks respondents to report all prescription drugs they obtain and how much they pay out of pocket for each drug. Opioid prescriptions are converted into morphine gram equivalents ( MGEs ) and then prices are estimated by dividing expenditures by the total number of MGEs. We use the terms MGEs and potency-adjusted units interchangeably throughout. Prices are converted into real dollars and then a real price index is shown. Figure shows the real supply and out-of-pocket price index for prescription opioids. The supply price is calculated as the ratio of total expenditures to total MGEs and the out-ofpocket price is calculated as the ratio of self ( out-of-pocket ) expenditures to total MGEs. Note that out-of-pocket expenditures include individual payments made for prescriptions without third-party coverage as well as individual copayments made for prescriptions that are only partially covered by third parties Between and the out-of-pocket price fell by percent before stabilizing. One potential factor in this decline which is analyzed in depth in the next section was the inception of Medicare Part D in which introduced subsidies for prescription drugs including opioids and lowered the out-of-pocket price for enrolled consumers. Another potential factor was the rapid expansion of disability ( SSDI ) enrollment which before provided drug coverage for many enrollees through Medicaid or other programs and after provided coverage through Medicare Part D. Finally between and supply prices fell by percent in conjunction with the expansion of generic opioids. A recent analysis by the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) similarly finds that potency-adjusted opioid acquisition prices for pharmacies fell by about percent during this same period although it also finds that prices substantially increased during the 1990s before the crisis took off ( FDA 2018a ) Figure shows the decline in the brand market share of potencyadjusted opioids as the generic market share rose from about to percent between and ( FDA 2018a ) The law of demand says that all else remaining the same consumers engage in more of an activity when the activity becomes cheaper. However the law by itself does not tell us the magnitude of the effect of an percent reduction in the potency-adjusted price of prescription opioids on either the quantity of prescriptions or the number of deaths involving prescription opioids. Previous econometric studies that have related opioid prescriptions and other prescriptions to out-of-pocket prices suggest a range of likely quantitative effects of the price changes shown in figure on the number of opioid | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Real Supply Price and Real Out-of-Pocket Price Index of Potency-Adjusted Prescription Opioids Index ( = ) Supply price Out-of-pocket price Sources : Medical Expenditure Panel Survey ; National Drug Code Database ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : Prices are calculated by dividing real total spending in a given year by the total number of morphine gram equivalents prescribed in that year. All prescriptions are converted into morphine gram equivalents based on the quantity of pills prescribed and their potency using the National Drug Code database Figure Brand Share of Potency-Adjusted Prescription Opioids and Supply Price Percent Index ( = ) Real supply price index ( right axis ) Brand share of prescription opioids ( left axis ) Sources : Food and Drug Administration ( 2018a ) ; Medical Expenditure Panel Survey ; CEA calculations Note : Price data are available up to Brand share data are provided up to Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM prescriptions. Predicting the effect on the number of deaths requires additional information because the deaths derive from misuse. Only a fraction of opioid prescriptions is given to people with opioid use disorder and their price sensitivity of demand may differ from the sensitivity of average consumers We begin with the effect of reduced prescription opioid prices on the number of opioid prescriptions. A number of studies look at the effects of drug prices and insurance coverage on the sales of all prescription drugs as well as the sales of opioid prescriptions specifically. The more responsive drug users are to prices the more they consume as prices decline. This price responsiveness is typically measured by the price elasticity of demand the percentage change in quantity demanded when the price increases by percent.11 Because elasticity studies typically make cross-sectional comparisons they are holding constant physician prescribing norms and marketing efforts by sellers that are changing over time. In other words the effects of changing prescribing norms and marketing efforts need to be added to the price effects measured by the cross-sectional studies of the price elasticity of demand. Box offers an overview of the ongoing opioid settlements between governments and opioid manufacturers over misleading marketing efforts by the manufacturers Soni ( ) found that the introduction of Medicare Part D increased opioid prescriptions for the population age to ( relative to the population age to and not on Medicare ) over a four-year period by a factor of At the same time and for the same population Soni ( ) found that the out-ofpocket price was reduced by a factor of from the introduction of Part D which is less than the price change for the entire U.S. population from to as shown in figure These estimated effects of Part D are economically significant and do not support the hypothesis that the changes shown in figure have a minimal effect on the number of prescriptions. Indeed they show an arc elasticity ( calculated with the natural logarithm ) of which suggests that the price change shown in figure would increase potency-adjusted prescriptions per capita by a factor of between and A factor of is close to the actual change as estimated with data from the Automation of Reports and Consolidated Orders System ( ARCOS ) and shown in figure ( DOJ n.d. ) Insurance plans should have coinsurance rates varying across drugs to the extent that the sensitivity of consumer demand to the out-of-pocket price varies across drugs ( Feldstein ; Besley ) Health insurance plans behave that way in practice ( Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ) Coinsurance rates for opioids ( percent ) are higher than for other common therapeutic classes ( percent ) Similarly coinsurance rates for hydrocodone When sales effects are estimated from small price changes the result is sometimes called point elasticity. Arc elasticity refers to an estimate from large price changes and typically uses midpoints for calculating percentage changes or uses logarithm changes so that the same elasticity can be applied to price increases as to price decreases | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Box Opioid Crisis Lawsuits Thousands of municipal governments nationwide and nearly two dozen states have sued the pharmaceutical industry in an effort to hold opioid manufacturers and distributers accountable for the opioid crisis. These lawsuits argue that opioid manufacturers launched misleading marketing campaigns underplaying the risks and exaggerating the benefits of opioids Additionally these lawsuits allege that opioid distributors unlawfully allowed the drugs to proliferate These civil litigation cases have resulted in the conclusion of multiple settlement agreements at least one large trial and the promise of more settlements to come. OxyContin maker Purdue Pharma as well as its owners the Sackler family announced a tentative settlement expected to be worth more than $ billion in September Under the proposed agreement the company will be restructured into a public corporation with profits from drug sales going toward the plaintiffs. The settlement would be the largest payout from any company involved in the opioid crisis. Purdue Pharma previously agreed to pay a total of $ million to Oklahoma to settle a lawsuit in March Purdue s Oklahoma settlement set the stage for subsequent settlements with the State including Teva Pharmaceutical s $ million settlement in May Johnson & Johnson refused to settle and the landmark trial resulted in an order to pay $ million to Oklahoma in August Both the State and Johnson & Johnson are contesting this verdict alleging respectively that the award is too small or too large The three largest drug distributors McKesson Cardinal Health and AmerisourceBergen and the generic opioid manufacturer Teva Pharmaceuticals reached a settlement worth about $ million in October These settlements are the early conclusions to nearly two years of legal battles and may serve as a benchmark for resolution in other opioid cases The first of a new series of Federal trials began on October after talks dissolved of a deal worth $ billion to resolve all opioid lawsuits filed against the three drug distributors Teva and Johnson & Johnson The settlements include a combination of donations to substance use disorder treatment program research and cash payouts and will likely provide a benchmark for thousands of similar cases brought before the courts in an attempt to hold pharmaceutical companies accountable for an opioid crisis that has killed hundreds of thousands and cost trillions ( percent ) are higher than for other common nonopioid drugs ( percent ) The observed coinsurance rates thus suggest that opioid prescriptions are not less price sensitive than the average prescription drug over the annual time frame ( or longer ) that is of interest to the sponsors of insurance plans.12 If The coinsurance rates are inferred from the estimates by Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ( ) and are for Part D participants who have not yet reached the donut hole. Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Potency-Adjusted Quantity ( MGEs ) of Prescription Opioids per Capita in the United States MGEs per capita Other Hydrocodone Oxycodone Sources : Automation of Reports and Consolidated Orders System ; National Drug Code database ; CEA calculations Note : MGEs = morphine gram equivalents. Quantities are converted into MGEs and divided by the total U.S. population in a given year to calculate MGEs per capita Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ( ) s one-month arc elasticity of for therapeutic drug classes were applied to the price change from to shown in figure it suggests that opioid prescriptions would have increased by a factor of due to price changes alone.13 A factor of is economically significant but is still only a minority of the actual change in opioid prescriptions between and The discrepancy between the findings of Soni ( ) and Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ( ) could be that behavior is more sensitive to a price change that lasts more than one month or that applies to a larger population of people.14 But this discrepancy may also reflect the imprecision of estimating price effects which is why our data are consistent with the view that the increase in prescriptions can not be explained by price reductions alone but also reflect changes in physicians prescribing norms and marketing efforts by opioid sellers Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ( ) report a point elasticity for a linear demand curve but their reports of price and quantity changes are sufficient for their readers to calculate the corresponding arc elasticity. We also note that the authors elasticity is estimated for a selected group of Part D participants who have high drug costs The demand for habit-forming products responds more to price changes that last longer ( Pollak ; Becker and Murphy ; Gallet ) which is why it would be especially problematic to apply the approach of Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ( ) specifically to opioids because it refers to price changes lasting only a month. The estimates by Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ( ) also exclude social multiplier price effects that may occur when the entire population experiences a price change rather than a selected few who are at a special spot in their prescription-benefit formula ( Glaeser Sacerdote and Scheinkman ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Proportion of Users Obtaining Misused Prescription Opioids by Most Recent Source Stole Other Bought from friend or relative Bought from drug dealer Free from friend or relative Doctor Source : Lipari and Hughes ( ) One reason that falling opioid prices may increase opioid deaths at a different rate than they increase opioid prescriptions is that opioid prices for medical purposes might follow a different trend than the prices paid by opioid misusers. In fact only percent of people who misuse prescription opioids most recently obtained the drugs from a doctor while the remaining percent obtained them from friends or relatives via theft from a drug dealer or from some other source ( figure ) But even when the drugs are obtained on the secondary market the price is likely positively correlated with the outof-pocket price. A lower out-of-pocket price decreases the acquisition cost for those selling the drugs in the secondary market. It also should decrease the implicit price for those giving the drugs away with no expected reciprocal gifts and it should reduce the precautions taken by individuals to safeguard their drugs against theft.15 Of course the out-of-pocket price is only one component of the total price of obtaining prescription opioids for misuse. The ease of finding a doctor to prescribe the opioids and a pharmacy that receives a supply and is willing to fill the prescription is also important As a calibration exercise for contextualizing whether falling out-of-pocket prices could have played a role in the first wave of the opioid crisis we assume that the price of prescription opioid misuse is proportional to the out-ofpocket price. For example a percent decline in the out-of-pocket price of This does not mean that the amount of theft varies with the price because thieves can be expected to put more effort toward stealing more valuable items. We only assume that thieves experience greater cost of theft for high-priced items due to owners precautions Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM prescription opioids is assumed to reduce the price of pills in the secondary market ( and for misusers obtaining pills in the primary market ) by percent This assumption is clearly reasonable for the percent of prescription opioid misusers who obtain their pills directly from drugs prescribed by medical providers in the primary market because they only face the out-of-pocket price Wemay mayalso alsoexpect expect secondary market price to proportional be proportional to outWe thethe secondary market price to be to the We may also expect the secondary market price to who be proportional to the outthe out-of-pocket price Consider first the misusers purchase their pills of-pocket price. Consider first the misusers who purchase their pills in the secondary of-pocket price Consider first the misusers who purchase their pills in the secondary in the ( as secondary ( as opposed to receiving them complimentarily ) Theseek market opposedmarket to receiving them complimentarily ) The sellers of these pills market ( as opposed to receiving them complimentarily ) The sellers of these pills seek sellers of these pills seek to maximize their profits which are equal to the price to maximize their profits which are equal to the price of each pill P minus the cost of to maximize their profits,the which equal to the price of the each pill P minus the cost of of each each pill Ppill minus cost are of market obtaining each pill in primary C ( the obtaining in the primary C ( the out-of-pocket price ) ,market multiplied by the obtaining each pillprice ) in the primary market C ( the out-of-pocket price ) multiplied by the out-of-pocket multiplied by the number of pills sold Q : number of pills sold Q : number of pills sold Q : ( = ) = ( ) competitivemarket market profits are competed InInaacompetitive competed down downto tozero zerofor forallallsellers sellers so In a competitive market profits are competed down to zero for all sellers so sothe thatprice the price charged onsecondary the secondary market is equal toout-of-pocket the out-of-pocket that charged on the market is equal to the price. In that the price charged on the secondary market is equal to the out-of-pocket price. In a noncompetitive market each seller hasseller the power influence the secondary price. In a noncompetitive market each has theto power to influence the a noncompetitive market each seller has the power to influence the secondary market price market based on how many sells. pills In terms of In the equation secondary price based onpills howitmany it sells terms of theabove equa- this market price based on how many pills it sells. In terms of the equation above this means that the is athat function of is quantity It can be shown thatbeashown necessary tion above thisprice means the price a function of quantity It can means that the price is a function of quantity. It can be shown that a necessary condition for maximizing profits that a necessary condition for is maximizing profits is condition for maximizing profits is = = where r is the responsiveness in percentage terms of the market price to the quantity where r is the in percentage terms of theofmarket price to theto quantity r isresponsiveness the responsiveness in percentage of where pills provided by a particular seller Thus anterms increasethe in market the costprice ( or thethe out-ofof pills provided by aprovided particular seller Thus seller an increase in the cost ( or out-ofquantity of pills by a particular Thus an increase in the cost pocket price ) C leads to a proportional increase in the secondary market price P pocket price ) C leads to price ) a proportional in theincrease secondary market price P ( or the out-of-pocket C leads to increase a proportional in the secondary assuming that r remains constant assuming that r remains constant market price P assuming that r remains constant Assuming that the share of prescription opioids obtained via various segments Assuming thatthat the the share of prescription opioids obtained via variousvarious segments Assuming share of prescription of the secondary market with different markups opioids remainsobtained constantvia over time the of the secondary market with different markups remains constant over time the segments of the secondary market with remains constant average secondary market price across all different segmentsmarkups would change proportionally average secondary market price acrossmarket all segments would all change proportionally over time the average secondary price across segments with changes in the out-of-pocket price. It is important to emphasizewould that this withchange changes in the out-of-pocket price It isout-of-pocket important to emphasize that this proportionally with changes in the price It is important assumption would be plausible only if suppliers to the secondary market face assumption wouldthat bethis plausible only would if suppliers to theonly secondary marketthe face to emphasize assumption beprescriptions plausible if suppliers relatively low transaction costs for obtaining from doctors to and filling relatively low transaction costs for obtaining prescriptions from doctors and filling secondary market face relatively lowreason transaction costsinfor obtainingguidelines prescrip- and prescriptions from pharmacies For this changes prescribing prescriptions from pharmacies Forprescriptions this reason changes in prescribing guidelines and tions from doctors and filling from pharmacies For this practices a greater emphasis on pain management and the expansion ofreason pill mills practices a greater emphasis on pain management and the expansion of pillpain mills changes into prescribing guidelines and practices a greater and supplies pharmacies are preconditions for falling pricesemphasis to have aon potentially and management supplies to pharmacies are preconditions for falling prices to have a potentially the expansion significant effect and on opioid misuse. of pill mills and supplies to pharmacies are significant effect onfor opioid misuse preconditions falling prices to have a potentially opioid at a Another reason that falling opioid prices cansignificant increase effect opioidondeaths Another reason that falling opioid prices can increase opioid deaths at a misuse different rate than they increase opioid prescriptions is that most opioid prescriptions different rate than they increase opioid prescriptions is that most opioid prescriptions reason that purposes falling opioid increase deaths a a are likelyAnother used for medical andprices thosecan who misuseopioid opioids mayathave are likely used for medical purposes and those who misuse opioids may have a different rate thantothey increase opioidofprescriptions is that most opioid pre-price different sensitivity prices One point view is that medical users are less different sensitivity to prices. One point of view is that medical users are less price scriptions are likely forfollowing medical purposes and those who misusemisusers opioids are sensitive because they used are just their providers orders whereas sensitive because they are just following their providers orders whereas misusers are may haveprice a different sensitivity to prices of view is that medical by necessarily sensitive to the extent that One mostpoint of their income is exhausted necessarily price sensitive to the extent that most of their income is exhausted by Another is that who misuse are less purchasing users areopioids less price sensitiveperspective because they are those just following theiropioids providers purchasing opioids.16 Another perspective is that those who misuse opioids are less price sensitive because they less interested in saving orders whereas misusers areare necessarily price sensitive to themoney extent on thattheir mostdrug price sensitive because they are less interested in saving money on their drug acquisitions acquisitions Unfortunately we are not aware of studies estimating price elasticities for the Unfortunately we are not aware of studies estimating price elasticities for the misuse of prescription opioids distinctly from price elasticities for the overall number misuse distinctly from price elasticities for the overall number 248of | prescription Chapter 7opioids of prescription opioids ( regardless of their use ) Thus we use estimates of the price of prescription opioids ( regardless of their use ) Thus we use estimates of the price People who misuse opioids who for example spend all disposable income on opioids have a price People who opioids who forpurchased example spend disposable income on opioids have 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM elasticity of misuse because the quantity is theall ratio of disposable income to price. Seea price Becker elasticity of because the quantity purchased is the ratio of disposable income to price. See Becker ( ) for a more general analysis Table Estimates of the Price Elasticity of Demand for Heroin Study type and outcomes Elasticity estimates Silverman and Spruill ( ) ; Caulkins ( ) ; Dave ( ) ; Olmstead et al. ( ) Outcomes related to heroin use ( crime emergency room visits etc. ) ; ; ; Saffer and Chaloupka ( ) National household surveys Government historical records to ; to Studies van Ours ( ) ; Liu et al. ( ) Bretteville-Jensen and Biorn ( ) ; Interviews with heroin Bretteville-Jensen ( ) ; Roddy and users Greenwald ( ) Petry and Bickel ( ) ; Jofre-Bonet and Petry ( ) ; Chalmers et al ( ) Laboratory studies to ; to ; to ; to ; to Source : Olmstead et al. ( ) of their income is exhausted by purchasing opioids.16 Another perspective is that those who misuse opioids are less price sensitive because they are less interested in saving money on their drug acquisitions Unfortunately we are not aware of studies estimating price elasticities for the misuse of prescription opioids distinctly from price elasticities for the overall number of prescription opioids ( regardless of their use ) Thus we use estimates of the price elasticity of heroin a substitute for prescription opioids for which a large body of academic literature is available. Olmstead and others ( ) provide an extensive review of the literature and categorize studies based on the methods used table summarizes their work. Although the literature contains a broad range of estimates studies generally find that higher prices reduce demand. For our calibration exercise we rely on a meta-analysis of the literature on illicit drug price elasticities by Gallet ( ) who synthesizes price elasticities from studies mostly based on U.S. data. He finds that the price elasticity of heroin falls in the range of to which coincides with the arc elasticity of calculated from Soni s ( ) results for People who misuse opioids who for example spend all disposable income on opioids have a price elasticity of because the quantity purchased is the ratio of disposable income to price. See Becker ( ) for a more general analysis Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM elasticity of heroin a substitute prescription opioids which a large body of ofof elasticity of heroin a substitute for for prescription opioids for for which awhich large ofbody elasticity elasticity ofofheroin heroin aasubstitute substitute for forprescription prescription opioids opioids for forwhich abody alarge large body prescription opioids but is available furtherOlmstead from zeroand than the short-run estimates for or which a large body ofacademic literature is Olmstead and others ( ) provide an extensive academic literature is available others ( ) provide an extensive academic academicliterature literatureisisavailable available.Olmstead Olmsteadand andothers others ( ) ( ) provide providean anextensive extensive allreview prescription drugs reported by Einav Finkelstein and ( ) ) provide an extensive review of the literature categorize studies based onPolyakova the methods used table of the literature andand categorize studies based on the methods used table review review ofofthe theliterature literature and andcategorize categorize studies studies based based on onthe themethods methods used table used table Because previous studies show aliterature range ofcontains price elasticities we can only methods used table summarizes 7-1summarizes their work Although literature contains a broad range of estimates their work Although thethe a broad of estimates summarizes summarizes their their work work Although Although the theliterature literature contains contains aarange broad broad range range ofofestimates estimates provide agenerally range offind estimates of higher the role of price changes asFor acalibration factor in exercise theexercise road range of estimates studies generally find that higher prices reduce demand our calibration studies that higher prices reduce demand ForFor our studies studies generally generally find find that that higher prices prices reduce reduce demand demand For our ourcalibration calibration exercise exercise our calibration exercise growth ofwe misuse and the number of deaths involving prescription rely on a meta-analysis of the literature on illicit drug price elasticities by Gallet we we relywe onopioid a meta-analysis of the literature on illicit drug price elasticities by Gallet rely relyon onaameta-analysis meta-analysisofofthe theliterature literatureon onillicit illicitdrug drugprice priceelasticities elasticities by byGallet Gallet rice elasticities by Gallet opioids As a synthesizes low value we take one interpretation of findings ( ) who synthesizes price elasticities from 42the studies mostly based on ( ) who price elasticities from studies mostly based on U.S.U.S ( ) ( ) who who synthesizes synthesizes price price elasticities elasticities from from 42short-run studies studies mostly mostly based based on onU.S U.S es mostly based onof U.S data He finds that the price elasticity offor heroin falls in the range ofnamely to data He finds that the price elasticity of heroin falls infalls the range Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ( ) all prescription drugs data data He He finds finds that that the the price price elasticity elasticity ofof heroin heroin falls ininthe theof range range ofofto toto range of to which coincides with the arc elasticity of calculated from Soni s ( ) results which with the arc elasticity of calculated from Soni s ( ) results which which coincides coincides with with the thearc arc elasticity ofof calculated calculated from from Soni s ( ) ( ) results results that thecoincides price elasticity of demand iselasticity constant and equal to As aSoni s middle om Soni s ( ) results for prescription opioids but is further from zero than the short-run estimates for all for prescription opioids but is further from zero than the short-run estimates for all for for for prescription prescription opioids but butisisfurther further from from zero zerothan thanthe theshort-run short-run estimates estimates forall all value we take the otheropioids interpretation of their results : that demand curve ort-run estimates forprescription allprescription drugs reported by Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ( ) drugs reported by Einav and Polyakova ( ) prescription prescription drugs drugs reported reported by byFinkelstein Einav Einav Finkelstein Finkelstein and andPolyakova Polyakova ( ) ( ) is linear in price.18 As a high value we take Gallet s high-end elasticity of kova ( ) Because previous show a range ofshown price elasticities we can onlyonly Because previous studies show ashow range of price we can only Because Because previous previous studies studies show aarange range ofofelasticities price price elasticities elasticities we we can can only The corresponding results forstudies predicted deaths are in figure as lasticities we can only provide a range of estimates of the role of price changes as a factor in the growth of ofof provide a range of estimates of the role of price changes as a factor in the growth of provide provide a a range range of of estimates estimates of of the the role role of of price price changes changes as as a a factor factor in in the the growth growth low constant elasticity low linear demand and high constant elasticity a factor in the growthopioid ofopioid misuse and the number of deaths involving prescription opioids aAs low value misuse and theand number of deaths involving prescription opioids As aAs low value opioid opioid misuse misuse and the thenumber number ofofdeaths deaths involving prescription prescription opioids opioids As aalow lowvalue value respectively.19 For reference figure alsoinvolving shows the actual rate of overn opioids. As a low value take one interpretation of the short-run findings of Einav Finkelstein andand we we take one interpretation of the short-run findings of Einav Finkelstein and we wetake takeone oneinterpretation interpretationofofthe theshort-run short-runfindings findingsofofEinav Einav,Finkelstein Finkelstein and deaths ( ) involving prescription opioids Price changes would be capable Einav Finkelstein dose and Polyakova ( ) for all prescription drugs namely the price elasticity of demand Polyakova for all prescription drugs namely thatthat thethat price elasticity of demand Polyakova Polyakova ( ) ( ) for for all allprescription prescription drugs drugs namely namely that the the price price elasticity elasticity ofofdemand demand ofisexplaining between 83aAs percent of value thewegrowth between and of of rice elasticity of demand is constant and equal toand aAsmiddle we take the other interpretation constant and equal middle value take the other interpretation isisconstant constant and andto equal equal totoAs Asaamiddle middle value value we we take take the the other other interpretation interpretation ofof assuming inresults : the death rate involving prescription opioids that the rise intake 18a high e other interpretation oftheir results : that the demand curve is linear in price value we take Gallet s As aAshigh we take Gallet s their that thethat demand curve iscurve linear in price their their results : results : that the thedemand demand curve isis linear linear inin price price AsAsvalue aahigh high value value we we take Gallet s Gallet s overdose deaths iselasticity proportional toThe thecorresponding rise in misuse Infor other words without gh value we take Gallet s high-end elasticity of The corresponding results predicted deaths are shown high-end elasticity of corresponding results for predicted deaths are shown high-end high-end elasticity ofofThe The corresponding results results for forpredicted predicted deaths deaths are areshown shown dicted deaths are shown the changes the estimates suggest that there would have been between in figure as low constant elasticity low linear demand and high constant in price figure as low constant elasticity low linear demand and high constant ininfigure figure7-13 7-13asas low lowconstant constantelasticity elasticity low lowlinear lineardemand demand and and high highconstant constant involving nd and high constant and fewer deaths prescription opioids during those elasticity respectively reference figure also shows the actual rate of ofof elasticity respectively ForFor reference figure also shows the actual rate ofrate elasticity elasticity respectively respectively For Forreference reference figure figure also also shows shows the the actual actual rate hows the actual rate of overdose deaths involving prescription opioids Price changes would be capable of overdose deathsdeaths involving prescription opioids Price changes would would be capable of years.20 overdose overdose deathsinvolving involving prescription prescription opioids opioids Price Pricechanges changes would be becapable capable ofof ges would be capableexplaining ofexplaining between 31that and percent of the growth between and in the between and offraction the growth between and in2010 the explaining explaining between between 31and and 83percent percent ofofthe the growth growth between between and and ininthe the Figure suggests apercent greater of the increase in2001 actual overen and indose the death rate involving prescription opioids assuming the rise in overdose deaths is isis death rate involving prescription opioids assuming thatthat the rise in overdose deaths isdeaths death death rateinvolving involving prescription prescription opioids opioids assuming assuming that that the the rise rise ininoverdose overdose deaths deaths israte explained with constant elasticity models ( the red and gold lines rise in overdose deathsproportional isproportional to the rise in misuse In other words without the price changes to2010 the rise inin misuse Inyears other words without thepattern price thethe the proportional proportional to to the the rise rise ininmisuse misuse InIn other other words without without the thechanges price price changes changes the in the figure ) in than earlier such aswords This occurs t the price changes the estimates suggest that there would have been between and fewer estimates suggest that there would have been between and fewer estimates estimates suggest suggest that that there there would would have have been been between between and and fewer fewer because our price measure shows proportionally fewer20 price declines in the and fewer deaths involving prescription opioids during those years deaths involving prescription opioids during those years deaths deaths involving prescription prescription opioids during during those those years years early years thaninvolving in the later ones andopioids likely reflects the substantial influences of Figure suggests a greater fraction of the increase in actual overdose Figure suggests thatthat a greater fraction of the increase in actual overdose Figure Figure suggests suggests that that aagreater greater fraction fraction ofofthe theincrease increase ininactual actual overdose overdose nonprice factors ( e.g. prescribing norms and marketing efforts ) in addition to rease in actual overdose deaths is explained with constant elasticity models red and gold lines in the deaths is explained with constant elasticity models ( the ( the red and gold lines inlines the deaths deaths isisexplained explained with with constant constant elasticity elasticity models models ( the ( the red red and and gold gold lines ininthe the factors the demand specification shows a time pattern of ourour ed and gold lines inprice the figure ) inHowever than in linear earlier years such as This pattern occurs because figure ) in than inthan earlier years such assuch pattern occurs because figure ) figure ) inin than ininearlier earlier years years such asasThis This This pattern pattern occurs occurs because becauseour our deaths ( as opposed to a total increase ) that is closer to actual deaths tern occurs becausepredicted our price measure shows proportionally fewer price declines in the early years than in the price measure shows proportionally fewer price declines in the early years than inthan the price price measure measure shows shows proportionally proportionally fewer fewer price price declines declines ininthe the early early years years than ininthe the he early years than in the later ones and likely reflects substantial influences of nonprice factors ( e.g. later ones and likely reflects thethe substantial influences of nonprice factors ( e.g. later later ones ones and and likely likely reflects reflects the thesubstantial substantial influences influences ofofnonprice nonprice factors factors ( e.g. ( e.g. f nonprice factors ( e.g. 17Gallet finds that demand forfor drugs ( ) ( ) is is more responsive to to price thethe extensive margin ( ) ( ) Gallet finds that demand for drugs ( ) more is ( ) more responsive toat price at the margin ( in ( in Gallet ( ) finds that demand drugs responsive price at extensive margin ( in Gallet Gallet ( ) ( ) finds finds that thatdemand demand for fordrugs drugs ( ) is ismore more responsive responsive to toprice price atatextensive the theextensive extensive margin margin ( in ( in decisions about whether to use drugs ) than at the intensive margin ( how much of the drug to use ) about whether to use than at the intensive margin ( how much of drug the drug to and about whether to use drugs ) than at the intensive margin ( how much ofmuch the to use ) ce at the extensive margindecisions ( indecisions decisions decisions about about whether whether totodrugs ) use use drugs ) drugs ) than than atat the theintensive intensive margin margin ( how ( how much ofof the the drug drugand totouse ) use ) ,and and use ) and is responsive inin the long run than inin the short run ( ) is ( ) more responsive in long the long run in the short run. run ( ) is more in the run than in the short run much of the drug to use ) and ( ) ( ) responsive isismore more more responsive responsive in the thelong longthan run run than than in the the short short run 18Einav Finkelstein and Polyakova ( ) calculate anelasticity elasticity based on Finkelstein Einav Polyakova ( ) calculate an elasticity of based onpercentage percentage changes Einav Finkelstein andand Polyakova ( ) calculate an ofof based onbased percentage changes Einav Einav,Finkelstein Finkelstein and andPolyakova Polyakova ( ) ( ) calculate calculate ananelasticity elasticity of of based on onpercentage percentage changes changes changes from the low price to the high price which is a valid point elasticity only if the demand the low price to the high price which is a valid point elasticity only if the demand curve is linear in inin fromfrom the low price to the high price which is a valid point elasticity only if the demand curve is curve linear inislinear based on percentage changes from fromthe thelow lowprice pricetotothe thehigh highprice price,which whichisisa avalid validpoint pointelasticity elasticityonly onlyif ifthe the demand demand curve is linear curve iswith linear in price withelasticity aofpoint elasticity of at the average out-of-pocket price paid with awith point elasticity of at average the average out-of-pocket price paid by low-cost Medicare price a point elasticity atof the out-of-pocket price paid by low-cost Medicare PartPartPart the demand curve is linear inprice price price with a apoint point elasticity of atat the the average average out-of-pocket out-of-pocket price price paid paid byby low-cost low-cost Medicare Medicare Part Medicare Part Dand recipients and aonly valid arc only ifcan D recipients between and It is aItvalid arc elasticity ifonly converted to so that itthat can Dlow-cost recipients between It between is a valid elasticity onlyItonly ifisconverted toelasticity so that itso beititbe aid by low-cost MedicarebyPart DDrecipients recipients between between and and Itisarc isa avalid valid arc arc elasticity elasticity if ifconverted converted to to sothat can canbebe converted to so thatincreases itincreases can bewell applied to price increases as well as decreases to price increases as as decreases applied to price increases as well as decreases erted to so that it can beapplied applied applied to toprice price asas well well as asdecreases decreases & & For19 the constant elasticity predictions weause demand function ofform the form = & where For the constant elasticity predictions weuse use awe demand function of the form = a is a isisa a 19For the constant elasticity predictions we demand function of the where For For the theconstant constant elasticity elasticity predictions predictions weause use a ademand demand function function ofof the the form ,&where ,iswhere " " form " " = = " the is quantity determined based on initial quantity price as ofasas is quantity andand determined based on the initial quantity andand price asprice of e form " = & where parameter isisaaparameter parameter and determined based onthe the initial quantity and price as2001 the is is the the quantity quantity parameter parameter and and determined determined based based on onthe the initial initial quantity quantity and and price of of " " " demanded is price the price and 0and < is<constant the constant elasticity of demand with respect to price the price demanded is the and <and is the elasticity ofelasticity demand with respect to the of " is the quantity quantity demanded the price is the constant of demand with respect demanded demanded isisis the the price price and < 00isis the the constant constant elasticity elasticity ofofdemand demand with with respect respect toto the theprice price 2020Pacula Powell Pacula and Taylor ( ) directly link the of Medicare D a source of ofof Powell and Taylor ( ) ( directly link the link introduction of Medicare PartPart D a source of with respect to the price.to20the Powell Powell Pacula Pacula and and Taylor Taylor ( ) ) directly directly linkintroduction the theintroduction introduction ofofMedicare Medicare Part Part D a D a source source price some of the price reduction between and to deaths involving prescription opioids the price reduction between and to deaths involving prescription opioids Medicare Part D a source of ofsome some ofof the the price price reduction reduction between between and and2010 to to deaths deaths involving involving prescription prescription opioids opioids some Powell Pacula and Taylor ( ) directly link the introduction of Medicare Part D a source including deaths among the Medicare-ineligible population suggesting substantial diversion deaths among the Medicare-ineligible population suggesting substantial diversion fromfromfrom volving prescription opioids including deaths deaths among among the the2001 Medicare-ineligible Medicare-ineligible population population suggesting suggesting substantial substantial diversion diversion from ofincluding some ofincluding the price reduction between and to deaths involving prescription opioids medical markets. medical markets. ng substantial diversionincluding from medical medical markets. markets. deaths among the Medicare-ineligible population suggesting substantial diversion from medical markets. | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Actual and Predicted Rates of Overdose Deaths Involving Prescription Opioids by the Price Elasticity of Demand for Misuse Deaths ( per ) Actual Low elasticity High elasticity Sources : CDC WONDER ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Medical Expenditure Panel Survey ; National Drug Code database ; CEA calculations Note : Predicted deaths are calculated by holding the demand curve constant and moving down the demand curve based on the amount of the price decrease. The functional form of the demand function is provided in the text. The low elasticity is ; the high elasticity is which suggests that constant elasticity might not be the correct model of the effects of price changes.21 Again it is important to emphasize that the potential role of prices in explaining the rise of overdose deaths depends on the ability of consumers in the primary market to obtain more pills as prices decline. This was facilitated by an environment in which prescribers were encouraged and even required to aggressively treat pain with opioids ( President s Commission ) As a result physicians wrote more opioid prescriptions for more patients lowering the amount of time and effort needed to acquire the drugs. In some places the rise of pill mills further increased the convenience of acquiring these drugs by combining prescription writing with dispensing We further note that the death rate involving prescription opioids increased by a factor of between and ( figure ) at the same time that the per capita quantity of prescription opioids increased by a factor of ( figure ) This suggests that whatever factor was increasing prescriptions over this period was also increasing opioid use with only somewhat Given that the research of price effects on drug sales finds most of them to be on the extensive margin the market demand curve largely reflects the inverse distribution of consumer heterogeneity. Distribution functions can generate convex demand functions like the constantelasticity function concave demand functions or a combination of both such as with the normal distribution In technical terms prescribing norms affect both the number of prescriptions at a given price and the sensitivity of that number to price changes Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM greater proportional effects on misuse. One possible explanation for this result is that the price elasticity of misuse is similar to but somewhat further from zero than the price elasticity of medical use so price declines increase both types of use but proportionally somewhat more for misuse Public Subsidies for Opioids A potentially relevant factor for the percent decline in out-of-pocket prices for prescription opioids between and is the expansion of public health insurance programs that subsidize access to and the purchasing of prescription drugs including opioids. These subsidies lower out-of-pocket prices in the legal market thereby lowering prices directly for the percent of prescription opioid misusers who obtain their drugs from a physician and indirectly for the percent of misusers ( see figure ) who receive them on the secondary market from friends family and dealers who first obtained the drugs in the primary market.23 The share of potency-adjusted prescription opioids funded by government programs grew from percent in to percent in ( figure ) However this may understate the share of diverted opioids that were obtained with the assistance of funding from public programs. The diversion of opioids to the secondary market is more profitable when out-of-pocket prices are lower and drugs purchased with government subsidies cost less on average than drugs purchased out of pocket or with private insurance ( MEPS ) Thus government subsidies that cut out-of-pocket prices the most may lead to opioids obtained with the assistance of funding from these programs to be the most likely to be diverted. In fact government programs funded percent of all opioids that were covered at least in part by a third-party payer in ( MEPS ) Figure shows the shares of potency-adjusted opioids covered by public programs private insurers and no third-party payer. Public programs have become much more important sources for funding opioids over time and Medicare coverage expansions appear to have largely driven this growth. The share of opioids covered by Medicare spiked in coinciding with the implementation that year of Medicare Part D which offers prescription drug benefits to Medicare beneficiaries.24 It is important to note that the vast majority of Medicare Part D enrollees dispensed opioids do not misuse them. Carey Jena See Schnell ( ) who analyzes the linkages between the primary and secondary markets In a similar calculation Zhou Florence and Dowell ( ) find that the share of expenditures on prescription opioids accounted for by Medicare increased from percent in to percent in As shown in figure we find that the number of prescriptions for which Medicare was the primary payer increased from percent in to percent in The slight differences may be because the Medicare share of expenditures ( as reported by Zhou Florence and Dowell ) does not include out-of-pocket copayments made by Medicare enrollees for prescriptions where Medicare was the primary payer ( figure ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Share of Potency-Adjusted Prescription Opioids by Primary Payer Percent No third-party payer Private Other public Medicaid Medicare Sources : Medical Expenditure Panel Survey ; National Drug Code Database ; CEA calculations Note : The primary payer is defined as the third-party payer with the highest payment for a given prescription. In addition to Medicare Medicaid and private insurers the other possible primary payers include veterans benefits workers compensation other Federal government insurance other State or local government insurance or other public insurance. All prescriptions are converted into morphine gram equivalents based on the quantity of pills prescribed and their potency using the National Drug Code database and Barnett ( ) studied a sample of more than Medicare beneficiaries who had an opioid prescription. Using several different measures only to percent of the beneficiaries fulfilled a misuse measure The implementation of Medicare Part D and the resulting growth in the share of opioids funded by Medicare do not appear to have simply displaced opioids covered by other sources. Figure shows the quantity of opioids per capita funded by each source. Though the number of potency-adjusted opioids covered by Medicaid fell between and the increase in the number of opioids covered by Medicare was over three times larger than this decline.25 The number of potency-adjusted opioids covered by private insurance also increased between and Furthermore between and the MEPS data suggest that the total quantity of potency-adjusted opioids that An estimated million Medicaid beneficiaries became eligible for Medicare Part D prescription drug coverage on January ( KFF ) These full dual eligibles included low-income seniors and low-income disabled individuals under age Nonelderly disabled dual eligibles including both full and partial made up about one-third of all duals ( million out of almost million per Holahan and Ghosh ) Applying this one-third ratio to million means that about to million nonelderly disabled Medicaid participants transitioned from Medicaid to Medicare prescription drug coverage in For comparison the SSDI rolls grew from million to million individuals between and Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Potency-Adjusted Prescription Opioids per Capita by Primary Payer MGEs per capita No third-party payer Private Other public Medicaid Medicare Sources : Medical Expenditure Panel Survey ; National Drug Code Database ; CEA calculations Note : MGEs = morphine gram equivalents. The primary payer is the third-party payer with the highest payment for a given prescription. In addition to Medicardi re Medicaid and private insurers ca the other possible primary payers include veterans benefits workers compensation other Federal government insurance other State or local government insurance or other public insurance. All prescriptions are converted into MGEs based on the quantity of pills prescribed and their potency using the National Drug Code Database were dispensed increased by percent with almost three-fourths of this growth coming from opioids paid for by Medicare.26 Between and Medicare-covered opioids increased by over percent Medicaid-covered opioids increased by over percent and total publicly covered opioids increased by over percent ( MEPS ) Given that Medicare covers the elderly and SSDI recipients who tend to have greater needs related to pain relief it is not surprising that Medicare is the largest payer of prescription drugs as well as the largest public payer of prescription opioids Previous research has studied the implications of the rise in public funding for opioids fueling the opioid crisis and in particular the diversion of pills to the secondary market. Powell Pacula and Taylor ( ) found that a Medicare Part D driven percent increase in opioid prescriptions results in percent more opioid-involved overdose deaths among the Medicare-ineligible population. The authors use the fact that Medicare Part D was plausibly more important in driving prescription drug benefits in States with a greater share of the population over age to estimate the impact of drug benefits on opioidinvolved overdose deaths As shown in a comparison of figures and the MEPS data undercount the total number of prescription opioids. See also Hill Zuvekas and Zodet ( ) which looks more systematically at the propensity of MEPS respondents to underreport the number of different drugs taken. MEPS underreporting presents greater challenges for measuring total quantities rather than average prices which is why the CEA measures the former from ARCOS and the latter from MEPS | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Moreover because the elderly the major population that is eligible for Medicare benefits are a disproportionately small fraction of those reported to die of drug overdoses these results suggest that the impact of Medicare expansion on opioid-involved death rates may have been due to an increased supply of prescription opioids in the secondary market. Others have examined opioid prescriptions covered by Medicaid.27 In a recent report the U.S Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs ( ) notes numerous examples of Medicaid fraud that fuel abuse of prescription opioids for example with drug dealers paying Medicaid recipients to obtain taxpayer-funded pills Similarly Eberstadt ( ) suggests that Medicaid has helped finance increasing nonwork by prime-age adults by subsidizing prescription opioids that could be sold on the secondary market. Goodman-Bacon and Sandoe ( ) Venkataramani and Chatterjee ( ) and Cher Morden and Meara ( ) however find little evidence for Medicaid expansion fueling the opioid crisis. These findings are not necessarily inconsistent with other evidence that public programs worsened the opioid crisis. It is possible that Medicaid expansion did not increase opioid misuse because the expansion population is less likely to be prescribed opioids. Before State expansions Medicaid already covered all disabled adults receiving Supplemental Security Income ( SSI ) as well as elderly adults not eligible for Medicare. Medicaid expansion only covered nondisabled nonelderly adults with low incomes a population less likely to be prescribed opioids. In fact figure shows that the per capita quantity of opioids covered by Medicaid decreased between and despite the fact that Medicaid enrollment grew from million to million people over this same period as the majority of States expanded Medicaid coverage In addition the Medicaid expansions studied by Goodman-Bacon and Sandoe ( ) occurred in after measures had been taken to reduce the ability of people to misuse prescription opioids ( e.g. the reformulation of OxyContin in and the introduction of other medicines along with the rescheduling of certain opioids to higher schedules with more restrictions ) Public subsidies for prescription opioids have also been fueled by the growing number of Americans claiming disability insurance. SSDI is a Federal disability assistance program that offers a maximum possible benefit of $ a month with an average monthly benefit of $ Only adults who have significant work experience are eligible to receive SSDI and the amount of In percent of the total U.S. population was age or older but only percent of all opioid-involved overdose deaths were age or older ( CDC WONDER ) Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM benefits is higher for those who had higher lifetime earnings before becoming disabled.28 SSDI disabled workers are generally eligible for Medicare after months of enrollment in the program. SSDI rolls have increased dramatically since The growth in SSDI rolls can be attributed to several factors including the aging of the population the increased labor force participation of women and more lenient disability determinations ( Autor ) Another disability program SSI provides more modest benefits to Americans without sufficient work experience to qualify for SSDI and provides automatic eligibility for Medicaid in most States. Figure shows the rise in SSDI and SSI rolls per people over time. Notably SSDI rolls and opioid overdose deaths especially those involving prescription opioids have risen in tandem. It is also important to note SSDI growth occurred over the same period as increased treatment of pain conditions with opioids The million SSDI disabled workers in represent less than percent of the total U.S. population and thus are overrepresented as a source of prescription opioids given disabilities ( increasingly related to pain ) that lead to a greater use of prescription opioids. The CEA estimates the total market share of SSDI recipients in two ways each suggesting that SSDI recipients make up about to percent of the prescription opioid market. First we use data from Morden and others ( ) who estimate the average potency-adjusted opioid prescriptions for SSDI recipients across the United States in ( MGEs per SSDI recipient ) We multiply this average rate by the total number of SSDI recipients in ( million recipients ) And finally we divide the total opioids prescribed to SSDI recipients ( million MGEs ) by the total opioids distributed in the United States according to ARCOS data ( million MGEs ) The result is that percent of potency-adjusted opioid prescriptions in the U.S. are filled by SSDI recipients which is over times their proportion of the U.S. population Second the CEA uses MEPS data that report opioid prescriptions for a random sample of Americans each year. We identify SSDI recipients as individuals between age and who receive Medicare. This may slightly overstate the SSDI population given that a small number of non-SSDI recipients under age are eligible for Medicare as well including people with end-stage renal disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.29 Nonetheless dividing the potencyadjusted opioids prescribed to these recipients by the total in the population Qualification for SSDI requires a sufficient number of work credits that were earned recently enough. Up to credits can be earned in one year and are accrued based on sufficient annual earnings. Applicants generally require credits to qualify for SSDI although standards are different for younger workers There were just under Medicare recipients under age with end-stage renal disease in ( HHS ) The prevalence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is just per implying that in there were just under Americans with the disease ( Stanford Medicine n.d. ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Adults Receiving Social Security Disability Insurance and Supplemental Security Income and Opioid-Involved Drug Overdose Deaths per People Adult recipients ( per ) Deaths ( per ) SSI ( left axis ) SSDI ( left axis ) Other opioid overdose ( right axis ) Rx opioid overdose ( right axis ) Sources : Social Security Administration ; CDC WONDER ; CEA calculations Note : SSDI = Social Security Disability Insurance. SSI = Supplemental Security Income. Prescription opioids include natural and semisynthetic opioids as well as methadone. Data for opioid overdose deaths were accessed in CDC WONDER beginning in results in an estimated SSDI market share of percent for the period The somewhat lower share estimated using MEPS data may be due to the exclusion of SSDI recipients who have been on the program for less than two years.31 These SSDI recipients would not yet be eligible for Medicare and may instead receive coverage via Medicaid or other programs.32 It is important to emphasize that the disproportionate market share of SSDI recipients receiving prescription opioids is a result of their higher levels of conditions that prevent them from working and that may also cause pain SSDI benefit payments in conjunction with Medicare coverage provide a vital means of support for disabled workers with major healthcare needs. Thus reforms that seek to reduce nonmedical use of opioids should be careful to preserve access to needed pain relief through the medical use of opioids for SSDI recipients Based on a five-year average centered on we similarly estimate a market share of percent MEPS excludes the institutionalized population so if SSDI recipients are overrepresented in this population this could further affect our estimate We note that Finkelstein Gentzkow and Williams ( ) estimate that SSDI recipients account for about percent of opioid prescriptions. However they do not appear to analyze potencyadjusted opioids as we do. Indeed when we use the MEPS data to estimate the market share of non-potency-adjusted opioid prescriptions for the same period that Finkelstein Gentzkow and Williams ( ) appear to consider we estimate a similar percent market share Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM The Second Wave of the Crisis : Illicit Opioids The second wave of the opioid crisis began in about when prescription opioids became more difficult to access due to efforts to rein in abuse However the buildup of a pool of people misusing prescription opioids that they could no longer access provided a large pool of new demand and a profit opportunity for sellers entering the illicit opioid market. Because for people suffering from addiction legal and illicit opioids can function as substitutes raising the price ( in terms of both money and time ) of legal opioids raises the demand for illicit ones The reformulation of OxyContin in made it more physically difficult to use. States have implemented prescription drug monitoring programs that require doctors to consult patient prescription histories before prescribing opioids ( Dowell et al. ; Buchmueller and Carey ; Dave Grecu and Saffer ) Professional societies and accrediting organizations have reconsidered their pain treatment guidelines. These changes have reduced the overall quantity of prescription opioids distributed with potency-adjusted quantities of opioids peaking in ( DOJ n.d. ) Unfortunately recent research has shown that overdose deaths averted from prescription opioid overdoses at least those resulting from the reformulation of OxyContin have been replaced by overdose deaths from heroin ( Alpert Powell and Pacula ; Evans Lieber and Power ) As users have substituted toward heroin it has increasingly been made even more potent suppliers and drug dealers now frequently lace heroin with illicitly manufactured fentanyl. Fentanyl is to times more potent in its analgesic properties than heroin so even small amounts can vastly increase the potency of the drugs with which it is mixed. Illicitly manufactured fentanyl can also be obtained independently of heroin. Figure documents the rise of fentanyl showing both the rate of overdose deaths involving synthetic opioids other than methadone ( a category dominated by fentanyl although whether the product is illicit or by prescription is not determinable ) and the rate of fentanyl reports in forensic labs acquired by law enforcement during drug seizures Figure shows the rise in overdose deaths involving heroin and fully synthetic opioids ( mostly fentanyl ) along with opioid deaths not involving heroin and synthetic opioids. As a reminder we refer to overdose-related opioid deaths from heroin and fentanyl as illicit deaths even though fentanyl can also be prescribed.33 From through the rate of illicit opioid deaths has increased by percent while the rate of opioid deaths not involving illicit opioids has fallen by percent. Importantly fentanyl also tends to be combined with nonopioids and deaths in which fentanyl and nonopioids are factors are included in the illicit opioid series shown in figure We use ICD-10 codes T40.1 and T40.4 to identify deaths involving heroin and fentanyl | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Rate of Overdose Deaths Involving Synthetic Opioids Other Than Methadone and Fentanyl Reports in Forensic Labs per Population Rate ( per ) Fentanyl reports in forensic labs Deaths involving synthetic opioids other than methadone ( e.g. fentanyl ) Sources : National Forensic Laboratory Information System ; DOJ and DEA ( 2017b ) ; CDC WONDER ; CEA calculations Figure The Opioid-Involved Overdose Death Rate by the Presence of Illicit Opioids Deaths ( per ) Second wave Did not involve illicit opioids Involved illicit opioids Sources : CDC WONDER ; CEA calculations Note : Illicit opioids include both heroin ( T40.1 ) and the category synthetic opioids other than methadone ( T40.4 ) in the CDC data which is primarily composed of illicitly produced fentanyl Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Given their illegal nature the price of illicit opioids is more difficult to measure than the price of prescription opioids. Accurate data can not be reliably obtained from dealers or users who may fear criminal sanctions for truthful reporting. In recent years the influx from Mexico and China of cheap but highly potent fentanyl which can vastly increase the potency of drugs with which it is mixed has complicated matters ( U.S. Department of State n.d. ) Market quantities of heroin and fentanyl also can not be directly observed so the extent to which added fentanyl reduces the price per potency-adjusted unit of opioids is difficult to determine. Subject to these limitations the CEA has assembled data from several sources to create a time series for the price of illicit opioids The Drug Enforcement Administration s ( DEA s ) System to Retrieve Information from Drug Evidence ( STRIDE ) and STARLIMS databases collect heroin price data. Heroin prices in these data sets are obtained by government agents who pay informants to purchase heroin on the street. The price is recorded and the heroin sample is analyzed in a laboratory to determine its potency so that prices can be adjusted for quality. Between and the potency-adjusted real price of heroin increased by percent However any fentanyl contained within heroin is not considered when determining the price per pure gram of heroin in the DEA data. Thus the true price per potency-adjusted unit of heroin purchases has likely increased by less than percent or has even declined. In addition fentanyl can be consumed on its own outside heroin which if cheaper on a potency-adjusted basis would lead overall illicit opioid prices to fall even more. Moreover increased heroin purity and product modifications have increasingly allowed for heroin use by means other than injection. These changes lower the nonmonetary costs of using heroin and although nonmonetary costs are not estimated here these changes would have further reduced the cost of illicit opioid use The CEA uses data from several sources to estimate the quantity of fentanyl mixed with heroin and available on its own along with the potencyadjusted price of heroin ( including the fentanyl with which it is mixed ) and the potency-adjusted price of fentanyl when consumed alone or with other drugs. Quantity data are based on seizures of heroin and fentanyl recorded in the National Seizure System along with exhibits of each drug recorded in the National Forensic Laboratory Information System. Price data are based on the DEA heroin price series and on DEA reports on the cost of fentanyl relative to heroin along with the quantity data in order to adjust heroin prices based on fentanyl with which it is mixed. A detailed methodology for estimating illicit opioid prices is provided in the appendix of a previously published CEA report ( CEA 2019b ) We acknowledge that seizure data are a highly imperfect proxy of the relative presence of heroin and fentanyl. Seized products reflect a combination of market shares and law enforcement priorities rather than market shares | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Figure Real Price Index of Potency-Adjusted Illicit Opioids Index ( = ) Price per MGE of illicit opioids Sources : National Seizure System ; National Forensic Laboratory Information System ; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics ; ONDCP ( ) ; DOJ and DEA ( 2017a 2017b ) ; CEA calculations Note : MGE = Morphine gram equivalent alone. Still absent an alternative data source and without a clear direction for the bias in this proxy for market shares we use the seizure data as reported Figure shows a real price index for illicit opioids between and which given the data limitations involved should be used only to draw qualitative conclusions. The price of illicit opioids is relatively stable before falling temporarily in and then quickly recovering and then falls by over half ( percent ) between and Each of these declines is due to surges in fentanyl that is either mixed with heroin or sold on its own or with other drugs. The price decline was due to a laboratory in Mexico that dramatically increased the supply of fentanyl to the United States but was quickly shut down through cooperative action between the United States and Mexico. The price decline between and is attributed to the widely documented influx of fentanyl into the United States including from China and Mexico ( NIDA ) The price series shown in figure is the outcome of a series of assumptions documented more completely in the appendix of the CEA s previously published report and is necessarily only a highly imperfect estimate of the real price from which only qualitative conclusions should be drawn ( CEA 2019b ) If data on the illicit opioid market in this period improve revisions to this series may be possible It is clear from figure that supply expansions were important for driving the growth in overdose deaths involving illicit opioids. Between and the price of illicit opioids was relatively stable. This implies that both supply and demand expansions were important during the first three years of the Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM illicit wave of the opioid crisis. If only demand had expanded then prices would have increased ; and if only supply had expanded then prices would have decreased. Demand expansions can likely be traced at least in part to efforts to clamp down on abuse that grew during the first wave of the crisis without providing additional access to quality treatment services. Expanded supply is likely due to increased supply from source countries including Mexico and Colombia and it may reflect a substitution of drug production from marijuana ( which has been legalized or decriminalized in some U.S. States ) to heroin ( ONDCP ) Meanwhile supply expansions are likely more important than demand expansions for the period given that the price of illicit opioids fell by more than half during these three years. The shift toward fentanyl produced in China and distributed through the mail has increased the potency of drugs without significantly increasing their prices and may have increased competition in the illicit opioid market thereby also putting downward pressure on the price of heroin To the extent that monetary price declines have been accompanied by an increased ease of obtaining illicit opioids ( given the proliferation of drug dealers in more locations and the increased availability of online markets ) supply expansions may have been even more important than the falling illicit price series suggests. For instance Quinones ( ) notes that Mexican heroin dealers who illegally cross the border have become much more efficient in delivering heroin to users rather than forcing users to find them. These drug dealers communicate with users via cell phones to establish a place to meet at which point the user enters the dealer s car to receive their heroin Conclusion The opioid crisis poses a major threat to the U.S. economy and American lives and many factors have exacerbated this threat. In addition to taking more than lives since the opioid crisis cost $ billion in or percent of U.S. gros domestic product. In this chapter the CEA presents evidence that falling prices may have played a role in increasing opioid misuse and opioid-involved overdose deaths During the first wave of the opioid crisis which was characterized by growing overdose deaths involving prescription opioids between and the out-of-pocket price of prescription opioids fell by percent. This likely reduced the price of prescription opioids in the secondary market from which most people who misuse prescription opioids obtain their drugs. Using the proportional price assumption and given elasticities from the academic literature we find that the decline in observed out-of-pocket prices is capable of explaining between and percent of the growth in the number of overdose deaths involving prescription opioids between and At the same time that out-of-pocket prices were falling government subsidies and the | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM market share of generic opioids were expanding. We estimate that the share of prescribed opioids funded by government programs increased from percent in to percent in ( and to percent in ) The share of publicly funded opioids diverted to the secondary market may be even higher given the relatively low acquisition cost for suppliers of diverted opioids Falling prices could not elicit a change in the quantity of opioids misused and the resulting opioid deaths unless providers were encouraged to prescribe the opioids health plans were paying for the prescriptions and pharmacies were filling these prescriptions. We describe the change in the environment resulting from changing pain management guidelines and aggressive marketing tactics that reduced barriers to obtaining larger quantities of opioids The CEA finds that the second wave of the opioid crisis characterized by growing deaths from illicit opioids between and was driven by a combination of supply and demand expansions. Efforts to restrict the supply and misuse of prescription opioids led an increased number of users from the first wave to substitute illicit opioids in place of prescription opioids At the same time the supply of illicit opioids expanded and this substitution decreased quality-adjusted prices to reduce the cost of a high. Despite the importance of demand through a substitution effect in the initial years of the second wave the CEA finds that the evidence supports the idea that supply expansions have been more important causes of the crisis s growth than demand increases The Trump Administration has taken significant steps to stem the tide of the opioid crisis. In October the Administration declared a nationwide Public Health Emergency. President Trump later established his Initiative to Stop Opioid Abuse and Reduce Drug Supply and Demand in March ( White House ) These and other measures taken by the government include securing more than $ billion in new funding in and to address the opioid crisis by reducing the supply of opioids reducing new demand for opioids and treating those with opioid use disorder To restrict the supply of illicitly produced opioids there have been increased efforts to prevent the flow of illicit drugs into the U.S. through ports of entry and international shipments. The President also signed into law the International Narcotics Trafficking Emergency Response by Detecting Incoming Contraband with Technology ( INTERDICT ) Act which funds U.S Customs and Border Protection ( CBP ) to expand technologies to help interdict illicit substances including opioids. The CBP is also training all narcotic detector dogs at ports of entry to detect fentanyl. These efforts have seen success during fiscal year the CBP seized almost pounds of fentanyl and over pounds of heroin ( CBP ) The Administration has also increased enforcement against illicit drug producers and traffickers. In the Department of Justice ( DOJ ) indicted two Chinese nationals accused of manufacturing and shipping fentanyl analogues synthetic opioids and Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM other drugs to at least U.S. States and other countries ( DOJ ) In addition the Department of the Treasury has levied kingpin designations against fentanyl traffickers that operate in China India the United Arab Emirates and Mexico and also throughout Southeast Asia including Vietnam Thailand and Singapore. To stop the flow of this deadly drug before it reaches Americans the Administration is working with more than nations that signed onto President Trump s Call to Action on this issue. The Federal government is also engaging private sector partners to help secure U.S. supply chains against traffickers attempting to exploit those platforms ( ONDCP ) One example is the promotion of increased private sector self-policing of products entering the U.S. via third-party marketplaces and other intermediaries to an e-commerce transaction ( via the Department of Homeland Security ) Immigrations and Customs Enforcement s Homeland Security Investigations ( HSI ) organization has also increased its efforts targeting transnational criminal organizations ( TCO ) involved with the opioid epidemic HSI has increased its partnerships such as the Border Enforcement Security Taskforce ( BEST ) platforms with other Federal international tribal State and local law enforcement agencies to increase information and resource sharing within U.S. communities. BESTs eliminate the barriers between Federal and local investigations ( access to both Federal and State prosecutors ) close the gap with international partners in multinational criminal investigations and create an environment that minimizes the vulnerabilities in our operations that TCOs have traditionally capitalized on to exploit the Nation s land and sea borders To better combat 21st-century crime exploiting ecommerce HSI has increased its presence at international mail facilities and express consignment centers by establishing BESTs at John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York Los Angeles International Airport Memphis International Airport Cincinnati Northern Kentucky International Airport and Louisville International Airport as part of HSI s comprehensive and multilayered strategy to combat TCOs and their smuggling activities. This strategy facilitates the immediate application of investigative techniques on seized parcels which aid in establishing probable cause needed to effect enforcement actions on individuals associated with narcotics laden parcels. Consequently these seizures and arrests disrupt the movement of narcotics transiting through the mail and express consignment shipments and aid in the dismantling of distribution networks. BEST partners with the CBP the United States Postal Inspection Service and DEA at these facilities. As of September BESTs are located at locations throughout the nation including Puerto Rico Along with reducing the supply of opioids Federal and State governments are also playing a key role in curtailing the demand for prescription and illicit opioids. Prescription drug monitoring programs that track controlled substance prescriptions are operational in states the District of Columbia | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM and Guam and they can provide timely information about prescribing and patient behaviors that exacerbate the crisis and enable response ( CRS ) In the number of high-dose opioid prescriptions dispensed monthly declined by over percent and the prescribing rate of opioids fell to its lowest rate in more than years. The Administration has also invested over $ billion in innovative research to develop effective nonopioid options for pain management. In addition to reducing opioid prescriptions to decrease new initiates to opioid misuse the Administration has launched information campaigns to create awareness and inform the public about opioid use disorder to prevent new drug users. In June the White House s Office of National Drug Control Policy the Ad Council and the Truth Initiative announced a public education campaign over digital platforms social media and television targeting youth and young adults. Importantly nearly percent fewer young adults between the age of and began using heroin in than in Improved guidelines are also being established to target the vulnerable veteran population who are twice as likely as the average American to die from an opioid drug overdose ( Wilkie ) The Department of Veterans Affairs ( VA ) and the Department of Defense updated their Opioid Safety Initiative in to provide prescribers with a framework to evaluate treat and manage patients with chronic pain including ways to better aggregate electronic medical records and track opioid prescriptions. In the first six years of the program from to the number of veteran patients receiving opioids was reduced by percent. Over the same period the number of veterans on long-term opioid therapies declined by percent and the number of veterans on high-dose opioid therapies declined by percent ( Wilkie ) Finally the Administration is also focusing on treating and saving the lives of those currently struggling with opioid addictions by expanding access to the life-saving drug naloxone and other evidence-based interventions such as medication-assisted treatment and other recovery support services Prevention of drug use is important but in addition the Trump Administration has invested in increased treatment and recovery support for people who suffer from opioid use disorder. The Surgeon General has promoted access and carrying naloxone the lifesaving reversal agent of an opioid overdose In October President Trump signed into law the bipartisan Substance Use Disorder Prevention That Promotes Opioid Recovery and Treatment ( SUPPORT ) for Patients and Communities Act which includes provisions to improve substance use disorder treatments for Medicaid patients and to expand Medicare coverage of opioid use disorder treatment services. In fiscal years and a total of $ billion was appropriated for State grants to fund opioid use disorder prevention and treatment. Many States including West Virginia Indiana Wyoming Tennessee Florida and Virginia have implemented legislation to expand the availability of naloxone and inpatient and outpatient use of the life-saving treatment is increasing ( ASTHO ) Understanding the Opioid Crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Many of the measures taken by the Trump Administration to cut the supply of opioids prevent new demand and save the lives of those currently struggling with opioid use disorders may have contributed to the flattening growth of overdose deaths involving opioids. Between January and May monthly overdose deaths fell by percent. If the growth rate in opioid overdose deaths from January through December had continued the CEA estimates that additional lives would have been lost due to opioid overdoses between January and May The CEA estimates the economic cost savings since January from reduced mortality compared with the preexisting trend was over $ billion. The opioid crisis remains at an emergency level but its dramatic growth has been halted. Despite successful efforts to curb the opioid crisis and stop the increase in overdose deaths there has been an increase in psychostimulant-related overdose deaths primarily driven by methamphetamine use that is a cause of concern. Psychostimulantrelated deaths now outnumber fentanyl deaths in States ( Wilner ) The economic and human costs of drug misuse continue to pose a threat to the United States. The Trump Administration is working to determine the underlying causes of the opioid crisis so that it can implement effective solutions. Lower drug prices clearly played a role in the opioid crisis s growth and understanding this dynamic will help policymakers successfully respond to this threat and avoid mistakes that could lead to another costly deadly crisis | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM x Chapter Expanding Affordable Housing Incomes in the United States are rising but home prices are rising much faster in some highly regulated markets. While overall homeownership rates have increased since some disadvantaged groups lag behind. As households turn to the rental market moderate-income households are dedicating a large share of their incomes to rent. The housing affordability problem shows no signs of subsiding in certain markets as housing construction fails to keep up with demand putting upward pressure on home prices and rents Fortunately the majority of areas in the United States have relatively wellfunctioning housing markets in which regulations do not significantly drive up prices. Indeed smart regulations that balance the need to build enough housing to meet growing demand while reflecting the reasonable concerns of neighborhood residents are achieved by many growing areas in the country While areas with relatively moderate home prices may still suffer from some issues such as delays for building permits regulations do not necessarily make homes substantially less affordable However research has shown that there are metropolitan areas where the inability to build enough housing to meet demand has driven home prices far higher than the cost to produce a home. These metropolitan areas include San Francisco Honolulu Oxnard Los Angeles San Diego Washington Boston Denver New York City Seattle and Baltimore Housing is particularly difficult to build in these metropolitan areas due to excessive regulatory barriers imposed by State and local governments. Such overly restrictive regulations include zoning and growth management controls rent controls building and rehabilitation codes energy and water efficiency 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM mandates maximum-density allowances historic preservation requirements wetland or environmental regulations manufactured-housing regulations and restrictions parking requirements permitting and review procedures investment or reinvestment tax policies labor requirements and impact or developer fees. Research has linked higher home prices and lower housing supply to many of these regulations Resulting higher housing prices in these metropolitan areas make homeownership less attainable for otherwise-qualified borrowers thereby constraining their ability to achieve sustainable homeownership and putting additional pressure on rental markets for lower- and middle-income households. The lowest-income households are especially burdened. Among these metropolitan areas homelessness would fall by an estimated percent on average if overly burdensome regulations were relaxed. Higher rents resulting from these regulations also deprive families of Federal rental housing assistance because higher government expenditures on households in high-rent areas through higher Fair Market Rents reduce the amount of funds available to serve other needy families. For example housing a family in a three-bedroom apartment can cost the Federal Government more than $ per month in San Francisco County California compared with about $ per month in Harris County Texas Excessive regulatory barriers to building more housing in these specific areas also have broader negative effects beyond those imposed on lower-income Americans. State and local housing regulations reduce labor mobility by pricing workers out of several of the Nation s most productive cities which stunts aggregate economic growth and increases inequality across regions and workers. Excessive regulatory barriers also reduce parents ability to access neighborhoods that best advance their children s economic opportunity. And by incentivizing families to venture further from their places of work to find affordable housing overregulation can increase commuting times to work | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM thus harming the environment straining local budgets and decreasing worker productivity Removing government-imposed barriers to more affordable housing is a priority for the Trump Administration. Beyond establishing the White House Council on Eliminating Regulatory Barriers to Affordable Housing the Department of Housing and Urban Development is encouraging State and local governments to focus on increasing housing supply in areas where supply is constrained Increasing housing choice for all Americans requires taking on regulatory barriers that place housing in large swaths of specific areas out of reach for lower-income families S ince real median ( posttax/posttransfer ) household income has grown by percent while real home prices have grown by almost percent according to the Standard & Poor s / Case-Shiller Index ( CBO ) With rising home prices outpacing income gains in some areas households are spending larger portions of their incomes on housing and fewer people can afford to purchase their own homes Although the overall homeownership rate has increased since some groups lag behind. Based on the four-quarter moving average the black homeownership rate remains percentage points below that of non-Hispanic white households ( see figure ) The Hispanic homeownership rate remains percentage points lower than that of non-Hispanic white households despite increasing by percentage points since the fourth quarter of when President Trump was elected. Differences in homeownership between races exacerbate the wealth gap. In white families had a median wealth of $ while black families had a median wealth of $ resulting in part from their lower homeownership rate ( Dettling et al. ) Many American households particularly low-income households spend a large portion of their income on rent. According to the American Community Survey out of million renter households in the United States in percent paid more than percent of their income on housing percent paid more than percent and percent paid more than percent. Among renters with incomes of less than $ in about percent paid more than percent of their income in rent. For those renters with income between $ and $ about percent paid more than percent of their income in rent Meanwhile a significant number of Americans go without housing altogether sleeping instead on the streets or in homeless shelters. Just over Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Homeownership Rates by Race and Ethnicity Homeownership rate ( percent ) : Q3 Non-Hispanic white Total Hispanic Black Sources : Census Bureau ; CEA calculations Note : Data represent a four-quarter moving average half a million people were homeless on a single night in January with percent of those found in unsheltered locations not intended for human habitation such as sidewalks and public parks ( HUD ) Research has linked higher rents to higher rates of homelessness ( e.g. Quigley Raphael and Smolensky ; Corinth ; Hanratty ; Nisar et al. ) The housing affordability problem shows no signs of subsiding given that home construction fails to keep up with demand in some places putting upward pressure on home prices and rents. Indeed from to housing construction failed to keep pace with household formation according to the Census Bureau. Home construction per capita has declined every decade since the 1970s. While an average of homes were built for every residents between and annual average construction fell to homes per residents between and Across States there is large variation in housing construction according to State-level data from the Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi. For example from to Texas built homes and Florida built homes per residents on average. Meanwhile over the same period California built homes and New York built homes per residents A key driver of the housing affordability problem is excessive regulatory barriers to building ( single and multifamily ) housing in a selected number of areas in the United States. In a competitive market developers will build homes until ( economic ) profits fall to zero or in other words until the price the developer receives for the home equals the cost to produce the home | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM However overly burdensome regulations in some areas restrict housing supply and drive the price of a home above its minimum profitable production cost : the cost of construction plus the price of land to build on in a free market and a normal profit margin. In terms of the standard model of supply and demand regulations make supply less elastic causing prices to increase and quantity to decrease. In this way Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) note that regulation that drives home prices above production costs acts as a regulatory tax on housing. Regulations that can potentially drive up home prices include for example overly burdensome permitting and review procedures overly restrictive zoning and growth management controls unreasonable maximum-density allowances historic preservation requirements overly burdensome environmental regulations and undue parking requirements It is important to emphasize that an adequate amount of smart regulation is important to address market failures and reflect the reasonable concerns of current neighborhood residents regarding new housing development In chapter of this Report we review evidence that gains in housing wealth contributed to the growth of total household wealth from through Many growing areas are highly successful in balancing neighborhood concerns with the need to expand housing supply to meet growing demand. In fact housing prices are near or below the cost to produce a home in most areas of the United States suggesting that low income levels ( despite incomes rising in recent years ) rather than high home prices are the reason some households struggle to cover housing costs in those areas. However research has shown that as a result of excessive local regulatory barriers to building housing there are metropolitan areas where the inability to build enough housing to meet demand has driven home prices far higher than the cost to produce a home ( Glaeser and Gyourko ) These metropolitan areas include San Francisco Honolulu Oxnard Los Angeles San Diego Washington Boston Denver New York City Seattle and Baltimore. Even in these areas it is not necessary to build high-rise apartments throughout neighborhoods currently zoned for single-family homes or to eliminate all regulations. Rather steps to remove excessive regulatory barriers must be taken so that housing supply can expand to meet demand and alleviate extreme housing cost burdens placed on low- and middle-income families The excessive regulatory barriers placed on building housing in these metropolitan areas cause economic distress to their current and potential residents. In addition to restricting the ability of property owners to use their property in reasonable ways these regulations increase costs for both renters and those trying to buy a home. Based on estimates from Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) excessive regulatory barriers ( defined as regulations that drive up home prices at least percent above home production costs ) drive up home prices by between and percent in each of these metropolitan areas which Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM also leads to higher rents. These cost burdens are especially problematic for low-income Americans who pay the largest share of their income on housing By increasing rents overly burdensome regulatory barriers to building housing increase homelessness. As estimated by the CEA ( ) relaxing excessive regulatory barriers in these metropolitan areas where housing supply is significantly constrained would reduce homelessness by an average of percent in these areas. For example homelessness would fall by percent in San Francisco percent in Los Angeles and percent in New York. Because these areas contain percent of the U.S. homeless population homelessness would fall by percent in the United States overall if each area adequately addressed its regulatory barriers Overregulation of these selected housing markets also reduces the efficiency of government housing assistance because fewer American families receive assistance for a given budget outlay. In the Department of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) was provided $ billion for its largest rental housing assistance programs : Section Housing Choice Vouchers ( $ billion ) Section Project-Based Rental Assistance ( $ billion ) and Public Housing ( $ billion ) Because HUD rental assistance is tied to market rents in an area regulations that drive up rents also increase the costs of serving a fixed number of families. Deregulation that reduces rents in supply-constrained areas could produce savings for HUD that could be used to serve more families For example Federal taxpayers can pay more than $ per month in rental assistance toward a three-bedroom unit in San Francisco County California compared with about $ per month in Harris County Texas In addition to specific harmful effects on low-income Americans excessive regulatory barriers in selected markets have other negative consequences for all Americans. First they reduce labor mobility across areas which stunts aggregate economic growth and increases inequality across regions and workers. When it is more expensive for workers to live in areas where they are most productive they are less likely to do so and their productivity falls. Hsieh and Moretti ( ) for example estimate that gross domestic product would have been percent higher by if housing supply restrictions in the New York San Jose and San Francisco areas were relaxed beginning in Second excessive regulatory barriers to building housing in selected markets reduces parents ability to access neighborhoods that advance their children s economic opportunity. A series of papers by Raj Chetty and his colleagues have identified neighborhoods that are most likely to improve longterm outcomes of children ( Chetty et al. ) High home prices are a common characteristic of such neighborhoods suggesting that excessive regulation that artificially increases home prices may reduce in-migration and diminish opportunity for children. A report from the U.S. Senate Joint Economic Committee similarly found that the average U.S. zip code with the highestquality public elementary schools has a median home price that is four times | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM as high as those zip codes with the lowest-quality public schools ( JEC ) This is partly due to the willingness of some parents to pay more for homes located in high-quality school districts. Many of these areas have excessive regulatory barriers however Third excessive regulatory barriers to building housing increase commuting times because housing can not be built near where people work increasing driving time and traffic congestion which harm the environment The average commuter spent hours in traffic congestion in up from hours in ( Schrank Eisele and Lomax ) The aggregate travel delay increased from billion hours to billion hours over this period and the total cost associated with congestion rose from $ billion to $ billion. As a result of this rise in average commuting times an extra billion gallons of fuel were consumed Fortunately growing evidence of the importance of addressing excessive regulatory barriers to building housing has led to increased bipartisan focus on the issue. The CEA under the previous Administration released a Housing Development Toolkit in for State and local regulators. While some of the proposed reforms could be problematic the toolkit called for a number of productive steps to reduce local government barriers to housing development These reforms include establishing by-right development to streamline the process for approving projects permitting multifamily zoning to boost urban density and shortening the process for obtaining building permits ( CEA ) Some counterproductive reforms were also suggested including requirements that developers build certain types of units with regulated rents in exchange for building more market-rate units a policy that can potentially hinder overall supply expansions and increase prices in some areas ( Schuetz Meltzer and Been ) The CEA ( ) connected regulatory barriers to a number of problems including stunted economic growth increased inequality harm to the environment and increased homelessness To more successfully address the overregulation of housing markets President Trump signed an Executive Order on June establishing the White House Council on Eliminating Regulatory Barriers to Affordable Housing. Recognizing the harmful impact of these regulations on economic growth opportunities for children homelessness and the cost of government programs the council is tasked with identifying the most burdensome Federal State and local regulatory barriers to housing supply as well as actions that can best counter them. The Executive Order requires the council to determine how each Federal agency can curtail impediments to housing development including in ways that align support and encourage State and local authorities to address local regulatory barriers HUD has also taken action under the Trump Administration to counter regulatory barriers to building affordable housing. The Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing rule which was finalized during the previous Administration Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM is being revised to focus more clearly on increasing housing supply in areas where supply is constrained rather than encouraging localities to subsidize housing in more affluent areas. This rule recognizes that increasing housing choice for disadvantaged groups requires taking on regulatory barriers that place housing in large swaths of specific areas out of reach for lower-income families This chapter proceeds by first documenting the housing affordability problem in the United States. It then identifies the key role that excessive regulatory barriers play in the problem in a selected number of metropolitan areas Next it provides evidence of the many harmful consequences of these barriers especially harm to low-income Americans. Finally it concludes by discussing actions the Administration has taken to encourage the relaxation of excessive regulatory barriers in local housing markets.1 The Housing Affordability Problem When home prices rise faster than incomes fewer households can afford to purchase a home. Those still able to qualify for a loan and purchase a home may do so in neighborhoods or regions with fewer opportunities and they may commit larger shares of their income to mortgage payments and savings to a down payment. Renter households may pay a greater portion of their income in rent leaving less income available for other needs. The burden is especially severe for lower-income households. By these definitions the housing affordability problem in America is worsening a result of home prices that have outpaced income gains and home construction that has not kept up with demand in certain areas Based on a four-quarter moving average as of the third quarter of percent of households owned their own homes ( figure ) This represents an increase of percentage points since reaching its low point in : Q3. However the current homeownership rate is still percentage points below its percent peak in : Q1 Some groups have particularly low homeownership rates. The black homeownership rate was percent in : Q3 percentage points below the non-Hispanic white homeownership rate ( figure ) While the Hispanic homeownership rate increased by percentage points since : Q4 when President Trump was elected it was still at percent in : Q3 percentage points lower than that of non-Hispanic white households ( figure ) For those who are homeowners owned homes are an important source of wealth. Thus gaps in homeownership rates have direct implications for 1The CEA previously released research on topics covered in this chapter. The text that follows builds on the research paper produced by the CEA titled The State of Homelessness in America ( CEA ) | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM wealth gaps. According to the Federal Reserve Board s Survey of Consumer Finances in white families had a median wealth of $ while black families had a median wealth of $ and Hispanic families had a median wealth of $ partly as a result of their much lower homeownership rates ( Dettling et al. ) Among those who own a home mortgages can take up a large share of income especially for lower-income families. In housing costs represented percent of household income for homeowners with less than $ in annual income and percent of income for homeowners with between $ and $ in annual income ( Dumont ) Thus housing affordability can be a problem even for those able to purchase their own home In chapter of this Report we discuss how current low mortgage rates on the whole should support the housing market. However other factors such as high mortgage underwriting costs hurt mortgage affordability As homeownership rates have fallen the number of renter households has grown. The Federal Reserve Board estimates that of the million households formed between and million ( percent ) were new renter households ( Dumont ) Renter households pay large shares of their income on rent without building equity which can make it difficult for low- and moderate-income households to address other needs. From to the share of renter households spending more than half of their income on housing increased from percent to percent ; over the same period the share spending at least percent on housing increased from percent to percent ( Albouy Ehrlich and Liu ) According to the American Community Survey out of million renter households in the United States percent pay more than percent of their income on housing percent pay more than percent and percent pay more than percent. As shown in table among renters with incomes of less than $ in about percent paid more than percent of their income in rent a smaller share than in For those renters with incomes between $ and $ percent paid more than percent of their income in rent rising from about percent in Meanwhile a significant number of Americans go without housing altogether sleeping instead on the streets or in homeless shelters. Just over half a million people were homeless on a given night in January with percent of those found in unsheltered locations not intended for human habitation such as sidewalks and public parks ( HUD ) Research has linked higher rents to higher rates of homelessness ( e.g. Quigley ; Corinth ; Hanratty ; Nisar et al. ) The growing housing affordability problem is not driven by falling incomes ( with the exception of the Great Recession which led to severe housing problems including widespread foreclosures ; see Steffen et al. ) Since real median ( posttax posttransfer ) household income increased by Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Table Percentage of Renter Households Paying More Than Percent of Income on Housing by Income versus ( percent ) Percentage point change Percent change $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ or more All renter households Sources : American Community Survey ; CEA calculations ( percent ) Less than $ Household income percent ( CBO ) Real income gains were even larger for the bottom fifth of households ( CBO ) The driver of growing unaffordability is rising home prices. According to the Standard & Poor s / Case-Shiller U.S. National Home Price Index real home prices have increased by percent since outpacing real median income gains. Home prices have increased the fastest for entrylevel homes according to the American Enterprise Institute National Home Price Appreciation Index home prices in the lowest price tier have increased more than percent more than home prices in the highest price tier since ( Pinto and Peter ) As shown in box the housing affordability problem is concentrated in a selected number of areas in the United States where the people who build houses are unable to afford them Although home prices are rising home construction has been slow to respond implying that supply is not keeping up with the demand for homes in certain places. Home construction per capita has declined every decade since the 1970s according to the Census Bureau. While an average of homes were built for every residents between and annual average construction fell to homes per residents between and Across States there is large variation in housing construction. For example from to Texas built homes and Florida built homes per residents on average. Meanwhile over the same period California built homes and New York built homes per residents. This represents a large decline for California which built more than homes per residents in the 1970s and 1980s before falling to less than per residents in every decade since then. Meanwhile New York is one of only two States in the country ( along | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Box Measuring the Housing Affordability Problem with the Carpenter Index One way to assess the affordability of housing is to ask whether the people who build homes can afford to buy them. The American Enterprise Institute s Carpenter Index compares the average income of households headed by carpenters to home prices in a given area. If the price of a home is less than three times the carpenter s household income then that home is deemed affordable. For each metropolitan area the index calculates the share of entry-level homes that are affordable to the carpenter Figure 8-i shows the share of the entry-level housing stock that is affordable for the largest CBSAs with the darker shades illustrating areas where housing is less affordable to the average carpenter. The average carpenter can afford only percent of entry-level homes built in the San Diego Carlsbad California CBSA ; percent in the Oxnard Thousand Oaks Ventura California CBSA ; percent in the Los Angeles Long Beach Anaheim California CBSA ; percent in the San Jose Sunnyvale Santa Clara California CBSA ; and percent in the San Francisco Oakland Hayward California CBSA the five least affordable areas in the country By contrast the average carpenter can afford percent of entry-level homes in the Chicago Naperville Elgin Illinois Indiana Wisconsin CBSA ; the Pittsburgh Pennsylvania CBSA ; the Saint Louis Missouri Illinois CBSA ; Figure 8-i. The Carpenter Index by CBSA Source : American Enterprise Institute Note : CBSA = core-based statistical area Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM and a number of other areas in the Midwest. The index signals that the most expensive metropolitan areas are located in California and to a lesser extent the rest of the West Coast and the Northeast while most of the affordable metropolitan areas are located in the Midwest with West Virginia ) that has never built more than homes per residents in an average year across every decade since the 1970s The Role of Overregulation in the Housing Affordability Problem When the housing affordability problem is defined as housing expenditures that constitute a sufficiently large share of income there are three potential causes : ( ) rising home prices ( ) falling household incomes and ( ) choices among households to consume higher-quality homes ( with either high physical quality or in closer proximity to desirable amenities ) As reported in the previous section real home prices have risen percent since Meanwhile household incomes are rising rather than falling and consumer decisions to choose higher-quality homes should not be considered an affordability problem. Thus the fundamental problem with housing affordability in the United States today is excessively high home prices in certain areas Overly stringent housing regulations play a key role in driving up home prices in the face of growing demand. Figure shows how excessive regulatory barriers to building housing in some areas constrain supply and thus increase home prices. In a market unconstrained by excessive regulation developers can build new homes at a constant cost when demand shifts outward ( for example because higher wages increase the desirability of living in an area ) and thus price remains constant at P1 while quantity increases to Q2 By contrast new home construction can not keep up with growing demand in a market constrained by excessive regulations such as lengthy permitting processes and unreasonable land use regulations. Excessive regulations lead to an upward sloping relatively more inelastic housing supply curve which drives home prices above the cost to produce a home in a market without excessive regulatory barriers. Prices rise to P2 and quantity falls to Q1. In this way Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) note that excessive regulation that drives home prices above production costs acts as a regulatory tax on housing. This regulatory tax is represented in figure as the gap between P1 and P2 Some regulations add additional costs to the development process driving up the total cost of housing development and reducing supply. For example environmental reviews can delay construction imposing additional costs on developers. An unintended consequence of these regulations is that housing is | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure The Effect of Regulation on Supply and Demand for Housing Price Supply ( regulated ) P2 Supply ( deregulated ) P1 Demand ( new ) Demand ( old ) Q0 Q1 Quantity Q2 Sources : Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) ; CEA calculations instead built in less central areas where regulations do less to drive up home prices which can increase commuting times and ultimately cause even greater environmental harm. More generally approval processes for new development can be lengthy and uncertain thus increasing the price and reducing the supply of housing by for example forcing developers to carry high-cost construction loans for a longer period of time or having to spend additional money on extending options to purchase land. Gyourko Hartley and Krimmel ( ) formulate an Approval Delay Index and find that the review time for housing construction projects is more than twice as long in highly regulated areas compared with relatively lightly regulated areas with an average review time of months. Environmental reviews alone can add substantial costs to a housing project. For example the California Environmental Quality Act which requires certain construction in California to undergo an environmental impact assessment can add an estimated $ million in costs to completing a housing development ( Jackson ) Other regulations that can potentially constrain supply are focused explicitly on reducing density. Building permit caps population caps and density restrictions limit the amount of new housing that can be built in an area. Similarly urban growth boundaries prevent urban expansion beyond designated areas. Other kinds of regulations reduce density by regulating the type and size of housing that can be constructed in a locality. Minimum lot size Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM requirements prevent homebuilders from subdividing a lot in order to build more homes. Height restrictions prevent taller buildings with more floors and more housing units. Maximum floor area ratios ( which are calculated by dividing floor area by lot area ) limit the amount of living space potentially across multiple units that can be built on a given lot. Zoning regulations also may prevent certain types of housing such as multifamily buildings from being constructed Of course when these types of regulations are not excessive they can be beneficial for example by maintaining standards that promote safety or by providing information about housing characteristics without significantly constraining supply. In addition certain types of land use may generate pollution or congestion externalities and some amount of regulation such as impact fees can help developers internalize these costs of construction. Local citizens may also wish to preserve certain land for public use or conservation purposes such as parks. However in a selected number of places excessive regulations prevent supply from expanding to meet housing demand substantially driving up home prices It is generally believed among economists that the overall effect of excessive regulatory barriers that constrain housing supply is to reduce overall well-being. For example Albouy and Ehrlich ( ) not only find that stringent housing regulation increases home prices but also that any benefits of these regulations for improving quality of life are outweighed by their cost They note : On net the typical land-use regulation in the United States reduces well-being by making housing production less efficient and housing consumption less affordable. Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) summarize the literature and state : Empirical investigations of the local costs and benefits of restricting building generally conclude that the negative externalities are not nearly large enough to justify the costs of regulation. The stringency of housing regulations and their impact on housing supply vary across the country. One way to measure the stringency of regulations is to analyze the regulations themselves. One measure that is heavily relied upon is the Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index. Gyourko Saiz and Summers ( ) constructed the index from a national survey of municipalities regarding their regulatory process and land use regulations. The resulting index is shown by metropolitan statistical area in figure with a darker shade of blue indicating cities that have more stringent land use regulations. The South and the Midwest have the least restrictive regulations while California and the Northeast have the most Areas with higher regulatory burdens tend to have higher home prices Figure shows metropolitan areas by the ratio of their median home prices to the cost to produce a home as constructed by Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) Where regulations are lax the ratio of home prices to production costs should be near or below Where regulations are more stringent and demand is strong | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Wharton Land Use Index by Metropolitan Statistical Area Source : Gyourko Saiz and Summers ( ) Figure Ratio of Home Prices to Production Costs by CBSA Sources : Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) ; CEA calculations Note : CBSA = core-based statistical area Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM ratios may exceed It is important to note that production costs include not only the construction cost of the home but also a normal profit margin and a small cost of land on which to build the home that would be achieved in a market without overly stringent regulations It is certainly the case that even in an unconstrained market land prices for a fixed size plot ( i.e. an acre ) of land will be higher in more desirable locations. Davis and others ( ) document large variation in land prices per acre across the United States much of this variation would remain even if all areas relaxed overly stringent housing regulations. However the price of a parcel of land used for each housing unit may be similar across areas absent excessive regulation. In dense areas each housing unit would require a smaller plot of land and so though the price of an acre of land is likely to be higher in denser areas the cost of the smaller piece of land used for each two-bedroom housing unit may be similar to the cost of the larger piece of land used for a twobedroom unit in less dense areas. Of course this will only roughly be true and other factors such as differences in property taxes may drive some remaining differences. Partly for this reason Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) focus on areas where home prices significantly exceed production costs Figure shows that the places where ratios of home price to production cost significantly exceed ( i.e. where home prices are at least percent higher than home production costs ) are largely the same places with high regulatory indices. Though correlational this provides suggestive evidence that housing regulations help determine home prices. Figure also indicates that excessive regulation is currently a major problem in a selected number of places indicated by the darker shade of blue. As noted earlier in this chapter these metropolitan areas include San Francisco Honolulu Oxnard Los Angeles San Diego Washington Boston Denver New York City Seattle and Baltimore Examples of overly burdensome regulations abound in these CBSAs Four of the are located in California where multifamily homes may be built on less than a quarter of the land in Los Angeles Long Beach Anaheim and San Diego and less than half of the land in San Francisco and Oakland ( Mawhorter and Reid ) In the cities of Los Angeles and San Diego two parking spaces are required for every typical two-bedroom apartment one and a half parking spaces are required for every typical one-bedroom apartment and one parking space is required for every studio apartment increasing costs for multifamily housing developers and ultimately renters ( San Francisco eliminated its parking requirements in early ) Across Hawaii only percent of land may be developed due to its network of local and State zoning regulations Although overly burdensome permitting processes and other barriers may still be a problem and put some degree of upward pressure on home prices in the rest of the country the major problem with excessive regulation is currently limited to these areas. Nonetheless future demand growth in | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM additional areas with excessive regulatory barriers could increase the number of areas with artificially inflated home prices Consistent with figures and a number of academic studies find that stringent regulation increases housing prices. In a review of much of the earlier literature Ihlanfeldt ( ) concludes that growth controls and minimum lot size restrictions reduce the supply of housing and increase its price Quigley and Raphael ( ) find that cities in California with more stringent regulations have higher levels and growth in home prices and rents and that housing supply is much less responsive to price increases in more regulated areas. Glaeser Gyourko and Saks ( ) argue that land-use restrictions explain why prices for high-rise apartments in Manhattan far exceed the cost to construct them. Ihlanfeldt ( ) finds that more stringent land-use regulation increases home prices in Florida. Glaeser and Ward ( ) find that more stringent regulations especially minimum lot sizes are associated with higher home prices and less construction in Massachusetts. Saiz ( ) finds that land-use regulations in addition to geographical constraints are important determinants of the responsiveness of housing supply to price increases Summarizing the literature Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) state : The general conclusion of existing research is that local land use regulation reduces the elasticity of housing supply and that this results in a smaller stock of housing higher house prices greater volatility of house prices and less volatility of new construction. Some might argue that there are reasons other than regulation that might be driving higher home prices. One reason could be that construction costs are rising. However Gyourko and Molloy ( ) find that real construction costs ( including the cost of labor and materials ) remained relatively constant from to Another potential cause is geographical constraints on building. For example Saiz ( ) argues that many areas with supply constraints have steep-sloped terrain that prevents the development of new housing Nonetheless even in areas that appear to have land constraints developers could build more densely and with fewer permitting delays which would exert downward pressure on housing prices. Finally though we focus on supply housing regulations may also increase prices through increased demand for housing if land use restrictions increase the appeal of living in a certain community. Empirically however Albouy and Ehrlich ( ) find that supply effects dominate demand effects Consequences of Overregulation of Housing The overregulation of housing markets in selected metropolitan areas has several negative consequences. By increasing home prices well above home production costs it increases the cost of attaining homeownership and increases the rent for renter households. It hurts low-income Americans in Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM particular by increasing homelessness and by reducing the number of people government housing assistance programs can serve. More generally it reduces labor mobility across areas and thus weakens economic growth reduces the ability of children to access high-opportunity neighborhoods and harms the environment The Increased Cost of Attaining Homeownership and Higher Rents In most areas in the United States reasonable regulations do not substantially drive up home prices. But in a selected number of metropolitan areas excessive regulatory barriers to building housing substantially increase the price of purchasing a home above the cost to produce it Figure shows the extent to which excessive regulations drive up home prices in these metropolitan areas according to data published by Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) and shown above in figure Home prices are more than percent higher in the San Francisco Oakland Hayward California CBSA and the Urban Honolulu Hawaii CBSA ; are about percent higher in the Oxnard Thousand Oaks Ventura California CBSA ; the Los Angeles Long Beach Anaheim California CBSA ; and the San Diego Carlsbad California CBSA and are percent higher in the Baltimore Columbia Towson Maryland CBSA the smallest price premium of the supply-constrained metropolitan areas The higher home prices resulting from excessive regulations make it more difficult for households to purchase their own homes and build wealth. As HUD Secretary Ben Carson recently stated As a result [ of the shortage in the housing supply ] Americans have fewer housing opportunities including the opportunity to achieve sustainable homeownership which is the No. builder of wealth for most U.S. families ( Carson ) Excessive regulation also increases rents in these metropolitan areas because higher home prices increase the amount property owners need to receive in revenue each year to maintain a normal profit margin. Higher rents are especially burdensome for lower- and moderate-income Americans and for some may make it prohibitively expensive to live in these excessively regulated areas Increased Homelessness Another harmful effect of overregulation of housing markets is its impact on homelessness. Several studies that rely on data on homelessness over time in various communities find that a percent increase in rent is associated with about a percent increase in homelessness. Because housing regulations generally drive up rents they should thus be expected to also increase homelessness The CEA ( ) estimates the extent to which removing excessive regulatory barriers that reduced home prices to their production costs would reduce | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Figure Home Price Premium Resulting from Excessive Housing Regulation Baltimore Columbia Towson MD Boston Cambridge Newton MA-NH Denver Aurora Lakewood CO Los Angeles Long Beach Anaheim CA New York Newark Jersey City NY-NJ-PA Oxnard Thousand Oaks Ventura CA San Diego Carlsbad CA San Francisco Oakland Hayward CA Seattle Tacoma Bellevue WA Urban Honolulu HI Washington Arlington Alexandria DC-VA-MD-WV Percent Sources : Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) ; CEA calculations Figure Percentage Reduction in Homelessness by CBSA from Deregulating Housing Markets Baltimore Columbia Towson MD Boston Cambridge Newton MA-NH Denver Aurora Lakewood CO Urban Honolulu HI Los Angeles Long Beach Anaheim CA New York Newark Jersey City NY-NJ-PA Oxnard Thousand Oaks Ventura CA San Diego Carlsbad CA San Francisco Oakland Hayward CA Seattle Tacoma Bellevue WA Washington Arlington Alexandria DC-VA-MD-WV Reduction in homelessness ( percent ) Sources : Department of Housing and Urban Development Point-in-Time Counts ; Census Bureau ; Corinth ( ) ; Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) ; Goodman ( ) ; CEA calculations Note : CBSA = core-based statistical area. Each continuum of care is merged into the metropolitan area where the majority of its overall population lives. This simulation assumes that deregulation reduces the ratio of home value to production cost to for all metropolitan areas with a ratio of at least ; see the text for further details about the simulation Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM homelessness. The results are summarized in figure Homelessness would fall by percent in the San Francisco Oakland Hayward California CBSA ; by percent in the Urban Honolulu Hawaii CBSA ; by percent in the Los Angeles Long Beach Anaheim California CBSA ; by percent in the San Diego Carlsbad California CBSA ; by percent in the Washington Arlington Alexandria D.C. Virginia Maryland West Virginia CBSA ; and by between and percent in the Boston Cambridge Newton Massachusetts New Hampshire CBSA ; the Denver Aurora Lakewood Colorado CBSA ; the New York Newark Jersey City New York New Jersey Pennsylvania CBSA ; the Seattle Tacoma Bellevue Washington CBSA ; and the Baltimore Columbia Towson Maryland CBSA The aggregate reduction in homelessness in these metropolitan areas which contain percent of the U.S. homeless population would have important effects for the United States as a whole with total U.S. homelessness falling by just under people or percent. These findings are also broadly consistent with results from Raphael ( ) who uses a different methodology to assess how housing market regulation drives up homelessness rates. Using an index of housing market regulation by metropolitan area he finds that deregulation could reduce overall United States homelessness by to percent. He does not show how homelessness reductions would vary across specific areas. It is important to note that the housing supply responses resulting from deregulation would take many years to translate into the types of price reductions and thus homelessness reductions shown here. Still these results suggest that the severe homelessness problems in a selected number of metropolitan areas are substantially driven by city-created regulations on housing Fewer People Are Served by Housing Assistance Programs By driving up rents overly stringent housing regulations in selected metropolitan areas increase the government s cost of providing rental housing assistance resulting in fewer assisted families. The Federal Government provides rental housing assistance across a number of programs that are administered by different agencies. Three major programs are administered by HUD these include ( ) Section Housing Choice Vouchers ( ) Section Project-Based Rental Assistance and ( ) public housing. The largest of these three HUD programs is the Housing Choice Voucher program which served million families at a cost of $ billion in fiscal year ( FY ) ( percent of the overall HUD budget ) Under the voucher program qualified tenants receive Federal subsidies that cover a portion of their rent in private rental apartments of their choosing. The second-largest HUD program is Section Project-Based Rental Assistance which served million families at a cost of $ billion in FY Under Project-Based Rental Assistance apartment owners receive government subsidies to lease units to low-income families. The third-largest | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM HUD program is public housing which served million families in FY at a Federal operating cost of $ billion ( excluding the opportunity cost of holding the property ) Public housing is built and managed by government authorities. Unlike with Housing Choice Vouchers tenants living in units covered by Project-Based Rental Assistance and in public housing do not maintain their subsidy if they move Eligibility for these programs is based on a family s income relative to median income in their area. However only about one in four eligible families actually receives assistance because housing costs are too high to serve every family that meets the income requirements for the programs especially in high-cost areas. For example the maximum payment standard for a three-bedroom unit is more than $ per month in San Francisco County California compared with about $ per month in Harris County Texas. Many areas have waiting lists for assistance that extend multiple years and in some cases waiting lists are not reopened for long periods of time Housing deregulation that removes excessive barriers and reduces market rents could extend assistance to many eligible families not currently being served in expensive markets. Under each of the three major HUD programs the government generally covers the difference between percent of a household s adjusted income and the allowable rent or operating cost for housing units. For the voucher program if market rents decrease Public Housing Authorities would pay less for contract rent assuming the tenants payments remain mostly constant at percent of adjusted income. HUD would also need to pay private property owners less to house people under Project-Based Rental Assistance. These savings from deregulation could be used to serve additional families under current funding amounts Removing excessive regulatory barriers could also improve the effectiveness of the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit ( LIHTC ) a program that subsidizes the developers of affordable housing units. The Federal Government is estimated to spend about $ billion per year on LIHTC ( JCT ) Given the budgetary restrictions on how much can be spent on this program excessive housing regulation increases the costs of building subsidized housing and reduces the amount of it that can built Weakened Labor Mobility and Economic Growth Aside from its specific harm to low-income Americans excessive regulation in selected housing markets also has negative consequences for the general population. One important example is the reduction in labor mobility across areas because higher home prices in certain areas reduce the incentive to move to places where wages may be higher. This reduces the productivity of workers and shrinks aggregate economic output. Hsieh and Moretti ( ) estimate that reducing housing regulations in New York City San Jose and San Francisco to that of the median U.S. city would have substantially increased growth from Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM to leading to percent higher gross domestic product in Hsieh and Moretti argue that this missing growth is the result of spatial misallocation of workers as high-productivity cities construct barriers to increasing housing supply to meet demand from workers. Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) find that restrictive land use regulations reduce national output by a smaller but still important percent. Herkenhoff and others ( ) similarly find significant economic growth effects from relaxing land use restrictions Reducing labor mobility has important regional effects in addition to aggregate ones. When home prices are higher due to overregulation workers are less able to migrate to areas with higher wages. This results in a persistent gap in wages between high-productivity and low-productivity areas that can not be reduced through migration that would expand the supply of workers in high-wage areas. Zabel ( ) finds that housing prices increase more in response to an increase in labor demand in cities with an inelastic housing supply than in those with a more elastic housing supply thus reducing the incentive for in-migration to areas with an inelastic housing supply. Saks ( ) similarly finds that more heavily regulated housing markets are less responsive to changes in demand for housing lowering employment growth in areas with relatively more extensive land use regulations. Saks estimated that the employment response to an increase in labor demand in an area in the 75th percentile of her State regulatory index is percentage points smaller than the response in an area in the 25th percentile Ganong and Shoag ( ) find that higher home prices resulting from stringent land use regulation can help explain why disparities between economic regions have grown since breaking from the previous pattern of regional economic convergence. H m l inen and B ckerman ( ) examine migration in Finland and come to a similar conclusion as Ganong and Shoag : high housing prices discourage in-migration Even within cities high levels of land use regulations can increase socioeconomic segregation. Owens ( ) examines segregation between neighborhoods between places ( municipalities cities and towns ) and between cities and their suburbs and finds that most housing segregation occurs between neighborhoods rather than between places or between cities and their suburbs which suggests that zoning regulations could play an important role Rothwell and Massey ( ) find that restrictive zoning laws lead to greater socioeconomic segregation and reduce interaction between the poor and the affluent. Lens and Monkkonen ( ) find that land-use regulation and income segregation are positively related with density restrictions leading to a concentration of more affluent households although not necessarily a concentration of poor households | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Reduced Opportunity for Children Overregulation of housing markets can also potentially reduce the ability of children to access neighborhoods that advance opportunity. A series of papers by Raj Chetty and his colleagues have identified neighborhoods that are most likely to improve long-term outcomes of children. A child that moves from a neighborhood at the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile of the opportunity index increases his or her lifetime earnings by $ Chetty and others ( ) calculate the cost of opportunity and find that an additional $ in children s future annual income costs $ each year for rent for every year of childhood. The cost of opportunity varies considerably across the United States however and much of the variance is due to differences in land use regulatory regimes. An additional $ in future annual income for a child costs only $ in Wichita but $ in Boston or Baltimore. Thus relaxing excessive regulatory barriers to building housing could reduce the cost for families of accessing higher-opportunity neighborhoods for their children and potentially improve their long-term prospects Similarly a report from the U.S. Senate Joint Economic Committee finds that U.S. zip codes with the highest-quality public elementary schools have a median home price that is four times as large as those zip codes with the lowest-quality public schools ( JEC ) Many of these areas have highly restrictive zoning. Although expanded school choice weakens the association between home prices and the quality of public schools housing deregulation could potentially promote greater access to high-quality schools for students ( JEC ) Increased Traffic Congestion and Harm to the Environment Finally excessive regulatory barriers to building housing in certain areas increases commuting times and traffic congestion because sufficient housing can not be built near where people work. The average commuter spent hours sitting in traffic in up from hours in ( Schrank Eisele and Lomax ) The aggregate travel delay increased from billion hours to billion hours during this period and the total cost associated with congestion rose from $ billion to $ billion As a result of this rise in average commuting times an extra billion gallons of fuel were consumed increasing carbon emissions and harming the environment. Moreover as Glaeser notes when environmentalists resist new construction in their dense but environmentally friendly cities they inadvertently ensure that it will take place somewhere else somewhere with higher carbon emissions ( Glaeser ) Indeed Glaeser ( ) finds that households in urban areas emit less carbon than those in the suburbs even after adjusting for differences in climate and environmental regulation across these areas Factors contributing to fewer emissions in cities include smaller housing units and that people are less likely to drive or would drive shorter distances than Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Box Poor Substitutes for Regulatory Reform Policymakers have proposed a litany of policies aside from regulatory reform to lower rents or incentivize affordable housing construction in high-cost areas. However these proposals alone such as rent control increases in rental housing assistance and so-called inclusionary zoning are unlikely to have their intended effects on rents or construction and in some cases may be counterproductive Rent controls or policies that limit rent increases for certain rental units are sometimes offered as a means of addressing high housing costs Though existing tenants in rent-controlled units may benefit from smaller rent increases supply is reduced for new potential tenants and the incentive for developers to build more units is diminished. There are few issues where economists are in as much as agreement as they are regarding the outcomes of rent control. In a University of Chicago Booth poll of economists across the political spectrum percent disagreed that rent control ordinances such as those imposed in New York and San Francisco had boosted affordable housing or improved the quality of rental units ( IGM ) The economists consensus is supported not only by economic theory but also by the empirical literature. In a recent paper examining the effect of a rent control law on housing supply and prices in San Francisco Diamond McQuade and Qian ( ) find that the law had the opposite of its intended effect on rents. While those living in rent-controlled units benefit from lower rents and remain in these units longer than they would without rent control those who do not have access to these units are substantially harmed in the long run. Landlords responded to the law by converting existing buildings into condominiums and by taking other steps to avoid being subject to rent control laws. This lowered the supply of rental housing by percent and incentivized the creation of housing that served the preferences of high-income households. As a result this rent control law likely raised rents in the long run rather than lowering them. Moreover even existing tenants who benefit from rent control may suffer from unintended consequences Jiang ( ) finds that rent control increases unemployment among tenants in New York City potentially because they can sustain longer bouts of joblessness given their lower housing costs or because tenants are tied to a particular housing unit and restrict their job search to opportunities nearby Expansions of government housing programs to combat rising rents are also unlikely to provide much relief to the general population of residents in supply-constrained areas. When the supply of housing is inelastic expanding demand by increasing government subsidies increases prices rather than quantities. As a result government rental subsidies to low income-renters will likely increase rents in markets with overly restrictive housing regulations Eriksen and Ross ( ) find that housing vouchers increased rents for housing within percent of the Fair Market Rent threshold in supply-constrained communities. They estimate that a percent increase in the number of | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM vouchers increased rents by percent for these units. LIHTC a program that subsidizes developers of below market-rate rental housing units may also be ineffective at addressing the underlying supply problem according to some evidence. Eriksen and Rosenthal ( ) find that new LIHTC development largely crowds out private development leaving total housing supply unchanged. Glaeser and Gyourko ( ) note that the credit tends to increase the profits of subsidized builders while pushing unsubsidized builders out of the housing market Regulations that require a certain share of housing units to be set aside for low-income residents often referred to as inclusionary zoning also fail to solve the affordable housing problem. For example Schuetz Meltzer and Been ( ) find that inclusionary zoning can increase home prices and in some cases reduce housing development. Hamilton ( ) in a study of Washington and Baltimore similarly finds that inclusionary zoning increases prices they would if they lived in the suburbs. As discussed in box regulatory reform rather than rent control expansion of government programs or inclusionary zoning offers the most effective solution to the problems posed by high housing costs and overregulation Conclusion How to increase housing affordability through regulatory reform is an issue that has garnered bipartisan attention in recent years. In this chapter we have focused on excessive regulations that substantially drive up home prices in a selected number of metropolitan areas. Relaxing these regulations would greatly benefit Americans especially those with lower incomes by reducing the cost of attaining homeownership and reducing rents in supply-constrained areas. Falling rents resulting from relaxing excessive regulations would reduce homelessness by percent on average in these areas and more families could be served by Federal rental housing assistance programs. Broader benefits would include increased economic growth reduced regional disparities expanded opportunities for children and a cleaner environment We have also emphasized that addressing the problem of overregulation with more regulation would be counterproductive. Rent control can increase housing prices by reducing the incentive for developers to build new housing Similarly expanded government subsidies for housing do not solve the problem of overregulation. When housing supply is constrained housing subsidies for tenants may increase market rents without increasing the quantity of housing counteracting the goals of these programs Expanding Affordable Housing | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM The Trump Administration has taken steps to address onerous housing regulations. President Trump issued an Executive Order in to establish the White House Council on Eliminating Regulatory Barriers to Affordable Housing which is tasked with reviewing housing regulations at all levels of government and submitting a report to the President in with recommendations on how to ameliorate these excessive regulatory burdens HUD has also taken action under the Trump Administration to counter regulatory barriers to building affordable housing. The Affirmatively Furthering Fair Housing rule which was finalized during the previous Administration is being revised to focus more clearly on increasing housing supply in areas where supply is constrained. This rule recognizes that increasing housing choice for disadvantaged groups requires taking on regulatory barriers that place housing in large swaths of specific areas out of reach for lower-income families | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM x Part III The Economic Outlook 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM x Chapter The Outlook for a Continued Expansion As this Report has shown under the Trump Administration economic growth and the labor market gains it enables have exceeded pre-2017 expectations The U.S. economy s performance has withstood strong headwinds from a weak global economy and several idiosyncratic domestic shocks as pro-growth policies have kept the U.S. economy resilient By increasing competition productivity and wages and reducing the prices of consumer goods and services the Administration s approach to regulation is raising real incomes while maintaining regulatory protections for workers public health safety and the environment. Specifically the Administration s approach to eliminating excessive regulation of energy markets supports further unleashing of the country s abundant human and energy resources Furthermore the Administration s healthcare reforms are building a system that delivers high-quality care at affordable prices through greater choice and competition. Across the board this pro-growth agenda has disproportionately benefited those previously left behind during the current expansion To further expand the economy and extend the longest expansion in U.S. history additional policy issues may need to be addressed. This challenge is why the Trump Administration remains focused on promoting competitive markets combating the opioid crisis promoting affordable housing enacting a comprehensive infrastructure plan rendering the individual provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act permanent updating the U.S. immigration system continuing deregulatory actions improving trade agreements and international trade 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM practices and incentivizing higher labor force participation through additional labor market reforms Overall assuming full implementation of the Trump Administration s economic policy agenda we project real U.S. economic output to grow at an average annual rate of percent over the budget window from to During that time inflation is expected to settle at a percent fourth-quarter-overfourth-quarter rate and the unemployment rate is expected to remain at or below an annual average rate of percent. Relative to the current-law baseline projection we estimate that full policy implementation of the Administration s economic agenda would cumulatively raise output by percent over this budget window The first three years of the Trump Administration show that long-lamented structural trends that were constraining potential growth in the United States are not policy-invariant. The right pro-growth policies attract greater investment encourage more people to enter the labor market and lead to higher wages from businesses investing in and competing for workers. Even with recent success there is ample room for the U.S. economy to expand especially if the Administration s approach to international trade produces results that are greater than expected S ince the Council of Economic Advisers in collaboration with the Office of Management and Budget and the U.S. Department of the Treasury has published a long-run forecast for the U.S. economy that assumes full enactment and implementation of the Administration s economic policy agenda. This reflects the Council s mandate as stipulated in the Employment Act of to set forth in the Economic Report of the President current and foreseeable trends in the levels of employment production and purchasing power and a program for carrying out the objective of creating and maintaining conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment opportunities including self-employment for those able willing and seeking to work and to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. Since execution of this mandate has involved providing an 11-year policy-inclusive economic forecast | 250-840_text_.pdf Chapter 2/7/20 : PM Because of this charge the Administration s forecast is historically unique from other long-run economic forecasts both official and private. The Congressional Budget Office for example publishes a current-law forecast which assumes no change in economic policy ( CBO ) The Blue Chip panel of professional private sector forecasters often reveals substantial heterogeneity in expectations reflecting both different estimates of economic potential under current law as well as objective and subjective estimations of the probability of policy implementation. Although the assumptions underlying projections of the Federal Open Market Committee are ambiguous those forecasts presumably also reflect committee members differing views both on potential growth under current law as well as potential growth under possible future law To better distinguish the estimated effects of the Administration s economic policy objectives the results of which may be contingent on legislative support and other factors from current-law projections beginning with the Economic Report of the President and continuing through this Report we have decomposed this forecast into a current-law baseline and intermediate and top lines that reflect estimated growth effects discussed in this Report as well as in the and Reports and the President s Fiscal Year Budget. We then build up to our top-line policy-inclusive forecast by successively adding to the current-law baseline the estimated effects of future deregulatory actions immigration reform additional labor market reforms to incentivize higher labor force participation rendering the individual provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) permanent additional fiscal policy proposals including the Administration s infrastructure plan and improved trade deals with international trading partners. The top-line forecast constitutes the Administration s official Troika forecast of the Council of Economic Advisers Office of Management and Budget and Department of Treasury. For comparison we also report a pre-policy baseline consisting of the Congressional Budget Office s projection made in August extended by its August current-law projection GDP Growth during the Next Three Years As illustrated in figure and reported in the third column ( real GDP ) of table the Administration anticipates economic growth to rise in from its projected pace of percent and to remain at or above percent through assuming full implementation of the economic agenda detailed in this Report its two predecessors and the President s Fiscal Year Budget. We expect near-term growth to be supported by the continuing effects of the TCJA as well as new measures to promote increased labor force participation deregulatory actions immigration reform reciprocal trade deals The Outlook for a Continued Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM  $ "    *   ./  * !   * 2/ #    /  $ )    '       "       f *   ./   "       f *   ./   ) /-l   f *   ./ *    m  -& /   )   d " '  / $ * )  p * ' $  $  $   '   )   t-    po ' $  $ Q4-over-Q4 change ( percent )  *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $    * !    *   /  / $ ./ $    * ) " $ * )  '    " /   ! ! $     -/ ( ) /  * !  / #      ! ! $   * !    )  " ( ) /   )     " /   EA calculations  * /   # e  current-law ! *   ./  i.      * )    /     $ '   '    * !    / *    and an infrastructure program which we assume will commence in with observable effects on output beginning in The Administration also expects the labor market to continue to exhibit strength in the near term with the civilian unemployment rate remaining below percent through as reported in the sixth column unemployment rate of table Despite low unemployment inflation is expected to remain low and close to the Federal Reserve Board s percent target for the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index. The Administration expects broad inflation beyond to remain stable at percent through as shown in the fourth column ( GDP price index ) of table GDP Growth over the Longer Term As discussed in the and volumes of the Economic Report of the President over the longer term the Administration s current-law baseline forecast is for output growth to moderate as the capital-to-output ratio asymptotically approaches a higher steady state level in response to corporate tax reform and as the near-term effects of the TCJA s individual provisions on the rate of growth dissipate into a permanent level effect. As reflected by our intermediate forecast we expect the latter moderation would be partially offset in | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM    '    #    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * ) s    * ) * ( $    *   ./     ) /   #  ) "   / *       * ( $ )  '      '    ' )        "    '           $   $ )     * ) (  $    #  $ ) /4+   #  $ ) /4+  $ )   ) / ./   /  ) / ./   /   ) ( ' * ( ) /            ) * /   /   ) /   $ ''.   ) /  ) /     /0  '                                                                                                          *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $     -/ ( ) /  * !  / #      ! ! $   * !    )  " ( ) /   )     " /   EA calculations  * /   # $  ! *   ./        * )    /     $ '   '    * !    / *      #  $ ) / ./   /  * )       $ ''.  $  (    * )     * )   (  -& /   $  * ) /    $   * ( $ )  '       )   / #  (  * !   '       )   / #      $   $ )   (    $ ! !  ' $ " # /'4    / *  * )  $ ) "  and if the individual provisions of the TCJA currently legislated to expire on December were instead made permanent The Administration s full policy-inclusive forecast is reported as the green line in figure In addition to successful implementation of the President s infrastructure plan and extension of the individual provisions of the TCJA this forecast assumes full achievement of the Administration s agenda with respect to deregulation immigration improved trade agreements fiscal consolidation and labor market policies designed to incentivize higher labor force participation. The latter includes expanding work requirements for nondisabled working-age welfare recipients in noncash welfare programs ; increasing childcare assistance for low-income families ; and enhancing assistance for reskilling programs through the National Council for the American Worker Though we anticipate growth moderating toward the end of the budget window to percent on average between and the policy-inclusive forecast is for output to grow at an average annual rate of percent. Relative to the current-law baseline we estimate that full policy implementation would cumulatively raise the level of output by percent over the budget window Reflecting moderating growth in the latter half of the budget window the Administration expects unemployment to converge to percent consistent The Outlook for a Continued Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM    '    0++'4  $    * ( * ) ) /.  * !    /0  '   )    * / ) / $  '    '   0/+0/   * 2/ #    * 2/ #   /   ) /  "  * $ ) /.   * ( * ) ) /     $ $ ' $  )  ) * ) $ ) ./ $ /0/ $ * )  '  * '  / $ * )   "     *  ! *    -/ $  $  / $ * )   /    / *     / *         ( ' *   #   * !  / #  '   *  ! *          / $ *  * !  ) * ) !  (   $ )  ( ' * ( ) /  / *  # * # * '   ( ' * ( ) /        "  &'4  # *  ) * ) !  (   $ )      0/+0/   # *  *   / $ $ /4  ) * ) !  (   $ )       / $ *  * !   '      / *  ) * ) !  (   $ )  * 0/+0/      (    /0  '   '          ( *       * / ) / $  '   '             0/+0/   * -&   $ ! ! ) / $  '       ) * ) !  (       '       )    '  ) * ) !  (   $ )  * 0/+0/    (      / #    "  * !  $ )  * (   )   *   / $   (    *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $    -/ ( ) /  * !  / #      ! ! $   * !    )  " ( ) /   )     " /        '  '  / $ * )   * /   ' '   * ) /- $  0/ $ * )    $ )   ) /  "  * $ ) /.   /   )   ) )  '   /  ! *   ./  ! $ )  ' $    * (      * /  '  (   ) * /         / *  * )  $ ) "  The quarter        $ )   '   & ;    $  / #  '  / ./   -/  $ / #    $ '   '    /    *   * ( ./ $   * 0/+0/      $  / #    "  * !       )   " *   * ( ./ $   $ )  * (   * '  / $ * )  '   *  ! *    )   # * # * '   ( ' * ( ) /  #    )    % 0./   ! *   $  * ) / $ ) $ / $  $ )  / #  * '  / $ * )  $    with the Federal Open Market Committee s December Summary of Economic Projections which reports a range of participant estimates from to percent ( Federal Reserve ) The unemployment rate rising to percent is also expected to maintain a rate of inflation of percent as measured by the GDP chained price index ( see the fourth column of table ) As shown in table the Administration anticipates that the primary contributor to increased growth through will be higher output per hour worked. During much of the current expansion U.S. labor productivity growth was disappointing by historical standards partly due to low contributions of capital deepening. By substantially raising the capital stock and consequent flows of capital services attracting increased net capital inflows including investment both by foreign firms and overseas affiliates of U.S. multinational enterprises and facilitating efficient capital reallocation from mature firms to more dynamic enterprises we expect enactment of corporate tax reform to considerably increase capital per worker and thus labor productivity. Already during the first seven quarters since the TCJA was enacted labor productivity growth in the nonfarm business sector rose substantially relative to its | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM pre-TCJA postrecession average as reported in chapter of this Report. If fully implemented we also expect the Administration s labor market reforms to partially offset the effects of demographic-related trends in labor force participation as reflected in line of table Upside and Downside Forecast Risks Since the Administration s forecast is a policy-inclusive one a key downside risk is the political contingency of full implementation of the President s economic agenda particularly in light of the inherent unpredictability of the legislative process. In addition by definition the policy-inclusive forecast assumes that the Administration s policies will be implemented and remain in place throughout the forecast window. In scenarios where future Administrations or Congress partially or fully reverse the TCJA otherwise raise taxes or significantly expand the Federal regulatory state economic growth would be lower or even negative. For example the Economic Report of the President estimated that Medicare for All bills then discussed in Congress would reduce real GDP by about percent in the long run if financed by taxes on labor income while recent proposals to introduce a top marginal income tax rate of percent on personal income over $ million would lower the long-run level of GDP by percent As observed in the Report and discussed in chapter of this Report a sharp slowdown in the global economy also poses a significant downside risk to the outlook through both direct and indirect channels. In particular continued or worsening weakness in other advanced economies particularly Germany and Italy but also Europe more broadly in the event of Brexit-related disruptions would have an adverse impact on U.S. growth through both a direct export channel and indirect exchange rate financial market and supply chain channels. A significant growth slowdown in the People s Republic of China similar to that observed in the years would also introduce substantial risks to the outlooks for advanced economies including the United States. High public debt levels in several advanced and emerging economies may generate economic headwinds while high corporate debt levels in the United States could act as an accelerant to potential adverse financial shocks Idiosyncratic shocks also pose risks to the outlook. In these included but were not limited to production cuts at Boeing whose production accounts for percent of U.S. GDP a partial government shutdown in the first quarter and industrial action at General Motors. As this Report was being finalized Boeing announced plans to halt production of the MAX a development that could subtract percent from annualized real GDP growth in the first quarter of Perhaps the single biggest upside risk to the outlook is that the Administration s more robust approach to international trade achieves The Outlook for a Continued Expansion 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM greater-than-expected success in its pursuit of freer fairer trade with zero tariffs zero nontariff barriers and zero subsidies. Recent research by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( Cadot Gourdon and van Tongeren ; Lamprecht and Miroudot ; OECD ) finds that lowering international tariff and nontariff barriers to trade as well as reducing international restrictiveness on trade in services would substantially raise U.S and global trade and output. With investment in intellectual property products now accounting for about one-third of U.S. private nonresidential fixed investment trade agreements that enhance international protection of intellectual property such as the United States Mexico Canada Agreement and Phase I of U.S.-China negotiations could also elevate the level of innovation and productivity growth Additional upside risks to the forecast include first higher net capital inflows due to international capital mobility exceeding estimates which would attenuate the potential crowding out of private fixed investment in response to individual tax reform and public infrastructure investment. Second academic studies demonstrating that individual marginal income tax rates may have differential effects across the age distribution suggest that estimated trends in labor force participation may overstate the growth-detracting effect of demography. Third insofar as the growth estimates presented in this Report and its predecessor have been derived from standard neoclassical growth models they may omit the positive externalities and spillover effects captured by endogenous growth models such as that of Ehrlich Li and Liu ( ) Tax reform that incentivizes investment in human capital regulatory reform that eliminates prohibitive barriers to entry for more innovative and entrepreneurial firms and health investments and labor market policies that facilitate human capital accumulation may therefore yield higher-growth dividends than those estimated here | Chapter 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM x References Chapter Amiti M. S. Redding and D. Weinstein. 2019a. The Impact of the Trade War on U.S. Prices and Welfare. CEP Discussion Paper dp1603 2019b. New China Tariffs Increase Cost to U.S. Households. Liberty Street Economics. https : //libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2019/05/ new-china-tariffs-increase-costs-to-us-households.html BIS ( Bank for International Settlements ) 2019a. Annual Economic Report. https : // www.bis.org/publ/arpdf/ar2019e.htm 2019b. BIS Quarterly Review : International Banking and Financial Market Developments. https : //www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1909.htm Caldara D. M. Iacoviello P. Molligo A. Prestipino and A. Raffo. Does Trade Policy Uncertainty Affect Global Economic Activity ? FEDS Notes. Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Economic Report of the President Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office 2019a. The Economic Effects of Federal Deregulation since January : An Interim Report. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/ The-Economic-Effects-of-Federal-Deregulation-Interim-Report.pdf 2019b. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office Collins C. and E. Truman. The U.S. Dollar s Strength Is Not at Historical Highs. Peterson Institute for International Economics. https : //www.piie.com/ research/piie-charts/us-dollars-strength-not-historical-highs Curcuru S. The Sensitivity of the U.S. Dollar Exchange Rate to Changes in Monetary Policy Expectations. IFDP Notes. Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //doi.org/10.17016/2573-2129.36 Deutsche Bundesbank. Monthly Report : October https : //www bundesbank.de/resource/blob/811960/ a0bf7575c07b3754dda37ec6739d4b13/mL/2019-10-monatsbericht-data.pdf 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Diebold F. and G. Rudebusch. A Nonparametric Investigation of Duration Dependence in the American Business Cycle. Journal of Political Economy no. Fajgelbaum P. P. Goldberg P. Kennedy and A. Khandelwal. The Return to Protectionism. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Green G. and J. Coder. Household Income Trends. Sentier Research LLC Hansen A. Economic Progress and Declining Population Growth. American Economic Review no. : Hooper P. F. Mishkin and A. Sufi Prospect for Inflation in a High Pressure Economy : Is the Phillips Curve Dead or Is It Just Hibernating ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research IMF ( International Monetary Fund ) World Economic Outlook : Challenges to Steady Growth. Washington : IMF 2019a. People s Republic of China. Article IV Consultation Press Release ; Staff Report ; Staff Statement ; and Statement by the Executive Director for China. IMF Country Report 19/266. Washington : IMF 2019b. Germany : Article IV Consultation Press Release ; Staff Report ; and Statement by the Executive Director for Germany. IMF Country Report 19/213. Washington : IMF 2019c. World Economic Outlook : Global Manufacturing Downturn Rising Trade Barriers. Washington : IMF 2019d. United States : Article IV Consultation Press Release ; Staff Report ; and Statement by the Executive Director for the United States. IMF Country Report 19/174. Washington : IMF Kopp E. D. Leigh S. Mursula and S. Tambunlertchai. U.S. Investment since the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of IMF Working Paper 19/120. Washington : IMF Lettau M. and S. Ludvigson. Understanding Trend and Cycle in Asset Values : Reevaluating the Wealth Effect on Consumption. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Londono J. S. Ma and B. Wilson. Quantifying the Impact of Foreign Economic Uncertainty on the U.S. Economy. FEDS Notes. Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //doi org/10.17016/2380-7172.2463 Mertens K. The Near Term Growth Impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Working Paper https : //doi.org/10.24149/ wp1803 OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) 2019a. OECD Economic Outlook Volume Issue Paris : OECD Publishing 2019b. Trade Simulations in the Car Sector. Presentation given at STEP Meeting October | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Poterba J. Stock Market Wealth and Consumption. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. Rachel L. and L. Summers. On Falling Neutral Real Rates Fiscal Policy and the Risk of Secular Stagnation. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity conference draft spring Rubbo E. Networks Phillips Curves and Monetary Policy. Working paper https : //scholar.harvard.edu/files/elisarubbo/files/rubbo_jmp.pdf Rudebusch G. Will the Economic Recovery Die of Old Age ? Economic Letter San Francisco : Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Summers L. IMF Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in Honor of Stanley Fischer. http : //larrysummers.com/ imf-fourteenth-annual-research-conference-in-honor-of-stanley-fischer/ U.S. Economic Prospects : Secular Stagnation Hysteresis and the Zero Lower Bound. Business Economics no. : The Age of Secular Stagnation. Foreign Affairs February http : // larrysummers.com/2016/02/17/the-age-of-secular-stagnation/ White House. Statement from the Press Secretary Regarding the President s Working Dinner with China https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefingsstatements/ statement-press-secretary-regarding-presidents-working-dinner-china/ World Bank. 2019a. Global Economic Prospects : Heightened Tensions Subdued Investment. Washington : World Bank. https : //elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/ abs/10.1596/978-1-4648-1398-6 2019b. Global Monthly : October Washington : World Bank WTO ( World Trade Organization ) World Trade Report : Levelling the Trading Field for SMEs. Geneva : WTO Publishing Chapter Aizer A. Public Health Insurance Program Take-Up and Child Health. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Barnett J. and E. Berchick. Health Insurance Coverage in the United States : U.S. Census Bureau. https : //www.census.gov/library/ publications/2017/demo/p60-260.html Berchick E. E. Hood and J. Barnett. Health Insurance Coverage in the United States : U.S. Census Bureau. https : //www.census.gov/library/ publications/2018/demo/p60-264.html Bernstein J. and K. Hassett. Unlocking Private Capital to Facilitate Economic Growth in Distressed Areas. Washington : Economic Innovation Group Blau F. and L. Kahn. Female Labor Supply : Why is the U.S. Falling Behind ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Burkhauser R. K. Corinth J. Elwell and J. Larrimore. Evaluating the Success of President Johnson s War on Poverty : Revisiting the Historical Record Using a Full-Income Poverty Measure. Working paper. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/ papers.cfm ? abstract_id = Canberra Group. Handbook on Household on Household Income Statistics 2nd ed Geneva : United Nations Economic Commission for Europe Casey A. Sale Prices Surge in Neighborhoods with New Tax Break. Zillow https : //www.zillow.com/research/prices-surge-opportunity-zones-23393/ CBO ( U.S. Congressional Budget Office ) An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook : to https : //www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/ recurringdata/51135-2016-08-economicprojections-2.xlsx Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for People Under Age : to https : //www.cbo.gov/system/files/2019-05/55085HealthCoverageSubsidies_0.pdf CDFI Fund ( U.S. Department of the Treasury Community Development Financial Institutions Fund ) Compliance Review of New Markets Tax Credit Program. https : //www.cdfifund.gov/Documents/Summit % % Compliance % 20Review % 20of % 20New % 20Markets % 20Tax % 20Credit % Program % % 20August % 20Date % % % 20Compliant.pdf Opportunity Zones Resources. https : //www.cdfifund.gov/Pages/ Opportunity-Zones.aspx New Markets Tax Credit Program Compliance Monitoring : Frequently Asked Questions. https : //www.cdfifund.gov/programs-training/Programs/ new-markets-tax-credit/Pages/compliance-step.aspx # step5 CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) 2018a. Addressing America s Reskilling Challenge. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/ Addressing-Americas-Reskilling-Challenge.pdf 2018b. Deregulating Health Insurance Markets : Value to Market Participants. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/DeregulatingHealth-Insurance-Markets-FINAL.pdf 2018c. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office 2019a. Economic Report of the President. Washington U.S. Government Publishing Office 2019b. President Trump s Policies Continue to Benefit All Americans Especially the Disadvantaged. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/articles/ president-trumps-policies-continue-benefit-americans-especiallydisadvantaged/ 2019c. Economic Effects of Deregulation. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2019/06/The-Economic-Effects-of-Federal-DeregulationInterim-Report.pdf | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 2019d. Government Employment and Training Programs : Assessing the Evidence on Their Performance. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2019/06/Government-Employment-and-Training-Programs.pdf 2019e. The Role of Affordable Child Care in Promoting Work Outside the Home. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/The-Roleof-Affordable-Child-Care-in-Promoting-Work-Outside-the-Home-1.pdf 2019f. The Full Cost of the Opioid Crisis : $ Trillion Over Four Years. https : // www.whitehouse.gov/articles/full-cost-opioid-crisis-2-5-trillion-four-years/ Crespo-Sancho C. Can Gender Equality Prevent Violent Conflict ? The World Bank Blogs March http : //blogs.worldbank.org/dev4peace/ can-gender-equality-prevent-violent-conflict CRS ( Congressional Research Service ) New Market Tax Credit : An Introduction. https : //fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL34402.pdf Dev Bhardwaj R. China s Economic Reform : The Role and Significance of SEZs. Indian Journal of Political Science no. : Elwell J. K. Corinth and R. Burkhauser. Income Growth and Its Distribution from Eisenhower to Obama : The Growing Importance of In-Kind Transfers ( ) NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Fein D. and J. Hamadyk. Bridging the Opportunity Divide for Low-Income Youth : Implementation and Early Impacts of the Year Up Program. OPRE Report Washington : Office of Planning Research and Evaluation Administration for Children and Families U.S. Department of Health and Human Services https : //www.yearup.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Year-Up-PACE-FullReport-2018.pdf Ferrant G. and A. Thim. Measuring Women s Economic Empowerment : Time Use Data and Gender Inequality. OECD Development Policy Paper Paris : OECD Publishing. http : //www.oecd.org/dev/development-gender/MEASURINGWOMENS-ECONOMIC-EMPOWERMENT-Gender-Policy-Paper-No-16.pdf FOMC ( Federal Open Market Committee ) Chair FOMC s Press Conference Projections Materials September Press release September https : //www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20160921 pdf Food and Nutrition Service. 2019a. Food Security in the U.S. : Key Statistics & Graphics. U.S. Department of Agriculture. https : //www.ers.usda.gov/topics/ food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-us/key-statistics-graphics/ 2019b. SNAP Data Tables. U.S. Department of Agriculture. https : //www.fns usda.gov/pd/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap Fry R. Millennials Projected to Overtake Baby Boomers as America s Largest Generation. Pew Research Service. https : //www.pewresearch.org/facttank/2018/03/01/millennials-overtake-baby-boomers/ References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM FTC ( Federal Trade Commission ) Policy Perspectives : Options to Enhance Occupational License Portability. https : //www.ftc.gov/reports/ options-enhance-occupational-license-portability Ganong P. and D. Shoag. Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S Declined ? Journal of Urban Economics : Goodnough A. and M. Sanger-Katz. Medicaid Covers a Million Fewer Children Baby Elijah Was One of Them. New York Times Upshot Blog October https : //www.nytimes.com/2019/10/22/upshot/medicaid-uninsured-children html Guo J. A. Seshadri and C. Taber. Jobs Skills and the Prison-to-Work Transition Madison : Center for Research on the Wisconsin Economy Hendra R. D. Greenberg G. Hamilton A. Oppenheim A. Pennington K. Schaberg and B. Tessler. Encouraging Evidence on a Sector-Focused Advancement Strategy. MDRC. https : //www.mdrc.org/sites/default/files/2016_ Workadvance_Final_Web.pdf Johnson J. and M. Kleiner. Is Occupational Licensing a Barrier to Interstate Migration ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Krueger A. Where Have All the Workers Gone ? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate. Washington : Brookings Institution https : //www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/1_krueger.pdf Levinson A. Energy Efficiency Standards Are More Regressive Than Energy Taxes : Theory and Evidence. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists no. S1 : S7 S36 Maguire S. J. Freely C. Clymer M. Conway and D. Schwartz. Tuning In to Local Labor Markets : Findings from the Sectoral Employment Impact Study. Public/Private Ventures Meyer B. W. Mok and J. Sullivan. Household Surveys in Crisis. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Meyer J. How Occupational Licensing Inhibits Economic Opportunity. Naples FL : Foundation for Government Accountability. https : //thefga.org/wp-content/ uploads/2017/10/How-Occupational-Licensing-Inhibits-EconomicOpportunity-10-23-17.pdf NCSHA ( National Council of State Housing Agencies ) Opportunity Zone Target Investment Surges to Nearly $ Billion Nationwide. https : //www.cdfifund gov/Documents/Summit % % 20Compliance % 20Review % 20of % 20New % Markets % 20Tax % 20Credit % 20Program % % 20August % 20Date % % % 20Compliant.pdf Nunn R. J. Parsons and J. Shambaugh. The Geography of Prosperity. In PlaceBased Policies for Shared Economic Growth edited by J. Shambaugh and R Nunn. Washington : Brookings Institution. Office of Family Assistance. TANF Caseload Data U.S. Department of Health and Human Services https : //www.acf.hhs.gov/ofa/resource/tanf-caseload-data-2018 | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Real Capital Analytics. U.S. Opportunity Zones : A Baseline. https : //www.rcanalytics com/opportunity-zones-baseline/ Roder A. and M. Elliot. Nine Year Gains : Project QUEST s Continuing Impact. Economic Mobility Corporation. https : //economicmobilitycorp.org/ wp-content/uploads/2019/04/NineYearGains_web.pdf Sage A. M. Langen and A. Van de Minne. Where Is the Opportunity in Opportunity Zones ? Early Indicators of the Opportunity Zone Program s Impact on Commercial Property Prices. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/ papers.cfm ? abstract_id = Schnepel K. Good Jobs and Recidivism. Economic Journal : Szafran R. Age-Adjusted Labor Force Participation Rates Monthly Labor Review : U.S. Census Bureau. Income and Poverty in the United States : https : // www.census.gov/library/publications/2019/demo/p60-266.html White House. Occupational Licensing : A Framework for Policymakers. https : // obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/docs/licensing_report_ final_nonembargo.pdf Woetzel J. A. Madgavkar K. Ellingrud E. Labaye S. Devillard E. Kutcher J. Manyika R Dobbs and M. Krishnan. The Power of Parity : How Advancing Women s Equality Can Add $ Trillion to Global Growth. McKinsey Global Institute World Bank. Levelling the Field : Improving Opportunities for Women Farmers in Africa. https : //www.one.org/international/policy/ levelling-the-field-improving-opportunities-for-women-farmers-in-africa/ Chapter AARP ( American Association of Retired Persons ) Workplace Retirement Plans Will Help Workers Build Economic Security. https : //www.aarp.org/content/ dam/aarp/ppi/2014-10/aarp-workplace-retirement-plans-build-economicsecurity.pdf Al-Ubaydli O. and P. McLaughlin. RegData : A Numerical Database on IndustrySpecific Regulations for All U.S. Industries and Federal Regulations Working paper. Arlington VA : Mercatus Center at George Mason University Arrow K. and J. Kalt. Petroleum Price Regulation : Should We Decontrol ? Studies in Energy Policy. Washington : American Enterprise Institute Becker G. D. Carlton and H. Sider. Net Neutrality and Consumer Welfare. Journal of Competition Law and Economics Belfield C. A. Bowden and V. Rodriguez. Evaluating Regulatory Impact Assessments in Education Policy. American Journal of Evaluation Bento A. K. Gilingham M. Jacobsen C. Knittel B. Leard and J. Linn. Flawed Analyses of U.S. Auto Fuel Economy Standards. Science no. : References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Berry S. J. Levinsohn and A. Pakes. Differentiated Products Demand Systems from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data : The New Car Market. Journal of Political Economy no. : Bernheim B. A. Fradkin and I. Popov. The Welfare Economics of Default Options in ( k ) Plans. American Economic Review no. : Brown P. Statement Submitted to the House Committee on Education and the Workforce. April Brynjolfsson E. F. Eggers and A. Gannamaneni. Using Massive Online Choice Experiments to Measure Changes in Well-Being. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Busse M. C. Knittel and F. Zettelmeyer. Are Consumers Myopic ? Evidence from New and Used Car Purchases. American Economic Review no. : CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) 2018a. Economic Report of the President Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office 2018b. The Administration s FDA Reforms and Reduced Biopharmaceutical Drug Prices. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/ The-Administrations-FDA-Reforms-and-Reduced-Biopharmaceutical-DrugPrices.pdf 2019a. Deregulating Health Insurance Markets : Value to Market Participants. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/DeregulatingHealth-Insurance-Markets-FINAL.pdf 2019b. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office 2019c. The Economic Effects of Federal Deregulation since January : An Interim Report. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/ The-Economic-Effects-of-Federal-Deregulation-Interim-Report.pdf Chetty R. Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis : A Bridge Between Structural and Reduced-Form Methods. Annual Review of Economics : Congressional Budget Office. The Economic Costs of Fuel Economy Standards versus a Gasoline Tax. Covert T. and R. Kellogg. Crude by Rail Option Value and Pipeline Investment NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Cummings S. Preliminary Injunction Order in NFIB vs. Perez. Dahlby B. The Marginal Cost of Public Funds : Theory and Applications Cambridge MA : MIT Press Davis L. and L. Kilian. The Allocative Cost of Price Ceilings in the U.S Residential Market for Natural Gas. Journal of Political Economy no. : DOL ( U.S. Department of Labor ) U.S. Department of Labor Rescinds Persuader Rule. News release July https : //www.dol.gov/newsroom/ releases/olms/olms20180717 | 250-840_text_.pdf References 2/7/20 : PM Eilperin J. In a Setback for Unions Labor Department Moves to Revoke Obama-Era Persuader Rule. June https : //www.washingtonpost.com/ news/wonk/wp/2017/06/09/ in-a-setback-for-unions-labor-department-moves-to-revoke-obama-erapersuader-rule/ Feldman R. J. Schmidt and K. Heinecke. Quantifying the Costs of Additional Regulation on Community Banks. Economic Policy Paper Minneapolis : Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Fenn P. and C. Veljanovski. A Positive Economic Theory of Regulatory Enforcement. Economic Journal no. : Furchtgott-Roth D. The High Costs of Proposed New Labor-Law Regulations. Manhattan Institute Issue Brief updated Furth S. and D. Kreutzer. Fuel Economy Standards Are a Costly Mistake Washington : Heritage Foundation Goolsbee A. The Value of Broadband and the Deadweight Loss of Taxing New Technology. Contributions to Economic Analysis and Policy no. : article Goulder L. I. Parry and R. Williams III. The Cost-Effectiveness of Alternative Instruments for Environmental Protection in a Second-Best Setting. Journal of Public Economics no : Goulder L. and R. Williams III. The Substantial Bias from Ignoring General Equilibrium Effects in Estimating Excess Burden and a Practical Solution. Journal of Political Economy no. : Harberger A. The Measurement of Waste. American Economic Review no. : Harrington W. R. Morgenstern and P. Nelson. On the Accuracy of Regulatory Cost Estimates. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : Haveman R. and B. Weisbrod. Defining Benefits of Public Programs : Some Guidance for Policy Analysts. Policy Analysis no. : Hayden K. Illinois First State in U.S. to Pass Mandatory Secure Choice Retirement Savings. HR Source. https : //www.hrsource.org/maimis/ Members/Articles/2018/11/November_27/Illinois_First_State_in_U.S._to_ Pass_Mandatory_Secure_Choice_Retirement_Savings_Via_AARP_Illinois aspx Hazlett T. and A. Caliskan. Natural Experiments in U.S. Broadband Regulation. Review of Network Economics no. : Hopkins J. Illinois Enacts Automatic IRAs ; Is Federal Mandate Coming ? Forbes January https : //www.forbes.com/sites/jamiehopkins/2015/01/07/ automatic-enrollment-iras-first-government-mandated-automatic-ira-isenacted-in-illinois/ # 4f37805e290c Koetter M. J. Kolari and L. Spierdijk. Enjoying the Quiet Life Under Deregulation ? Evidence from Adjusted Lerner Indices for U.S. Banks. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Lazaer E. Why Is there Mandatory Retirement ? Journal of Political Economy no. : Agency Earnings Profiles Productivity and Hours Restrictions. American Economic Review no. : Madrian B. and D. Shea. The Power of Suggestion : Inertia in ( k ) Participation and Savings Behavior. Quarterly Journal of Economics no : McDevitt R. and A. Sojourner. Demand Regulation and Welfare on the Margin of Alternative Financial Services. Working paper Duke University Mortensen D. Nobel Lecture : Markets with Search Friction and the DMP Model. https : //www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/mortensen-lecture.pdf Murphy R. Removing the 1970s Crude Oil Price Controls : Lessons for FreeMarket Reform. Journal of Private Enterprise no. : Murray Energy Corporation v. U.S. Department of the Interior. https : //www courthousenews.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/murraysuit.pdf NCSL ( National Conference of State Legislatures ) State-Facilitated Retirement Savings Programs for Private Sector Workers. http : //www.ncsl.org/research/ fiscal-policy/state-facilitated-retirement-savings-programs-for-private-sectorworkers.aspx NFIB v. Perez ( National Federation of Independent Business v. Perez ) http : //www constangy.net/nr_images/nfib-v-perez-pI-order.pdf OMB ( Office of Management and Budget ) Circular A-94 : Guidelines and Discount Rates for Benefit-Cost Analysis of Federal Programs. https : //www whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/circulars/A94/a094.pdf Circular A-4 : Regulatory Impact Analysis A Primer. https : // obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/omb/circulars_a004_a-4/ Guidance Implementing Executive Order Titled Reducing Regulation and Controlling Regulatory Costs. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/memoranda/2017/M-17-21-OMB.pdf Regulatory Reform : Regulatory Budget for Fiscal Year https : //www reginfo.gov/public/pdf/eo13771/EO_13771_Regulatory_Budget_for_Fiscal_ Year_2019.pdf Panis C. and M. Brien. Target Populations of State-Level Automatic IRA Initiatives. Department of Labor. https : //www.dol.gov/sites/default/files/ ebsa/researchers/analysis/retirement/target-populations-of-state-levelautomatic-ira-initiatives.pdf Parrillo N. Should the Public Get to Participate Before Federal Agencies Issue Guidance ? An Empirical Study. Administrative Law Review no. : Parry I. R. Williams III and L. Goulder. When Can Carbon Abatement Policies Increase Welfare ? The Fundamental Role of Distorted Factor Markets. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management no. : | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Public Citizen. Shining a Light of the Midnight Rule Boogeyman : An Analysis of Economically Significant Final Rules Reviewed by OIRA. Washington : Public Citizen Roehrig C. The Impact of Prescription Drug Rebates on Health Plans and Consumers. Ann Arbor MI : Altarum Institute Sheetz M. Teva Stock Plummets % After Rough Quarter in U.S. Generic Drug Market. CNBC August https : //finance.yahoo.com/news/teva-stockplummets-18-rough-135334052.html Staten M. and F. Cate. The Impact of Opt-In Privacy Rules on Retail Credit Markets : A Case Study of MBNA. Duke Law Journal : State of Oregon. 78th Oregon Legislative Assembly : Regular Session Enrolled House Bill https : //olis.leg.state.or.us/liz/2015R1/Downloads/ MeasureDocument/HB2960/Enrolled Tankersley J. Fed Dimming Its Economic Outlook Predicts No Rate Increases This Year. New York Times March https : //www.nytimes.com/2019/03/20/ us/politics/fed-rates.html UC Berkeley Labor Center. California Secure Choice Retirement Savings Program ( SB ) : FAQ for Unions and Union Members. http : //laborcenter.berkeley edu/pdf/2017/SB-1234-Fact-Sheet.pdf U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. Decision in Organization for Competitive Markets et al. v. U.S.D.A. U.S. Department of the Treasury. Limiting Consumer Choice Expanding Costly Litigation : An Analysis of the CFPB Arbitration Rule Winston C. Economic Deregulation : Days of Reckoning for Microeconomists. Journal of Economic Literature : Chapter Alvarez R. D. Zavala-Araiza D. Lyon D. Allen Z. Barkley A. Brandt K. Davis S Herndon D. Jacob A. Karion and E. Kort. Assessment of Methane Emissions from the U.S. Oil and Gas Supply Chain. Science no. : Avalos R. T. Fitzgerald and R. Rucker. Measuring the Effects of Natural Gas Pipeline Constraints on Regional Pricing and Market Integration. Energy Economics : Barteczko A. Poland and Lithuania see Nord Stream as Threat to Energy Security. Reuters. Edited by Jason Neely. https : //www.reuters.com/article/ us-poland-lithuania-nordstream2/ poland-and-lithuania-see-nord-stream-2-as-threat-to-energy-securityidUSKBN1W20TQ Bartik A. J. Currie M. Greenstone and C. Knittel. The Local Economic and Welfare Consequences of Hydraulic Fracturing. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Baumeister C. and L. Kilian. Lower Oil Prices and the U.S. Economy : Is this Time Different ? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : Borenstein S. and J. Bushnell. The U.S. Electricity Industry After Years of Restructuring. Annual Review of Economics no. : Boslett A. T. Guilfoos and C. Lang. Valuation of Expectations : A Hedonic Study of Shale Gas Development and New York s Moratorium. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management : Brown J. T. Fitzgerald and J. Weber. Capturing Rents from Natural Resource Abundance : Private Royalties from U.S. Onshore Oil & Gas Production. Resource and Energy Economics : Caldara D. M. Iacoviello P. Molligo A. Prestipino and A. Raffo. Does Trade Policy Uncertainty Affect Global Economic Activity ? FEDS Notes. Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Cavallo M. Oil Prices and the U.S. Trade Deficit. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter. http : //www.frbsf.org/economic-research/ publications/economic-letter/2006/september/ oil-prices-and-the-us-trade-deficit/ CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) The Value of U.S. Energy Innovation and Policies Supporting the Shale Revolution. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2019/10/The-Value-of-U.S.-Energy-Innovation-andPolicies-Supporting-the-Shale-Revolution.pdf Coglianese J. T. Gerarden and J. Stock. The Effects of Fuel Prices Regulations and Other Factors on U.S. Energy Journal no. forthcoming https : //scholar.harvard.edu/files/stock/files/coglianese_gerarden_stock.pdf CRS ( Congressional Research Service ) Nuclear Energy : Overview of Congressional Issues. https : //fas.org/sgp/crs/row/IF10715.pdf Venezuela : Overview of U.S. Sanctions. https : //fas.org/sgp/crs/row/ IF10715.pdf Currie J. M. Greenstone and K. Meckel. Hydraulic Fracturing and Infant Health : New Evidence from Pennsylvania. Science Advances no. : Darrah T. A. Vengosh R. Jackson N. Warner and R. Poreda Noble Gases Identify the Mechanisms of Fugitive Gas Contamination in Drinking-Water Wells Overlying the Marcellus and Barnett Shales. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. : DOT ( Department of the Treasury ) Iran Sanctions. https : //www.treasury.gov/ resource-center/sanctions/programs/pages/iran.aspx EIA ( U.S. Energy Information Administration ) Trends in U.S. Oil and Natural Gas Upstream Costs. https : //www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/drilling/pdf/ upstream.pdf 2019a. EIA Estimates of Drilled but Uncompleted Wells ( DUCs ) https : //www eia.gov/petroleum/drilling/pdf/duc_supplement.pdf | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 2019b. Fossil Fuels Continue to Account for the Largest Share of U.S. Energy. Today in Energy. https : //www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php ? id = 2019c. Annual Energy Outlook with Projections to https : //www.eia gov/outlooks/aeo/pdf/aeo2019.pdf 2019d. The United States Is Expected to Export More Energy Than It Imports by Today in Energy. https : //www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail php ? id = 2018a. The United States Exported More Natural Gas Than It Imported in Today in Energy. https : //www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php ? id = 2018b. U.S. Crude Oil Production Efficiency Continues to Improve. Today in Energy. https : //www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php ? id = Fell H. and D. Kaffine. The Fall of Coal : Joint Impacts of Fuel Prices and Renewables on Generation and Emissions. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Feyrer J. E. Mansur and B. Sacerdote. Geographic Dispersion of Economic Shocks : Evidence from the Fracking Revolution. American Economic Review no. : Financial Times. In Charts : Has the U.S. Shale Drilling Revolution Peaked ? https : //www.ft.com/content/e17930dc-b288-11e7-a398-73d59db9e399 Fitzgerald T. Importance of Mineral Rights and Royalty Interests for Rural Residents and Landowners. Choices no. : Gillingham K. and J. Stock. The Cost of Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Gopalakrishnan S. and H. Klaiber. Is the Shale Energy Boom a Bust for Nearby Residents ? Evidence from Housing Values in Pennsylvania. American Journal of Agricultural Economics no. : Gordon D. The Carbon Contained in Global Oils vol. Washington : Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Graham J. J. Irving X. Tang S. Sellers J. Crisp D. Horwitz L. Muehlenbachs A Krupnick and D. Carey. Increased Traffic Accident Rates Associated with Shale Gas Drilling in Pennsylvania. Accident Analysis & Prevention : Greene D. Measuring Energy Security : Can the United States Achieve Oil Independence ? Energy Policy no. : Greenstone M. and I. Nath. Do Renewable Portfolio Standards Deliver ? Energy Policy Institute at the University of Chicago Working Paper Hamilton J. Historical Oil Shocks. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/ w16790.pdf Hausman C. and R. Kellogg. Welfare and Distributional Implications of Shale Gas. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Homans C. Energy Independence : A Short History. Foreign Policy January https : //foreignpolicy.com/2012/01/03/energy-independence-a-short-history/ Hill E. and L. Ma. Shale Gas Development and Drinking Water Quality. American Economic Review no. : IEA ( International Energy Agency ) United States Review. https : //webstore iea.org/energy-policies-of-iea-countries-united-states-2019-review Jacobsen G. Who Wins in an Energy Boom ? Evidence from Wage Rates and Housing. Economic Inquiry no : Johnsen R. J. LaRiviere and H. Wolff. Fracking Coal and Air Quality. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists no. : Johnson E. The Cost of Carbon Dioxide Abatement from State Renewable Portfolio Standards. Resource and Energy Economics no. : Keranen K. M. Weingarten G. Abers B. Bekins and S. Ge. Sharp Increase in Central Oklahoma Seismicity since Induced by Massive Wastewater Injection. Science no. : Kilian L. The Impact of the Fracking Boom on Arab Oil Producers. The Energy Journal International Association of Energy Economics no. The Impact of the Shale Oil Revolution on U.S. Oil and Gasoline Prices Working Paper Munich : CESifo Komarek T. Labor Market Dynamics and the Unconventional Natural Gas Boom : Evidence from the Marcellus Region. Resource and Energy Economics : Linn J. L. Muehlenbachs and Y. Wang. How Do Natural Gas Prices Affect Electricity Consumers and the Environment ? RFF Discussion Paper Washington : Resources for the Future Litovitz A. A. Curtright S. Abramzon N. Burger and C. Samaras. Estimation of Regional Air-quality Damages from Marcellus Shale Natural Gas Extraction in Pennsylvania. Environmental Research Letters no. : MacAvoy P. The Natural Gas Market : Sixty Years of Regulation and Deregulation New Haven CT : Yale University Press Marchand J. and J. Weber. How Local Economic Conditions Affect School Finances Teacher Quality and Student Achievement : Evidence from the Texas Shale Boom. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management forthcoming Martin R. M. Mu ls and U. Wagner. The Impact of the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme on Regulated Firms : What Is the Evidence after Ten Years ? Review of Environmental Economics and Policy no. : Mathur A. and A. Morris. Distributional Effects of a Carbon Tax in Broader U.S Fiscal Reform. Energy Policy Muehlegger E. and R. Sweeney. Pass-Through of Input Cost Shocks Under Imperfect Competition : Evidence from the U.S. Fracking Boom. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research | 250-840_text_.pdf References 2/7/20 : PM Muehlenbachs L. E. Spiller and C. Timmins. The Housing Market Impacts of Shale Gas Development. American Economic Review no. : Newell R. and D. Raimi. The Fiscal Impacts of Increased U.S. Oil and Gas Development on Local Governments. Energy Policy : Newell R. B. Prest and A. Vissing. Trophy Hunting versus Manufacturing Energy : The Price-Responsiveness of Shale Gas. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists no. : Oliver M. C. Mason and D. Finnoff. Pipeline Congestion and Basis Differentials. Journal of Regulatory Economics no. : Wang Z. and A. Krupnick. A Retrospective Review of Shale Gas Development in the United States : What Led to the Boom ? Economics of Energy & Environmental Policy no. : Weber J. J. Burnett and I. Xiarchos. Broadening Benefits from Natural Resource Extraction : Housing Values and Taxation of Natural Gas Wells as Property. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : Weber J. Y. Wang and M. Chomas. A Quantitative Description of State-Level Taxation of Oil and Gas Production in the Continental U.S. Energy Policy : Wrenn D. H. Klaiber and E. Jaenicke. Unconventional Shale Gas Development Risk Perceptions and Averting Behavior : Evidence From Bottled Water Purchases. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists no. : Chapter AHIP ( America s Health Insurance Plans ) Health Savings Accounts and Consumer-Directed Health Plans Grow as Valuable Financial Planning Tools. https : //www.ahip.org/2017-survey-of-health-savings-accounts/ Aitken M. E. Berndt D. Cutler M. Kleinrock and L. Maini. Has the Era of Slow Growth for Prescription Drug Spending Ended ? Health Affairs no. : American Medical Association. U.S. Justice Department Should Block CVS-Aetna Merger. https : //www.ama-assn.org/delivering-care/patient-supportadvocacy/us-justice-department-should-block-cvs-aetna-merger Armour S. Premiums for ACA Health Plans Are Set to Drop in Wall Street Journal October https : //www.wsj.com/articles/ premiums-for-aca-health-plans-are-set-to-drop-in-2020-11571749200 Aron-Dine A. CBO : Administration s Short-Term Plans Rule Means a Return to Pre-ACA Practices. Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. https : //www.cbpp org/blog/ cbo-administrations-short-term-plans-rule-means-a-return-to-pre-acapractices References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Azar A. Ending the HIV Epidemic : A Plan for America. Department of Health & Human Services. https : //www.hhs.gov/blog/2019/02/05/ending-the-hivepidemic-a-plan-for-america.html Badger D. Obamacare Caused Premiums to Spike ; Here s How States Are Lowering Them Again. Heritage Foundation. https : //www.heritage.org/ health-care-reform/commentary/ obamacare-caused-premiums-spike-heres-how-states-are-lowering-them Berchick E. J. Barnett and R. Upton. Health Insurance Coverage in the United States : U.S. Census Bureau Report P60-267. Washington : U.S Government Publishing Office Berry S. M. Gaynor and F. Morton. Do Increasing Markups Matter ? Lessons from Empirical Industrial Organization. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Blase B. 2019a. Health Reform Progress : Beyond Repeal and Replace. Paeonian Springs VA : Galen Institute 2019b. How Price Transparency Would Revolutionize Healthcare. New York Post October https : //nypost.com/2019/10/12/ how-price-transparency-would-revolutionize-healthcare/ Bosworth B. J. Bieler M. Kleinrock E. Koepcke and E. Berndt. An Evaluation of the CPI Indexes for Prescription Drugs. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Boskin M. J. Dulberger R. Gordon Z. Griliches and D. Jorgenson. Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living. Final Report to the Senate Finance Committee December Burns L. and M. Pauly. Transformation of the Health Care Industry : Curb Your Enthusiasm ? Milbank Quarterly no. : Carpenter E. and C. Sloan. Health Plans with More Restrictive Provider Networks Continue to Dominate the Exchange Market. Press release Avalere https : //avalere.com/press-releases/ health-plans-with-more-restrictive-provider-networks-continue-to-dominatethe-exchange-market CBO ( Congressional Budget Office ) How CBO and JCT Analyzed Coverage Effects of New Rules for Association Health Plans and Short-Term Plans. https : //www.cbo.gov/system/files/2019-01/54915-New_Rules_for_AHPs_ STPs.pdf CDC ( Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ) About Chronic Diseases. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion https : //www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/index.htm CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) 2019a. Economic Report of the President Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office 2019b. Deregulating Health Insurance Markets : Value to Market Participants Washington : White House. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2019/02/Deregulating-Health-Insurance-Markets-FINAL.pdf | 250-840_text_.pdf References 2/7/20 : PM 2019c. Measuring Prescription Drug Prices : A Primer on the CPI Prescription Drug Index. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/ Measuring-Prescription-Drug-Prices-A-Primer-on-the-CPI-Prescription-DrugIndex.pdf 2019d. Mitigating the Impact of Pandemic Influenza through Vaccine Innovation Washington : White House. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2019/09/Mitigating-the-Impact-of-Pandemic-Influenza-throughVaccine-Innovation.pdf Reforming Biopharmaceutical Pricing at Home and Abroad. Washington : White House. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/ CEA-Rx-White-Paper-Final2.pdf Census Bureau. Health Insurance Coverage in the United States : https : // www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2019/demo/ p60-267.pdf Chernew M. A. Rosen and A. Fendrick. Value-Based Insurance Design. Health Affairs no. : Claxton G. M. Rae A. Damico G. Young D. McDermott and H. Whitmore. Health Benefits in : Premiums Inch Higher Employers Respond to Federal Policy. Health Affairs no CMS ( Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ) Premiums on the Federallyfacilitated Exchanges drop in https : //www.cms.gov/newsroom/ press-releases/premiums-federally-facilitated-exchanges-drop-2019 2019a. Organ Procurement Organization ( OPO ) Conditions for Coverage Proposed Rule : Revisions to Outcome Measures for OPOs. https : //www.cms gov/newsroom/fact-sheets/ organ-procurement-organization-opo-conditions-coverage-proposed-rulerevisions-outcome-measures-opos 2019b. Premiums for HealthCare.gov Plans are down percent but remain unaffordable to non-subsidized consumers. https : //www.cms.gov/ newsroom/press-releases/ premiums-healthcaregov-plans-are-down-4-percent-remain-unaffordablenon-subsidized-consumers Conrad L. HSAs March Ever Higher Expected to Continue. Entertainment Benefit News. https : //www.benefitnews.com/news/ number-of-hsa-expected-to-continue Cooper Z. S. Gibbons S. Jones and A. McGuire. Does Hospital Competition Save Lives ? Evidence from the English NHS Patient Choice Reforms. Economic Journal no. : Dafny L. K. Ho and M. Varela. Let Them Have Choice : Gains from Shifting Away from Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance and Toward an Individual Exchange. American Economic Journal no. : References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM eHealth Insurance. How Much Does Obamacare Cost in ? June https : // www.ehealthinsurance.com/resources/affordable-care-act/ much-obamacare-cost-2018 Effros R. Increase Cost-Participation by Employees ( e.g. Through HighDeductible Health Plans ) RAND Corporation. https : //www.rand.org/pubs/ technical_reports/TR562z4/analysis-of-high-deductible-health-plans.html Fehr R. R. Kamal and C. Cox. Insurer Participation on ACA Marketplaces Kaiser Family Foundation. https : //www.kff.org/private-insurance/ issue-brief/insurer-participation-on-aca-marketplaces-2014-2020/ Feldman R. S. Parente J. Abraham J. Christianson and R. Taylor. Health Savings Accounts : Early Estimations on National Take-Up. Health Affairs no. Foppa I. P. Cheng S. Reynolds D. Shay C. Carias et al. Deaths Averted by Influenza Vaccination in the U.S. during the Seasons 2005/06 through 2013/14. Vaccine no. : Frogner B. and J. Spetz. Health Policy Debates and the Outlook for Health Care Jobs. Health Affairs Blog November https : //www.healthaffairs.org/ do/10.1377/hblog20171102. 115215/full/ Fuchs V. Managed Care and Merger Mania. Journal of the American Medical Association no. : Gaynor M. and R. Town. The Impact of Hospital Consolidation Update. Synthesis Project Policy Brief no. Gaynor M. K. Ho. and R. Town. The Industrial Organization of Health-Care Markets. Journal of Economic Literature no. : Gee E. C. Peters and J. Wilder. The Year in Review : Economics at the Antitrust Division Review of Industrial Organization : Greene J. J. Hibbard A. Dixon and M. Tusler. Which Consumers Are Ready for Consumer-Driven Health Plans ? Journal of Consumer Policy no. : Haas-Wilson D. and C. Garmon. Hospital Mergers and Competitive Effects : Two Retrospective Analyses. International Journal of the Economics of Business no. : Haefner M. Fitch Solutions : U.S. Economic Burden of Chronic Disease Unparalleled. Beckers Hospital Review. https : //www.beckershospitalreview com/finance/fitch-solutions-us-economic-burden-of-chronic-diseaseunparalleled.html Haviland A. M. Eisenberg A. Mehrotra P. Huckfeldt and N. Sood. Do Consumer-Directed Health Plans Bend the Cost Curve Over Time ? Journal of Health Economics : Haviland A. N. Sood R. McDevitt and S. Marquis. How Do Consumer-Directed Health Plans Affect Vulnerable Populations ? Forum for Health Economics & Policy no. article | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM HCCI ( Health Care Cost Institute ) National Chartbook of Health Care Prices https : //www.healthcostinstitute.org/images/pdfs/ HCCI-National-Chartbook-of-Health-Care-Prices-2015.pdf HHS ( Department of Health and Human Services ) Reforming America s Healthcare System through Choice and Competition. https : //www.hhs.gov/ sites/default/files/Reforming-Americas-Healthcare-System-Through-Choiceand-Competition.pdf 2019a. HHS Announces Quality Summit to Streamline and Improve Quality Programs across Government. https : //www.hhs.gov/about/ news/2019/07/09/hhs-announces-quality-summit-streamline-improvequality-programs-government.html 2019b. HHS Proposes Stark Law and Anti-Kickback Statute Reforms to Support Value-Based and Coordinated Care. https : //www.hhs.gov/about/ news/2019/10/09/hhs-proposes-stark-law-anti-kickback-statute-reforms html 2019c. Statement on Continued Progress Enhancing Patient Access to HighQuality Low-Cost Generic Drugs. https : //www.fda.gov/news-events/ press-announcements/ statement-continued-progress-enhancing-patient-access-high-quality-lowcost-generic-drugs IRS ( Internal Revenue Service ) Employee Benefits Security Administration and HHS ( Department of Health and Human Services ) Health Reimbursement Arrangements and Other Account-Based Group Health Plans. Federal Register no. : Kessler D. and M. McClellan. Is Hospital Competition Socially Wasteful ? Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : KFF ( Kaiser Family Foundation ) Employer Health Benefits Survey. https : //www kff.org/ report-section/2018-employer-health-benefits-survey-section-8-highdeductible-health-plans-with-savings-option/ Moriya A. Vogt W. and Gaynor M. Hospital Prices and Market Structure in the Hospital and Insurance Industries. Health Economics Policy and Law no. : Mulligan C. The Economic Consequences of Health-Care Reform. Chicago : University of Chicago Press NACDD ( National Association of Chronic Disease Directors ) No date. Why Public Health Is Necessary to Improve Healthcare. https : //cdn.ymaws.com/www chronicdisease.org/resource/resmgr/white_papers/cd_white_paper_ hoffman.pdf National Cancer Institute. No date. Cancer Stat Facts : Cancer of Any Site. https : //seer cancer.gov/statfacts/html/all.html NBGH ( National Business Group on Health ) Large U.S. Employers Eye Changes to Health Care Delivery System as Cost to Provide Health Benefits Nears References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM $ per Employee. Press release. https : //www.businessgrouphealth.org/ news/nbgh-news/press-releases/press-release-details/ ? ID = NCCI ( National Council on Compensation Insurance ) The Impact of Hospital Consolidation on Medical Costs. https : //www.ncci.com/Articles/Pages/II_ Insights_QEB_Impact-of-Hospital-Consolidation-on-Medical-Costs.aspx Newman D. S. Parente E. Barette and K. Kennedy. Prices for Common Medical Services Vary Substantially Among the Commercially Insured. Health Affairs no. : OMB ( Office of Management and Budget ) Combatting the Opioid Epidemic Budget Fact Sheet. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2019/03/FY20-Fact-Sheet_Combatting-the-Opioid-Epidemic_FINAL pdf Parente S. and R. Feldman. Micro-Simulation of Private Health Insurance and Medicaid Take-Up Following the U.S. Supreme Court Decision Upholding the Affordable Care Act. Health Services Research no. : Parente S. R. Feldman J. Spetz B. Dowd and E. Baggett. Wage Growth for the Health Care Workforce : Projecting the Affordable Care Act Impact. Health Services Research no. : Parente S. R. Feldman and X. Yu. Impact of Full Replacement with Consumer Driven Health Plan on Health Care Cost and Use of Preventive Services. Insurance Markets and Companies : Analyses and Actuarial Computations no : Sood N. T. Shih K. Van Nuys and D. Goldman. The Flow of Money through the Pharmaceutical Distribution System. Leonard Schaeffer Center for Health Policy and Economics University of Southern California. https : //healthpolicy usc.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/USC_Flow-of-MoneyWhitePaper_ Final_Spreads.pdf Tenn S. The Price Effects of Hospital Mergers : A Case Study of the SutterSummit Transaction. International Journal of the Economics of Business no. : Unger J. R. Vaidya D. Hershman L. Minasian and M. Fleury. Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Magnitude of Structural Clinical and Physician and Patient Barriers to Cancer Clinical Trial Participation. Journal of the National Cancer Institute no. : VBID Health ( Value-Based Insurance Design Health ) Uptake and Federal Budgetary Impact of Allowing Health Savings Account-Eligible High Deductible Health Plans to Cover Chronic Disease Drugs and Services Pre-Deductible. http : //vbidhealth.com/docs/NPC % 20HDHP+ % 20FINAL % 05-30-2019.pdf Vogt W. and R. Town. How Has Hospital Consolidation Affected the Price and Quality of Hospital Care ? Research Synthesis Report no. | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Waters H. and M. Graf. The Cost of Chronic Diseases in the U.S. Milken Institute. https : //assets1b.milkeninstitute.org/assets/Publication/Viewpoint/ PDF/Chronic-Disease-Executive-Summary-r2.pdf White House. 2019a. President Donald J. Trump s Healthcare Agenda Puts Seniors and American Patients First. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/ president-donald-j-trumps-healthcare-agenda-puts-seniors-americanpatients-first/ 2019b. Executive Order on Improving Price and Quality Transparency in American Healthcare to Put Patients First. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ presidential-actions/ executive-order-improving-price-quality-transparency-american-healthcareput-patients-first/ 2019c. Presidential Message on National HIV Testing Day https : //www whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/ presidential-message-national-hiv-testing-day-2019/ 2019d. President Donald J. Trump Is Taking a Bold New Approach to Advance Kidney Health. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/ president-donald-j-trump-taking-bold-new-approach-advance-kidneyhealth/ Willis Towers Watson. NBGH Employer Survey on Value in Purchasing Health Care. https : //www.towerswatson.com/en/Insights/IC-Types/SurveyResearch-Results/2013/03/ Towers-Watson-NBGH-Employer-Survey-on-Value-in-Purchasing-Health-Care Chapter Ashenfelter O. D. Hosken and M. Weinberg. Efficiencies Brewed : Pricing and Consolidation in the US Beer Industry. RAND Journal of Economics no. : Autor D. D. Dorn L. Katz C. Patterson and J. Reenen. The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/ w23396.pdf ; forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of Economics https : // economics.mit.edu/files/12979 Baker J. Taking the Error Out of Error Cost Analysis : What s Wrong with Antitrust s Right. Antitrust Law Journal no. : Basu S. Are Price-Cost Markups Rising in the United States ? A Discussion of the Evidence. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Berry S. M. Carnall and P. Spiller. Airline Hubs : Costs Markups and the Implications of Customer Heterogeneity. In Competition Policy and Antitrust Advances in Airline Economics edited by D. Lee. Bingley U.K. : Emerald Group References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Berry S. M. Gaynor and F. Morton. Do Increasing Markups Matter ? Lessons from Empirical Industrial Organization. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.33.3.44 Bloomberg. FTC Chief Says Willing to Break Up Companies Amid Big Tech Probe. https : //www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-08-13/ ftc-chief-says-willing-to-break-up-companies-amid-big-tech-probe Borenstein S. Why Can t U.S. Airlines Make Money ? American Economic Review : Papers & Proceedings no. : https : //pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/ pdfplus/10.1257/aer.101.3.233 Bourne R. Is This Time Different ? Schumpeter the Tech Giants and Monopoly Fatalism. CATO Institute. https : //www.cato.org/publications/policy-analysis/ time-different-schumpeter-tech-giants-monopoly-fatalism Bresnahan T. Empirical Studies of Industries with Market Power. In Handbook of Industrial Organization edited by R. Schmalensee and R. Willig Amsterdam : Elsevier Science CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Benefits of Competition and Indicators of Market Power. https : //obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/ page/files/20160414_cea_competition_issue_brief.pdf 2018a. Reforming Biopharmaceutical Pricing at Home and Abroad. https : // www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/CEA-Rx-White-PaperFinal2.pdf 2018b. The Administration s FDA Reforms and Reduced Biopharmaceutical Drug Prices. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/ The-Administrations-FDA-Reforms-and-Reduced-Biopharmaceutical-DrugPrices.pdf Chugh R. N. Goldstein E. Lewis J. Lien D. Minehart and N. Rose. Economics at the Antitrust Division : Household Appliances Oil Field Services and Airport Slots. Review of Industrial Organization no. : https : // www.justice.gov/atr/public-documents/rio-annual-review-articles Cr mer J. Y. Montjoye and H. Schweitzer. Competition Policy for the Digital Era Brussels : European Commission. https : //ec.europa.eu/competition/ publications/reports/kd0419345enn.pdf Crouzet N. and J. Eberly. Understanding Weak Capital Investment : The Role of Market Concentration and Intangibles. Paper prepared for Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium. https : //www.kellogg.northwestern.edu/faculty/ crouzet/html/papers/IntangiblesInvestmentConcentration_latest.pdf Cunningham C. F. Ederer and S. Ma. Killer Acquisitions. Working paper https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm ? abstract_id = Demsetz H. Industry Structure Market Rivalry and Public Policy. Journal of Law and Economics no. : Digital Competition Expert Panel. 2019a. Public Responses to Call for Evidence from Individuals. Chaired by J. Furman. https : //assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/ | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/785548/DCEP_ Public_responses_to_call_for_evidence_from_individuals.pdf 2019b. Public Responses to Call for Evidence from Organisations. https : // assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ attachment_data/file/785549/DCEP_Public_responses_to_call_for_ evidence_from_organisations.pdf 2019c. Unlocking Digital Competition. https : //assets.publishing.service.gov uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/785547/ unlocking_digital_competition_furman_review_web.pdf DOJ ( U.S. Department of Justice ) United States v. The Thomson Corp. and Reuters Group PLC. Competitive Impact Statement case : civil action https : //www.justice.gov/atr/case-document/ competitive-impact-statement-207 2011a. United States v. George s Foods LLC ; George s Family Farms LLC ; and George s Inc. Competitive Impact Statement case : civil action https : //www.justice.gov/atr/case-document/file/497376/download 2011b. United States v. George s Foods LLC ; George s Family Farms LLC ; and George s Inc. Complaint case : civil action https : //www.justice gov/atr/case-document/file/497411/download United States v. Halliburton Co LLC ; and Baker Hughes Inc. Complaint case : civil action https : //www.justice.gov/atr/file/838661/download 2018a. The Walt Disney Company Required to Divest Twenty-Two Regional Sports Networks in Order to Complete Acquisition of Certain Assets from Twenty-First Century Fox. https : //www.justice.gov/opa/pr/ walt-disney-company-required-divest-twenty-two-regional-sports-networksorder-complete 2018b. United States v. The Walt Disney Company and Twenty-First Century Fox Inc. Case : civil action https : //www.justice.gov/atr/case-document/ file/1075201/download Justice Department Reviewing Practices of Market Leading Online Platforms. https : //www.justice.gov/opa/pr/ justice-department-reviewing-practices-market-leading-online-platforms DOJ and FTC ( Department of Justice and Federal Trade Commission ) Horizontal Merger Guidelines. https : //www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/atr/ legacy/2010/08/19/hmg-2010.pdf Antitrust Guidelines for the Licensing of Intellectual Property. https : // www.justice.gov/atr/IPguidelines/download 2019a. Hart-Scott Rodino Annual Report : Fiscal Year Annual Competition https : //www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/ federal-trade-commission-bureau-competition-department-justice-antitrustdivision-hart-scott-rodino/fy18hsrreport.pdf 2019b. Joint Letter from the FTC and DOJ to Alaska State Senate. https : //www justice.gov/atr/page/file/1146346/download References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 2019c. Joint Letter from the FTC and DOJ to Nebraska Legislature. https : // www.justice.gov/atr/page/file/1146236/download 2019d. Joint Letter from the FTC and DOJ to Tennessee House of Representatives. https : //www.justice.gov/atr/page/file/1146241/download European Commission. Platform-to-Business Trading Practices. https : // ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/ platforms-to-business-trading-practices Faccio M. and L. Zingales. Political Determinants of Competition in the Mobile Telecommunication Industry. Finance Working Paper 494/2016. Brussels : European Corporate Governance Institute FTC ( Federal Trade Commission ) 2018a. Options to Enhance Occupational License Portability. Policy Perspectives. https : //www.ftc.gov/system/files/ documents/reports/options-enhance-occupational-license-portability/ license_portability_policy_paper.pdf 2018b. United States of America before the Federal Trade Commission. Docket https : //www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/cases/docket_no_9382_ cdk_automate_part_3_complaint_redacted_public_version_0.pdf 2019a. FTC Staff Issues FY Report on Branded Drug Firms Patent Settlements with Generic Competitors. https : //www.ftc.gov/news-events/ press-releases/2019/05/ ftc-staff-issues-fy-2016-report-branded-drug-firms-patent 2019b. Hearings on Competition and Consumer Protection in the 21st Century. https : //www.ftc.gov/policy/hearings-competition-consumer-protection 2019c. State-Based Initiatives : Selected Examples. https : //www.ftc.gov/policy/ advocacy/economic-liberty/state-based-initiatives 2019d. The Antitrust Laws. https : //www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/competitionguidance/guide-antitrust-laws/antitrust-laws Furman J. Market Concentration : Note by Jason Furman. Hearing on Market Concentration Prepared Testimony Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. https : //one.oecd.org/document/DAF/COMP/WD ( ) 67/ en/pdf Furman J. and P. Orszag. A Firm-Level Perspective on the Role of Rents in the Rise of Inequality. In Towards a Just Society : Joseph Stiglitz and Twenty-First Century Economics edited by Martin Guzman. New York : Columbia University Press Gee E. C. Peters and J. Wilder. The Year in Review : Economics at the Antitrust Division Review of Industrial Organization no. : Grullon G. Y. Larkin and R. Michaely. Are U.S. Industries Becoming More Concentrated ? Review of Finance no. : https : //academic.oup com/rof/article/23/4/697/5477414 Guti rrez G. and T. Philippon. 2017a. Declining Competition and Investment in the U.S NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w23583.pdf | 250-840_text_.pdf References 2/7/20 : PM 2017b. Investment-Less Growth : An Empirical Investigation. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www nber.org/papers/w22897.pdf How EU Markets Became More Competitive than U.S. Markets : A Study of Institutional Drift. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w24700.pdf Heyer K. C. Shapiro and J. Wilder. The Year in Review : Economics at the Antitrust Division Review of Industrial Organization : https : //doi.org/10.1007/s11151-009-9232-1 Igami M. and K. Uetake. Mergers Innovation and Entry-Exit Dynamics : Consolidation of the Hard Disk Drive Industry Review of Economic Studies forthcoming Jia J. G. Jin and L. Wagman. GDPR and the Localness of Venture Investment. Working paper. http : //dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3436535 Krugman P. Robber Baron Recessions. New York Times April https : //www nytimes.com/2016/04/18/opinion/robber-baron-recessions.html Kwoka J. Mergers Merger Control and Remedies : A Retrospective Analysis of U.S Policy. Cambridge MA : MIT Press Lambrecht A. and C. Tucker. Can Big Data Protect a Firm from Competition ? http : //ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/image/ document/2016-6/computer_and_communications_industry_association_-_ can_big_data_protect_a_firm_from_competition_13846.pdf Lamoreaux N. The Problem of Bigness : From Standard Oil to Google. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/ pdfplus/10.1257/jep.33.3.94 Lee R. Vertical Integration and Exclusivity in Platform and Two-Sided Markets. American Economic Review no. : http : //www.people.fas harvard.edu/ ~ robinlee/papers/VIExclusivity.pdf Mahnke R. Big Data as a Barrier to Entry. Competition Policy International https : //www.competitionpolicyinternational.com/ big-data-as-a-barrier-to-entry/ Marshall G. and A. Parra. Innovation and Competition : The Role of the Product Market. International Journal of Industrial Organization : Miller N. and M. Weinberg. Understanding the Pricing Effects of the MillerCoors Joint Venture. Econometrica no. : Ohlhausen M. Written Statement of Proposed Testimony to U.S. House of Representatives Hearing on Online Platforms and Market Power Part : Innovation and Entrepreneurship. https : //docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/ JU05/20190716/109793/HHRG-116-JU05-Wstate-OhlhausenM-20190716.pdf https : //docs.house.gov/meetings/JU/JU05/20190716/109793/HHRG-116JU05-Wstate-OhlhausenM-20190716.pdf References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Pai A. Remarks of the FCC Commissioner Ajit Pai at TechFreedom s Forum on the 100th Anniversary of the Kingsbury Commitment. https : //www.fcc.gov/ document/pai-remarks-100th-anniversary-kingsbury-commitment Peltzman S. Industrial Concentration under the Rule of Reason. Journal of Law and Economics no. S3 : Philippon T. The Great Reversal : How American Gave Up on Free Markets Cambridge MA : Belknap Press of Harvard University Press Rossi-Hansberg E. P. Sarte and N. Trachter. Diverging Trends in National and Local Concentration. NBER Working Paper https : //www.princeton edu/ ~ erossi/DTNLC.pdf Rubinfeld D. and M. Gal. Access Barriers to Big Data. Arizona Law Review no. : http : //arizonalawreview.org/pdf/59-2/59arizlrev339.pdf Shapiro C. The Horizontal Merger Guidelines : From Hedgehog to Fox in Forty Years. Antitrust Law Journal no. : https : //heinonline.org/ HOL/Page ? handle = hein.journals/antil77&id = 53&collection = journals&index = # Antitrust in a Time of Populism. International Journal of Industrial Organization : Protecting Competition in the American Economy : Merger Control Tech Titans Labor Markets. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/jep.33.3.69 Stigler Committee on Digital Platforms. Final Report. Chicago : Booth School of Business at University of Chicago. https : //research.chicagobooth.edu/-/ media/research/stigler/pdfs/digital-platforms---committee-report---stiglercenter.pdf Syverson C. Macroeconomics and Market Power : Context Implications and Open Questions. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : // faculty.chicagobooth.edu/chad.syverson/research/macromarketpowerjep pdf Economist. Too Much of a Good Thing. March https : //www.economist.com/ briefing/2016/03/26/too-much-of-a-good-thing U.S. Congress. 2019a. S.307 116th Congress ( ) https : //www.congress.gov/ bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/307/text 2019b. S.2658 116th Congress ( ) https : //www.congress.gov/ bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/2658/text ? r = 2&s = U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary. 2019a. Online Platforms and Market Power Part : The Free and Diverse Press. June https : //judiciary.house.gov/ legislation/hearings/ online-platforms-and-market-power-part-1-free-and-diverse-press 2019b. Online Platforms and Market Power Part : Innovation and Entrepreneurship. July https : //judiciary.house.gov/legislation/hearings/ online-platforms-and-market-power-part-2-innovation-andentrepreneurship | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 2019c. Online Platforms and Market Power Part : The Role of Data and Privacy in Competition. September https : //judiciary.house.gov/legislation/ hearings/ online-platforms-and-market-power-part-3-role-data-and-privacycompetition-0 U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary Subcommittee on Antitrust Competition Policy and Consumer Rights. Competition in Digital Technology Markets : Examining Acquisitions of Nascent or Potential Competitors by Digital Platforms. September https : //www.judiciary.senate.gov/ meetings/ competition-in-digital-technology-markets-examining-acquisitions-ofnascent-or-potential-competitors-by-digital-platforms Werden G. Network Effects and Conditions of Entry : Lessons from the Microsoft Case. Antitrust Law Journal no. : https : //heinonline.org/HOL/ Page ? collection = journals&handle = hein.journals/ antil69&id = 95&men_tab = srchresults # Werden G. and L. Froeb. Don t Panic : A Guide to Claims of Increasing Concentration. Antitrust Magazine no. : Wessel D. Is Lack of Competition Strangling the U.S. Economy ? Harvard Business Review March. https : //hbr.org/2018/03/ is-lack-of-competition-strangling-the-u-s-economy White House. Executive Order : Steps to Increase Competition and Better Inform Consumers and Workers to Support Continued Growth of the American Economy. https : //obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-pressoffice/2016/04/15/ executive-order-steps-increase-competition-and-better-inform-consumers Wilson C. Welfare Standards Underlying Antitrust Enforcement : What You Measure is What You Get. Luncheon keynote address at George Mason Law Review 22nd annual Antitrust Symposium. https : //www.ftc.gov/es/system/ files/documents/public_statements/1455663/welfare_standard_speech_-_ cmr-wilson.pdf Wu T. The Curse of Bigness : Antitrust in the New Gilded Age. New York : Columbia Global Reports Yun J. Competition in Digital Technology Markets : Examining Acquisitions of Nascent or Potential Competitors by Digital Platforms. Prepared statement for U.S. Senate. https : //www.judiciary.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/Yun % Testimony.pdf Chapter Ahmad F. L. Rossen M. Spencer M. Warner and P. Sutton. Provisional Drug Overdose Death Counts. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Center for Health Statistics. https : //www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/ drug-overdose-data.htm References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Alpert A. D. Powell and R. Pacula. Supply-Side Drug Policy in the Presence of Substitutes : Evidence from the Introduction of Abuse-Deterrent Opioids. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : ASTHO ( Association of State and Territorial Health Officials ) State Legislation Addressing Naloxone. http : //www.astho.org/ StatePublicHealth/2018-State-Legislation-Addressing-Naloxone/04-05-18/ Autor D. The Unsustainable Rise of the Disability Rolls in the United States : Causes Consequences and Policy Options. In Social Policies in an Age of Austerity : A Comparative Analysis of the U.S. and Korea edited by J. Scholz H Moon and S. Lee. Northampton MA : Edward Elgar Becker G. Irrational Behavior and Economic Theory. Journal of Political Economy no. : Becker G. and K. Murphy. A Theory of Rational Addiction. Journal of Political Economy no. : Besley T. Optimal Reimbursement Health Insurance and the Theory of Ramsey Taxation. Journal of Health Economics no. : Bretteville-Jensen A. Drug Demand Initiation Continuation and Quitting. De Economist no. : Bretteville-Jensen A. and E. Biorn. Heroin Consumption Prices and Addiction : Evidence from Self-Reported Panel Data. Scandinavian Journal of Economics no. : Buchmueller T. and C. Carey. The Effect of Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs on Opioid Utilization in Medicare. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Cardinal Health Inc. Distributors Reach Settlement with Ohio Counties in Opioids Case. Press release October https : //ir.cardinalhealth.com/news/ press-release-details/2019/Distributors-Reach-Settlement-With-OhioCounties-in-Opioids-Case/default.aspx Carey C. A. Jena and M. Barnett. Patterns of Potential Opioid Misuse and Subsequent Adverse Outcomes in Medicare to Annals of Internal Medicine no. : Case A. and A. Deaton A. Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring Caulkins J. Estimating Elasticities of Demand for Cocaine and Heroin with Data from the Drug Use Forecasting System. Final Report NCJ U.S Department of Justice National Institute of Justice Washington CBP ( U.S. Customs and Border Protection ) CBP Enforcement Statistics FY2019. https : //www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/cbp-enforcement-statistics-fy2019 CDC ( Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ) Opioid Overdose : Understanding the Epidemic. https : //www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/epidemic/ index.html | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Drug and Opioid-Involved Overdose Deaths United States https : //www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/67/wr/mm675152e1.htm No date. Calculating Total Daily Dose of Opioids for Safer Dosage. U.S Department of Health and Human Services Washington. https : //www.cdc gov/drugoverdose/pdf/calculating_total_daily_dose-a.pdf CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) The Underestimated Cost of the Opioid Crisis. Executive Office of the President the White House 2019a. The Full Cost of the Opioid Crisis : $ Trillion Over Four Years. https : // www.whitehouse.gov/articles/full-cost-opioid-crisis-2-5-trillion-four-years/ 2019b. The Role of Opioid Prices in the Evolving Opioid Crisis. https : //www whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/The-Role-of-Opioid-Prices-inthe-Evolving-Opioid-Crisis.pdf Chalmers J. D. Bradford and C. Jones. The Effect of Methamphetamine and Heroin Price on Polydrug Use : A Behavioral Economics Analysis in Sydney Australia. International Journal of Drug Policy no. : Cher B. N. Morden and E. Meara. Medicaid Expansion and Prescription Trends : Opioids Addiction Therapies and Other Drugs. Medical Care no. : Chermak J. K. Krause D. Brookshire and H. Burness. Moving Forward by Looking Back : Comparing Laboratory Results with Ex Ante Market Data. Economic Inquiry no. : Chicago Tribune. Chemical Weapon for Sale : A Synthetic Opioid from China That Will Kill Heroin Users. October Ciccarone D. G. Unick and A. Kraus. Impact of South American Heroin on the U.S. Heroin Market International Journal of Drug Policy no. : CRS ( Congressional Research Service ) Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs. https : //fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42593.pdf Currie J. J. Yin and M. Schnell. U.S. Employment and Opioids : Is There a Connection ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Dave D. Illicit Drug Use Among Arrestees Prices and Policy. Journal of Urban Economics : Dave D. A. Grecu and H. Saffer. Mandatory Access Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs and Prescription Drug Abuse. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : DeBruyne N. American War and Military Operations Casualties : Lists and Statistics. Congressional Research Service April DOJ ( U.S. Department of Justice ) Two Chinese Nationals Charged with Operating Global Opioid and Drug Manufacturing Conspiracy Resulting in Deaths. https : //www.justice.gov/opa/pr/ References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM two-chinese-nationals-charged-operating-global-opioid-and-drugmanufacturing-conspiracy No date. Automated Reports and Consolidated Ordering System. https : //www deadiversion.usdoj.gov/arcos/retail_drug_summary/ DOJ and DEA ( U.S. Department of Justice and Drug Enforcement Administration ) 2017a. National Drug Threat Assessment. https : //www.dea.gov/ documents/2017/10/01/2017-national-drug-threat-assessment 2017b. NFLIS Brief : Fentanyl Diversion Control Division National Forensic Laboratory Information System. https : //www.nflis.deadiversion usdoj.gov/DesktopModules/ReportDownloads/Reports/ NFLISFentanylBrief2017.pdf DOT ( U.S. Department of Transportation ) Guidance on Treatment of the Economic Value of a Statistical Life ( VSL ) in U.S. Department of Transportation Analyses Adjustment. https : //www.transportation gov/sites/dot.gov/files/docs/2016 % 20Revised % 20Value % 20of % 20a % Statistical % 20Life % 20Guidance.pdf Dowell D. E. Arias K. Kochanek R. Anderson G. Guy J. Losby and G. Baldwin. Contribution of Opioid-Involved Poisonings to the Change in Life Expectancy in the United States Journal of the American Medical Associaton no. : Drug Enforcement Administration. National Drug Threat Assessment. U.S Department of Justice Washington. https : //www.dea.gov/docs/DIR-04017_2017-NDTA.pdf DuPont S. A. Bezaitis and M. Ross. Stemming the Tide of Prescription Opioid Overuse Misuse and Abuse. Health Affairs Blog September https : //www healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/hblog20150922.050693/full/ Eberstadt N. Our Miserable 21st Century. Commentary February. https : //www commentarymagazine.com/articles/our-miserable-21st-century/ Einav L. A. Finkelstein and M. Polyakova. Private Provision of Social Insurance : Drug-Specific Price Elasticities and Cost Sharing in Medicare Part D. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : Evans W. E. Lieber and P. Power. How the Reforumlation of OxyContin Ignited the Heroin Epidemic. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : FDA ( Food and Drug Administration ) 2018a. FDA Analysis of Long-Term Trends in Opioid Analgesic Products : Quantity Sales and Price Trends. https : //www fda.gov/downloads/aboutfda/reportsmanualsforms/reports/ucm598899.pdf 2018b. National Drug Code Directory. https : //www.fda.gov/Drugs/ InformationOnDrugs/ucm142438.htm Feldstein M. The Welfare Loss of Excess Health Insurance. Journal of Political Economy no. : Finkelstein A. M. Gentzkow and H. Williams. What Drives Prescription Opioid Abuse ? Evidence from Migration. Stanford Institute for Economic Policy | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Research Working Paper. https : //siepr.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/ publications/18-028.pdf Fontenot K. J. Semega and M. Kollar. Income and Poverty in the United States. Current Population Reports U.S. Census Bureau September Gallet C. Can Price Get the Monkey Off Our Back ? A Meta-analysis of Illicit Drug Demand. Health Economics no. : Glaeser E. B. Sacerdote and J. Scheinkman. The Social Multiplier. Journal of the European Economic Association nos. : Goodman-Bacon A. and E. Sandoe. Did Medicaid Expansion Cause the Opioid Epidemic ? There s Little Evidence That It Did. Health Affairs Blog August https : //www.healthaffairs.org/action/showDoPubSecure ? doi = % 2Fhbl og20170823.061640&format = full Guo J. The Postal Service Is Losing Millions a Year to Help You Buy Cheap Stuff from China. Washington Post September HHS ( Department of Health and Human Services ) Current Status of Tobacco Control. https : //www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-ofprogress/sgr50-chap-14.pdf Testimony Before the United States Senate Special Committee on Aging : Opioid Use Among Seniors Issues and Emerging Trends. https : //oig.hhs gov/testimony/docs/2016/maxwell0216.pdf Hill S. S. Zuvekas and M. Zodet. Implications of the Accuracy of MEPS Prescription Drug Data for Health Services Research. Inquiry : Hoffman J. $ Million Opioid Settlement Reached at Last Minute with Big Drug Companies. New York Times October https : //www.nytimes com/2019/10/21/health/opioid-settlement.html Holahan J. and A. Golsh. Dual Eligibles : Medicaid Enrollment and Spending for Medicare Beneficiaries. Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured July Hollingsworth A. C. Ruhm and K. Simon. Macroeconomic Conditions and Opioid Use Disorder. Journal of Health Economics : Jofre-Bonet M. and N. Petry. Trading Apples for Oranges ? Results of an Experiment on the Effects of Heroin and Cocaine Price Changes on Addicts Polydrug Use. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization no. : KFF ( Kaiser Family Foundation ) Dual Eligibles and Medicare Part D. Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured May. https : // kaiserfamilyfoundation.files.wordpress.com/2013/01/7454.pdf What s in the Administration s 5-Part Plan for Medicare Part D and What Would it Mean for Beneficiaries and Program Savings ? https : //www.kff.org/ medicare/issue-brief/ whats-in-the-administrations-5-part-plan-for-medicare-part-d-and-whatwould-it-mean-for-beneficiaries-and-program-savings/ References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Kochanek K. E. Arias and B. Bastian. The Effect of Changes in Selected Age-Specific Causes of Death in Non-Hispanic White Life Expectancy between and NCHS Data Brief no. Lipari R. and A. Hughes. How People Obtain the Prescription Pain Relievers They Misuse. CBHSQ Report January Liu J. J. Liub J. Hammittc and S. Choud. The Price Elasticity of Opium in Taiwan Journal of Health Economics no. : Max M. M. Donovan C. Miaskowski S. Ward D. Gordon M. Bookbinder C. Cleeland N Coyle M. Kiss H. Thaler N. Janjan A. Anderson S. Weinstein and W Edwards. Quality Improvement Guidelines for the Treatment of Acute Pain and Cancer Pain. Journal of the American Medical Association no. : Miroff N. Losing Marijuana Business Mexican Cartels Push Heroin and Meth. Washington Post January Morden N. J. Munson C. Colla J. Skinner J. Bynum W. Zhou and E. Meara. Prescription Opioid Use among Disabled Medicare Beneficiaries : Intensity Trends and Regional Variation. Medical Care no. : NIDA ( National Institute on Drug Abuse ) Research on the Use and Misuse of Fentanyl and Other Synthetic Opioids. https : //www.drugabuse.gov/aboutnida/legislative-activities/testimony-to-congress/2017/ research-use-misuse-fentanyl-other-synthetic-opioids Olmstead T. S. Alessi B. Kline R. Pacula and N. Petry. The Price Elasticity of Demand for Heroin : Matched Longitudinal and Experimental Evidence. Journal of Health Economics : ONDCP ( Office of National Drug Control Policy ) National Drug Control Strategy Data Supplement Executive Office of the President the White House https : //obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/files/ondcp/policy-andresearch/2016_ndcs_data_supplement_20170110.pdf 21st Century Drug Trafficking Advisories on Fentanyl and Other Synthetics. Executive Office of the President White House. https : //www whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/White-House-FentanylAdvisories-Summary.pdf National Drug Control Strategy. Executive Office of the President White House. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/NDCSFinal.pdf Pacula R. B. Kilmer M. Grossman and F. Chaloupka. Risks and Prices : The Role of User Sanctions in Marijuana Markets. B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy no. Petry N. and W. Bickel. Polydrug Abuse in Heroin Addicts : A Behavioral Economic Analysis. Addiction no. : Pollak R. Habit Formation and Dynamic Demand Functions. Journal of Political Economy no. : | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Popper N. Opioid Dealers Embrace the Dark Web to Send Deadly Drugs by Mail. New York Times June Powell D. R. Pacula and E. Taylor. How Increasing Medical Access to Opioids Contributes to the Opioid Epidemic : Evidence from Medicare Part D. Paper presented at meeting of National Tax Association President s Commission on Combating Drug Addiction and the Opioid Crisis. Final Report. Purdue Pharma. 2019a. Purdue Pharma Announces Agreement in Principle on Landmark Opioid Litigation Settlement. Press release September https : //www.purduepharma.com/news/2019/09/16/ purdue-pharma-announces-agreement-in-principle-on-landmark-opioidlitigation-settlement/ 2019b. Purdue Pharma Announces Landmark Agreement with Oklahoma to Advance the Treatment of Addiction. Press release March https : //www purduepharma.com/news/2019/03/22/ purdue-pharma-announces-landmark-agreement-with-oklahoma-toadvance-the-treatment-of-addiction/ Quinones S. Dreamland : The True Tale of America s Opiate Epidemic. New York : Bloomsbury Press Roberts A. and A. Skinner. Assessing the Present State and Potential of Medicaid Controlled Substance Lock-In Programs. Journal of Managed Care Pharmacy no. : Roddy J. and M. Greenwald. An Economic Analysis of Income and Expenditures by Heroin-Using Research Volunteers. Substance Use & Misuse no. : Rosenberg T. When Is a Pain Doctor a Drug Pusher ? New York Times Magazine June https : //www.nytimes.com/2007/06/17/magazine/17pain-t.html Rosenblum D. J. Unick and D. Ciccarone. The Entry of Columbian-Sourced Heroin into the U.S. Market : The Relationship between Competition Price and Purity. International Journal of Drug Policy no. : An Instrumental Variables Approach to Estimating the Effects of Changes in the Heroin Market on Overdose in the U.S. Canadian Centre for Health Economics Working Paper Ruhm C. Drivers of the Fatal Drug Epidemic. Journal of Health Economics : Saffer H. and F. Chaloupka. The Demand for Illicit Drugs. Economic Inquiry : SAMHSA ( Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service Administration ) Key Substance Use and Mental Health Indicators in the United States : Results from the National Survey on Drug Use and Health. https : //www samhsa.gov/data/report/2018-nsduh-annual-national-report Sarpatwari A. M. Sinha and A. Kesselheim. The Opioid Epidemic : Fixing a Broken Pharmaceutical Market. Harvard Law and Policy Review July. http : // References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM harvardlpr.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/07/SarpatwariSinhaKesselheim pdf Schneider J. A. Anderson and F. Tennant. Patients Who Require Ultra-High Opioid Doses. Practical Pain Management no. Schnell M. Physician Behavior in the Presence of a Secondary Market : The Case of Prescription Opioids. Working paper November Silverman L. and N. Spruill. Urban Crime and the Price of Heroin. Journal of Urban Economics : Social Security Administration. SSA State Agency Monthly Workload Data. https : // www.ssa.gov/disability/data/ssa-sa-mowl.htm Soni A. Health Insurance Price Changes and the Demand for Pain Relief Drugs : Evidence from Medicare Part D. Unpublished paper Indiana University Stanford Medicine. No date. Descriptive Epidemiology : Epidemiology of Sporadic ALS. ALS Consortium of Epidemiologic Studies. http : //aces.stanford.edu/ acesmem2/EpiDescSporadic.html Stiglitz J. When Inequality Kills. Project Syndicate December State of Oklahoma v. Purdue Pharma et al. https : //int.nyt.com/data/ documenthelper/ 1660-oklahoma-opioid-trial-johnson-andjohnson/79f3fe55f5fa1a75bd48/optimized /full.pdf # page = Teva Pharmaceutical Industries. 2019a. Company Statement : Teva Reaches Agreement with State of Oklahoma to Resolve State s Claims against the Company. Press release May https : //ir.tevapharm.com/investors/pressreleases/press-release-details/2019/ Teva-Settles-Track-1-Opioid-Cases-and-Reaches-Agreement-on-Frameworkto-Settle-Remaining-Litigation/default.aspx 2019b. Teva Settles Track Opioid Cases and Reaches Agreement on Framework to Settle Remaining Litigation. Press Release October https : //ir.tevapharm.com/investors/press-releases/press-releasedetails/2019/ Teva-Settles-Track-1-Opioid-Cases-and-Reaches-Agreement-on-Frameworkto-Settle-Remaining-Litigation/default.aspx U.S. Census Bureau. Various years. Current Population Survey. https : //www.census gov/programs-surveys/cps.html U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Pain Management Best Practices Inter-Agency Task Force Report : Updates Gaps Inconsistencies and Recommendations. https : //www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/pmtf-finalreport-2019-05-23.pdf U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. CMS Statistics. https : //www cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-andReports/CMS-Statistics-Reference-Booklet/Downloads/CMS_Stats_2014_final pdf | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Various years. Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. https : //meps ahrq.gov/mepsweb/ U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Various years. Multiple Cause of Death on CDC WONDER Online Database. http : //wonder.cdc.gov/ucd-icd10.html U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics. CPI Price Index for All Urban Consumers ( CPI-U ) https : //www.bls.gov/cpi/tables/supplementalfiles/historical-cpi-u-201801.pdf U.S. Department of State. No date. Programs to Fight Opioids. https : //www.state gov/j/inl/opioid/programs/index.htm U.S. Department of Transportation. Guidance on Treatment of the Economic Value of a Statistical Life ( VSL ) in U.S. Department of Transportation Analyses Adjustment. https : //www.transportation.gov/sites/dot.gov/ files/docs/2016 % 20Revised % 20Value % 20of % 20a % 20Statistical % 20Life % Guidance.pdf U.S. General Accounting Office. Prescription Drugs : OxyContin Abuse and Diversion and Efforts to Address the Problem. GAO-04-110 U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs. Drugs for Dollars : How Medicaid Helps Fuel the Opioid Epidemic. Majority Staff Report VA ( U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs ) Pain as the 5th Vital Sign Toolkit. October Opioid Safety. August https : //www.va.gov/PAINMANAGEMENT/Opioid_ Safety/index.asp Van Ours J. The Price Elasticity of Hard Drugs : The Case of Opium in the Dutch East Indies Journal of Political Economy no. : Van Zee A. The Promotion and Marketing of OxyContin : Commercial Triumph Public Health Tragedy. American Journal of Public Health no. : Venkataramani A. and P. Chaterjee. Early Medicaid Expansions and Drug Overdose Mortality in the USA : A Quasi-Experimental Analysis. Journal of General Internal Medicine no. : White House. President Donald J. Trump s Initiative to Stop Opioid Abuse and Reduce Drug Supply and Demand. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefingsstatements/ president-donald-j-trumps-initiative-stop-opioid-abuse-reduce-drug-supplydemand/ Wilkie R. Fighting Pain and Addiction for Veterans. White House October https : //www.whitehouse.gov/articles/fighting-pain-addiction-veterans/ Wilner M. The Fourth Wave of the Opioid Crisis : Feds Warn of a Rise in Meth Use. McClatchy DC August https : //www.mcclatchydc.com/news/politicsgovernment/white-house/article234149267.html References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Zhou C. C. Florence and D. Dowell. Payments for Opioids Shifted Substantially to Public and Private Insurers While Consumer Spending Declined Health Affairs no. : Chapter Albouy D. G. Ehrlich and Y. Liu. Housing Demand Cost-of-Living Inequality and the Affordability Crisis. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w22816.pdf Albouy D. and G. Ehrlich. Housing Productivity and the Social Cost of Land-Use Restrictions. Journal of Urban Economics : Beyer S. Washington D.C. Reformed Its Zoning Code ; Now Time to Ditch the Height Limits. Forbes January https : //www.forbes.com/sites/ scottbeyer/2016/01/29/ washington-dc-reformed-its-zoning-code-now-time-to-ditch-the-heightlimits/ # 228f85814db8 Carson B. Ben Carson : Trump Is Getting Our Housing Market Back on Track. Washington Post June https : //www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/ ben-carson-our-affordable-housing-policy-is-failing-we-need-a-newapproach/2019/06/27/c5641dec-98fc-11e9-8d0a-5edd7e2025b1_story.html CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Housing Development Toolkit. https : // www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/images/Housing_ Development_Toolkit % 20f.2.pdf The State of Homelessness in America. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2019/09/The-State-of-Homelessness-in-America.pdf Chetty R. J. Friedman N. Hendren M. Jones and S. Porter. The Opportunity Atlas : Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www nber.org/papers/w25147 CBO ( U.S. Congressional Budget Office ) The Distribution of Household Income https : //www.cbo.gov/publication/55413 Corinth K. The Impact of Permanent Supportive Housing on Homeless Populations. Journal of Housing Economics : Davis M. W. Larson S. Oliner and J. Shui. The Price of Residential Land for Counties ZIP codes and Census Tracts in the United States. Federal Housing Finance Agency Working Paper. https : //www.fhfa.gov/ PolicyProgramsResearch/Research/PaperDocuments/wp1901.pdf Dettling L. J. Hsu L. Jacobs K. Moore J. Thompson and E. Llanes. Recent Trends in Wealth-Holding by Race and Ethnicity : Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances. FEDS Notes. Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/fedsnotes/ recent-trends-in-wealth-holding-by-race-and-ethnicity-evidence-from-thesurvey-of-consumer-finances-20170927.htm | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Diamond R. T. McQuade and F. Qian. The Effects of Rent Control Expansion on Tenants Landlords and Inequality : Evidence from San Francisco. American Economic Review no. : Dumont A. Housing Affordability in the U.S. : Trends by Geography Tenure and Household Income. FEDS Notes. Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/fedsnotes/ housing-affordability-in-the-us-trends-by-geography-tenure-and-householdincome-20190927.htm Eriksen M. and S. Rosenthal. Crowd Out Effects of Place-Based Subsidized Rental Housing : New Evidence from the LIHTC Program. Journal of Public Economics : Eriksen M. and A. Ross. Housing Vouchers and the Price of Rental Housing. American Economic Journal no. : Ganong P. and D. Shoag. Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S Declined ? Journal of Urban Economics : Glaeser E. Green Cities Brown Suburbs. City Journal February https : // www.city-journal.org/html/green-cities-brown-suburbs-13143.html Glaeser E. and J. Gyourko. Rethinking Federal Housing Policy : How to Make Housing Plentiful and Affordable. Washington : AEI Press The Economic Implications of Housing Supply. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Glaeser E. J. Gyourko and R. Saks. Why Have Housing Prices Gone Up ? American Economic Review no. : Glaeser E. and B. Ward. The Causes and Consequences of Land Use Regulation : Evidence from Greater Boston. Journal of Urban Economics : Gray N. Do Minimum Lot Size Rules Matter ? Strong Towns June https : // www.strongtowns.org/journal/2019/6/19/do-minimum-lot-size-rules-matter Gyourko J. and R. Molloy. Chapter : Regulation and Housing Supply. In Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics vol. edited by G. Duranton J Henderson and W. Strange. Amsterdam : Elsevier Gyourko J. A. Saiz and A. Summers. A New Measure of the Local Regulatory Environment for Housing Markets : The Wharton Residential Land Use Regulatory Index. Urban Studies no. : Gyourko J. J. Hartley and J. Krimmel. The Local Residential Land Use Regulatory Environment across U.S. Housing Markets : Evidence from a New Wharton Index NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w26573.pdf H m l inen K. and P. B ckerman. Regional Labor Market Dynamics Housing and Migration. Journal of Regional Science no. : Hamilton E. Inclusionary Zoning and Housing Market Outcomes. Arlington VA : Mercatus Center at George Mason University. https : //www.mercatus.org/ publications/urban-economics/ inclusionary-zoning-and-housing-market-outcomes References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Hanratty M. Do Local Economic Conditions Affect Homelessness ? Impact of Area Housing Market Factors Unemployment and Poverty on Community Homeless Rates. Housing Policy Debate no. : Herkenhoff K. L. Ohanian and E. Prescott. Tarnishing the Golden and Empire States : Land-Use Restrictions and the U.S. Economic Slowdown. Journal of Monetary Economics : Hsieh C. and E. Moretti. Housing Constraints and Spatial Misallocation. American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics no. : HUD ( U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development ) The Annual Homeless Assessment Report ( AHAR ) to Congress. https : //files.hudexchange info/resources/documents/2018-AHAR-Part-1.pdf Chapter : Calculating Rent and HAP Payments. https : //www.hud.gov/ sites/documents/DOC_35616.PDF 2019a. Fair Market Rents : Introductory Overview. https : //www.huduser.gov/ portal/sites/default/files/pdf/fmr-overview.pdf 2019b. Payment Standards In Housing Choice Voucher Program Guidebook https : //www.hud.gov/sites/dfiles/PIH/documents/HCV_Guidebook_ Payment_Standards.pdf IGM ( Initiative on Global Markets ) Rent Control. http : //www.igmchicago.org/ surveys/rent-control Ihlanfeldt K. Exclusionary Land-Use Regulations within Suburban Communities : A Review of the Evidence and Policy Prescriptions. Urban Studies no. : The Effect of Land Use Regulation on Housing and Land Prices. Journal of Urban Economics no. : Ikeda S. and E. Washington. How Land-Use Regulation Undermines Affordable Housing. Mercatus Center George Mason University. https : //www.mercatus org/system/files/Ikeda-Land-Use-Regulation.pdf Jackson K. Why Is Liberal California the Poverty Capital of America ? Manhattan Institute January https : //www.manhattan-institute.org/html/why-liberalcalifornia-poverty-capital-america-10882.html JCT ( Joint Committee on Taxation ) Present Law and Data Relating to Tax Incentives for Rental Housing. JCX-40-17. Washington : Joint Committee on Taxation JEC ( Joint Economic Committee of the U.S. Congress ) Zoned Out : How School and Residential Zoning Limit Educational Opportunity. https : //www.jec senate.gov/public/_cache/files/e18ff012-908e-4521-b1ce-a8b7b7f28ee3/ jec-report-zoned-out.pdf Jiang H. Ignorance Is Bliss ? Rent Regulation Policy Awareness and Labor Market Outcomes : Evidence from New York City. http : //www.econ2.jhu.edu/ jobmarket/2019/JiangH/JobPaper/JobPaperJiangH.pdf | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Lens M. and P. Monkkonen. Do Strict Land Use Regulations Make Metropolitan Areas More Segregated by Income ? Journal of the American Planning Association no. : Mawhorter S. and C. Reid. Local Housing Policies Across California : Presenting the Results of a New Statewide Survey. Terner Center for Housing Innovation. https : //californialanduse.org/download/Terner_California_ Residential_Land_Use_Survey_Report.pdf McCarty M. HUD FY2018 Appropriations : In Brief. Congressional Research Service. https : //fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R44931.pdf Nisar H. M. Vachon C. Horseman and J. Murdoch. Market Predictors of Homelessness : How Housing and Community Factors Shape Homelessness Rates Within Continuums of Care. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. https : //www.huduser.gov/portal/sites/default/files/pdf/ Market-Predictors-of-Homelessness.pdf Owens A. Building Inequality : Housing Segregation and Income Segregation. Sociological Science : Pinto E. and T. Peter. Home Price Appreciation Index and Months Remaining Inventory. AEI Housing Center American Enterprise Institute Quigley J. S. Raphael and E. Smolensky. Homeless in America Homeless in California. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Quigley J. and L. Rosenthal. The Effects of Land Use Regulation on the Price of Housing : What Do We Know ? What Can We Learn ? Cityscape no. : http : //www.jstor.org/stable/20868572 Quigley J. and S. Raphael. Regulation and the High Cost of Housing in California. American Economic Review no. : https : //www.jstor org/stable/pdf/4132841.pdf Raphael S. Housing Market Regulation and Homelessness. In How to House the Homeless edited by I. Ellen and B. O Flaherty. New York : Russell Sage Foundation Rossi A. and F. D Acunto. How Dodd-Frank Helped the Wealthy and Left the Middle Class Behind. The Hill April https : //thehill.com/blogs/punditsblog/finance/328998-how-dodd-frank-hurt-the-middle-class Rothwell J. and D. Massey. Density Zoning and Class Segregation in U.S Metropolitan Areas. Social Science Quarterly no. : https : //www ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3632084/pdf/nihms453211.pdf Saiz A. The Geographic Determinants of Housing Supply. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Saks R. Job Creation and Housing Construction : Constraints on Metropolitan Area Employment Growth. Journal of Urban Economics no. : Schrank D. B. Eisele and T. Lomax. Urban Mobility Report. Texas A&M Transportation Institute. https : //static.tti.tamu.edu/tti.tamu.edu/documents/ mobility-report-2019.pdf References | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Schuetz J. R. Meltzer and V. Been. Silver Bullet or Trojan Horse ? The Effects of Inclusionary Zoning on Local Housing Markets in the United States. Urban Studies no. : Schwartz M. and E. Wilson. Who Can Afford To Live in a Home ? A Look at Data from the American Community Survey. U.S. Census Bureau. https : // www.census.gov/housing/census/publications/who-can-afford.pdf Steffen B. S. Bucholtz M. Martin D. Vandenbroucke and Y. Yao. Worst Case Housing Needs : Report to Congress. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. https : //www.huduser.gov/portal//Publications/pdf/ HUD-506_WorstCase2011_reportv3.pdf White House. Executive Order Establishing a White House Council on Eliminating Regulatory Barriers to Affordable Housing. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ presidential-actions/ executive-order-establishing-white-house-council-eliminating-regulatorybarriers-affordable-housing/ Zabel J. Migration Housing Market and Labor Market Responses to Employment Shocks. Journal of Urban Economics nos. : Chapter Cadot O. J. Gourdon and F. van Tongeren. Estimating Ad Valorem Equivalents of Non-Tariff Measures : Combining Price-Based and Quantity-Based Approaches OECD Trade Policy Paper Paris : OECD Publishing. https : //doi org/10.1787/f3cd5bdc-en CBO ( U.S. Congressional Budget Office ) The Budget and Economic Outlook : to https : //www.cbo.gov/publication/54918 CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Economic Report of the President Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office Ehrlich I. D. Li and Z. Liu. The Role of Entrepreneurial Human Capital as a Driver of Endogenous Economic Growth. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Federal Reserve. Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Board Members and Federal Reserve Bank Presidents under Their Individual Assessments of Projected Appropriate Monetary Policy December December https : //www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20191211 pdf Lamprecht P. and S. Miroudot. The Value of Market Access and National Treatment Commitments in Services Trade Agreements. OECD Trade Policy Paper Paris : OECD Publishing. https : //doi.org/10.1787/d8bfc8d8-en OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) OECD Economic Surveys : United States. Paris : OECD Publishing. https : //www.oecd org/economy/surveys/Overview-United-States-2018-OECD.pdf | References 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM x Appendix A Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM x Letter of Transmittal Council of Economic Advisers Washington December Mr. President : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during calendar year in accordance with the requirements of the Congress as set forth in section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely yours Tomas J. Philipson Acting Chairman Tyler B. Goodspeed Member Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Chairman August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July October December April John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L. Smith Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L. Seevers William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel Charles L. Schultze William D. Nordhaus Lyle E. Gramley George C. Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L. Weidenbaum William A. Niskanen Jerry L. Jordan Martin Feldstein William Poole Beryl W. Sprinkel November January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July July January January | Appendix A 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date Thomas Gale Moore Michael L. Mussa Michael J. Boskin John B. Taylor Richard L. Schmalensee David F. Bradford Paul Wonnacott Laura D Andrea Tyson Alan S. Blinder Joseph E. Stiglitz Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chair Member Member Chairman Member Member Chair Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Chair Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Acting Chairman Vice Chairman Member July August February June October November November February July July June June January February April October August August May May July November May November November February June November November February July January March September March April April November February August August July August August September September August July July May Martin N. Baily Alicia H. Munnell Janet L. Yellen Jeffrey A. Frankel Rebecca M. Blank Martin N. Baily Robert Z. Lawrence Kathryn L. Shaw R. Glenn Hubbard Mark B. McClellan Randall S. Kroszner N. Gregory Mankiw Kristin J. Forbes Harvey S. Rosen Ben S. Bernanke Katherine Baicker Matthew J. Slaughter Edward P. Lazear Donald B. Marron Christina D. Romer Austan D. Goolsbee Cecilia Elena Rouse Katharine G. Abraham Carl Shapiro Alan B. Krueger James H. Stock Jason Furman Betsey Stevenson Maurice Obstfeld Sandra E. Black Jay C. Shambaugh Kevin A. Hassett Richard V. Burkhauser Tomas J. Philipson Tyler B. Goodspeed May September January August June January January April June February August August August March July January January January February November July February June June January July March January January September August February April May August May January August August January January June May Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During The Employment Act of established the Council of Economic Advisers to provide the President with objective economic analysis on the development and implementation of policy for the full range of domestic and international economic issues that can affect the United States. Governed by a Chairman who is appointed by the President and confirmed by the United States Senate the Council has two additional Members who are also appointed by the President The Chairman of the Council On June Kevin A. Hassett resigned as Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers. In accordance with the Employment Act of the duties and responsibilities of the Chairman have been subsequently executed by Tomas J. Philipson who has served as a Member of the Council since and was appointed Vice Chairman on July The Members of the Council Tomas J. Philipson is the Vice Chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers and in this capacity serves as acting Chairman. He is on leave from the University of Chicago and has been a Member of the Council of Economic Advisers since his appointment in Previously he served in the George W. Bush Administration among other public sector positions. He received his M.A. and Ph.D. in economics from the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania. He has been a visiting faculty member at Yale University and a visiting senior fellow at the World Bank. He previously served as a fellow board member or associate with a number of other organizations including the University of Chicago the National Bureau of Economic Research the American Enterprise Institute the Manhattan Institute the Heartland Institute the Milken Institute the RAND Corporation and the University of Southern California s Schaeffer Center for Health Policy & Economics Tyler Beck Goodspeed is a Member of the Council of Economic Advisers having previously served as Chief Economist for Macroeconomic Policy and Senior Economist for Macroeconomics. Before joining the CEA he was a member of the Faculty of Economics at the University of Oxford and was a Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM lecturer in economics at King s College London. He has published extensively on financial regulation banking and monetary economics with particular attention to the role of contingent liability and access to credit in mitigating the effects of adverse aggregate shocks in historical contexts. His research has appeared in three full-length monographs from academic publishers as well as numerous articles in peer-reviewed and edited journals. He received his B.A. M.A. and Ph.D. from Harvard University ; and he received his M.Phil from the University of Cambridge where he was a Gates Scholar. He is a current member of the American Economic Association and was previously a member of the Economic History Association Economic History Society and Royal Economic Society as well as an adjunct scholar at the Cato Institute Areas of Activity Macroeconomic Policies Throughout fulfilling its mandate from the Employment Act of the Council continued to gather timely and authoritative information concerning economic developments and economic trends both current and prospective. The Council appraises the President and the White House staff of new economic data and their significance on an ongoing basis. As core products of the Council these regular appraisals include written memoranda. The Council also prepares in-depth briefings on certain topics as well as public reports that address macroeconomic issues One of the Council s public reports this year addressed the economic effects of Federal deregulation. According to the report this historic reduction in costly Federal regulation will raise real household incomes by a large enough magnitude to have macroeconomic implications On employment and the labor market the Council actively disseminated analyses to the public. One report addressed the effectiveness of public jobtraining programs in improving participants labor market outcomes. Another report showed that economic growth is more effective in lifting Americans out of poverty than expanded government assistance programs. The Council also released a report on how lower market costs for childcare could affect parents labor force participation. Reports on employment policies complement the Council s regular blog posts on new releases of labor market data The Council also released a report that shows U.S. energy innovation epitomized by the shale revolution in oil and natural gas production increases household incomes by lowering consumers energy costs. Furthermore the report highlighted how the shale revolution led the United States to experience a greater decline in energy-related emissions than European Union countries Working alongside the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget the Council participates in the troika process that | Appendix A 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM generates the macroeconomic forecasts that underlie the Administration s budget proposals. The Council under the leadership of the acting Chairman and the Members continued to initiate and lead this forecasting process The acting Chairman and Members maintained the Council s tradition of meeting regularly with the Chairman and Members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to exchange views on the economy Microeconomic Policies The Council participated in discussions internal to the Federal Government as well as external on a range of issues in microeconomic policy. Publication topics included healthcare deregulation vaccines prescription drug pricing the opioid crisis and homelessness On healthcare the Council published a paper on the Trump Administration s policies to expand healthcare choice and competition. This paper finds that these policy changes including reducing the individual mandate penalty ; permitting more association health plans ; and expanding short-term limited-duration insurance plans will keep costs down for consumers and taxpayers. The Council also released a report that estimates the potentially large health and economic losses associated with influenza pandemics and discusses policy options to increase vaccine innovation and moderate pandemics risk Additionally the Council published a paper that shows average prescription drug prices are falling because of improved Food and Drug Administration policies that if continued will benefit patients by further lowering drug prices The Council also released a report on how lower prices and easier access to opioids exacerbated the crisis s growth which finally shows signs of leveling off Another Council report documents the state of homelessness in America This report finds that the Administration s actions to reduce regulatory barriers in the housing market combat the drug crisis expand mental illness treatment improve the chances of people leaving prison promote self-sufficiency support effective policing and increase incomes for people at the bottom of the distribution will address the root causes of homelessness International Economics The Council participated in the analysis of numerous issues in the area of international economics. The Council engages with a number of international organizations. The Council is a leading participant in the activities of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development a forum for facilitating economic coordination and cooperation among the world s high-income countries. Council Members and Council staff have also engaged with the organization s working-party meetings on a range of issues and shaped its agenda Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM In addition the Council analyzed a number of proposals and scenarios in the area of international trade and investment. These included generating estimates of the benefits as well as any trade-offs of prospective trade agreements as well as revisions to existing agreements The Council continues to actively monitor the U.S. international trade and investment position and to engage with emerging issues in international economics such as malicious cyber activity. The Council looks forward to continuing to analyze the United States international economic position | Appendix A 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM The Staff of the Council of Economic Advisers Executive Office Rachael S. Slobodien Chief of Staff Paige E. Terryberry Deputy Chief of Staff Robert M. Fisher General Counsel and Senior Economist Cale A. Clingenpeel Special Adviser to the Chairman and Economist Jared T. Meyer Special Adviser to the Chairman on Communications David N. Grogan Staff Assistant Emily A. Tubb Staff Assistant Senior Research Staff Joseph V. Balagtas Senior Economist ; Agriculture International Trade and Infrastructure Andre J. Barbe Senior Economist ; International Trade Steven N. Braun Director of Macroeconomic Forecasting Kevin C. Corinth Chief Economist for Domestic Policy Jason J. Galui Senior Advisor to the Chairman ; National Security LaVaughn M. Henry Senior Economist ; Education Banking and Finance Donald S. Kenkel Chief Economist Ian A. Lange Senior Economist ; Energy Brett R. Matsumoto Senior Economist ; Labor and Health Deborah F. Minehart Senior Economist ; Industrial Organization Stephen T. Parente Senior Economist ; Health Joshua D. Rauh Principal Chief Economist Eric C. Sun Senior Economist ; Health Jeremy G. Weber Senior Advisor to the Council and Chief Energy Economist Anna W. Wong Chief International Economist Junior Research Staff Jackson H. Bailey Research Assistant ; Housing and Education Andrew M. Baxter Staff Economist ; Deregulation and Macroeconomics Adam D. Donoho Research Economist ; Macroeconomics and International Trade Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Alex J. Durante Staff Economist ; International Trade and Public Finance Troy M. Durie Research Economist ; International Trade Macroeconomics William O. Ensor Staff Economist Amelia C. Irvine Research Assistant ; Labor Macroeconomics Gregory K. Kearney Research Economist ; Tax Deregulation and Macroeconomics Nicole P. Korkos Research Economist ; National Security David J. Laszcz Staff Economist Caroline J. Liang Research Economist ; Deregulation Health and Education Julia A. Tavlas Economist ; Education Labor and Poverty Grayson R. Wiles Research Assistant ; Macroeconomics Health and Deregulation Statistical Office Brian A. Amorosi Director of Statistical Office Administrative Office Doris L. Searles Operations Manager Interns Student interns provide invaluable help with research projects day-to-day operations and fact-checking. Interns during the year were : Justin Arenas William Arnesen Michelle Bai Quinn Barry Matthew Baumholtz Michael Bugay John Camara Blythe Carvajal Cross Di Muro Ayelet Drazen Soleine Fechter Kiyanoush Forough Jelena Goldstein Caroline Hui Jacob Kronman Meg Leatherwood Andrew Liang Eric Menser Hailey Ordal Raj Ramnani Jacqueline Sands Cindy Shen Matthew Style Sharon Yen Michael Yin and Chris Zhao ERP Production Alfred F. Imhoff Editor | Appendix A 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM x Appendix B Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Contents National Income or Expenditure B Percent changes in real gross domestic product  B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product  B Gross domestic product  B Percentage shares of gross domestic product  B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product  B Gross value added by sector  B Real gross value added by sector  B Gross domestic product ( GDP ) by industry value added in current dollars and as a percentage of GDP  B Real gross domestic product by industry value added and percent changes  B Personal consumption expenditures  B Real personal consumption expenditures  B Private fixed investment by type  B Real private fixed investment by type  B Foreign transactions in the national income and product accounts  B Real exports and imports of goods and services  B Sources of personal income  B Disposition of personal income  B Total and per capita disposable personal income and personal consumption expenditures and per capita gross domestic product in current and real dollars  B Gross saving and investment  B Median money income ( in dollars ) and poverty status of families and people by race  B Real farm income  Contents | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM Labor Market Indicators B Civilian labor force  B Civilian employment by sex age and demographic characteristic  B Unemployment by sex age and demographic characteristic  B Civilian labor force participation rate  B Civilian employment/population ratio  B Civilian unemployment rate  B Unemployment by duration and reason  B Employees on nonagricultural payrolls by major industry  B Hours and earnings in private nonagricultural industries  B Employment cost index private industry  B Productivity and related data business and nonfarm business sectors  B Changes in productivity and related data business and nonfarm business sectors  Production and Business Activity B Industrial production indexes major industry divisions  B Capacity utilization rates  B New private housing units started authorized and completed and houses sold  B Manufacturing and trade sales and inventories  Prices B Changes in consumer price indexes  B Price indexes for personal consumption expenditures and percent changes  | 250-840_text_.pdf Appendix B 2/7/20 : PM Money Stock Credit and Finance B Money stock and debt measures  B Consumer credit outstanding  B Bond yields and interest rates  B Mortgage debt outstanding by type of property and of financing  B Mortgage debt outstanding by holder  Government Finance B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years  B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt as percent of gross domestic product fiscal years  B Federal receipts and outlays by major category and surplus or deficit fiscal years  B Federal receipts outlays surplus or deficit and debt fiscal years  B Federal and State and local government current receipts and expenditures national income and product accounts ( NIPA ) basis  B State and local government revenues and expenditures fiscal years  B U.S. Treasury securities outstanding by kind of obligation  B Estimated ownership of U.S. Treasury securities  Corporate Profits and Finance B Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments  B Corporate profits by industry  B Historical stock prices and yields  B Common stock prices and yields  Contents | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM International Statistics B U.S. international transactions  B U.S. international trade in goods on balance of payments ( BOP ) and Census basis and trade in services on BOP basis  B U.S. international trade in goods and services by area and country  B Foreign exchange rates  B Growth rates in real gross domestic product by area and country  | 250-840_text_.pdf Appendix B 2/7/20 : PM General Notes Detail in these tables may not add to totals due to rounding Because of the formula used for calculating real gross domestic product ( GDP ) the chained ( ) dollar estimates for the detailed components do not add to the chained-dollar value of GDP or to any intermediate aggregate. The Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) no longer publishes chained-dollar estimates prior to except for selected series Because of the method used for seasonal adjustment the sum or average of seasonally adjusted monthly values generally will not equal annual totals based on unadjusted values Unless otherwise noted all dollar figures are in current dollars Symbols used : p Preliminary Not available ( also not applicable ) NSA Not seasonally adjusted Data in these tables reflect revisions made by source agencies through January Excel versions of these tables are available at www.gpo.gov/erp General Notes | 250-840_text_.pdf 2/7/20 : PM National Income or Expenditure Table B Percent changes in real gross domestic product [ Percent change fourth quarter over fourth quarter ; quarterly changes at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential Change in private inventories                                                                    See next page for continuation of table | 250-840_text_.pdf Appendix B 2/7/20 : PM Table B Percent changes in real gross domestic product Continued [ Percent change fourth quarter over fourth quarter ; quarterly changes at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Exports Imports                                                                    Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local Final Final Gross sales to Gross sales of domestic private domestic Average of GDP domestic pur- domestic income and GDI pur ( GDI ) product chases chasers     Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Personal consumption expenditures plus gross private fixed investment Gross domestic income is deflated by the implicit price deflator for GDP Note : Percent changes based on unrounded GDP quantity indexes Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Table B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product [ Percentage points except as noted ; annual average to annual average quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product ( percent change ) Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential Change in private inventories See next page for continuation of table | 250-840_text_.pdf Appendix B 2/7/20 : PM Table B Contributions to percent change in real gross domestic product Continued [ Percentage points except as noted ; annual average to annual average quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Net exports Exports Total Goods Imports Services Total Goods Federal Services Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local Final sales of domestic product Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Table B Gross domestic product [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter Gross domestic product Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential Change in private inventories Billions of dollars                p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p                 p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  See next page for continuation of table Billions of chained ( ) dollars | 250-840_text_.pdf Appendix B 2/7/20 : PM Table B Gross domestic product Continued [ Quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Net exports Exports Imports Total                p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p                 p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Total National Nondefense defense State and local Final Final Gross sales to Gross sales of domestic private domestic Average of GDP domestic pur- domestic income and GDI pur ( GDI ) product chases chasers Billions of dollars         Billions of chained ( ) dollars Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Personal consumption expenditures plus gross private fixed investment For chained dollar measures gross domestic income is deflated by the implicit price deflator for GDP Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Table B Percentage shares of gross domestic product [ Percent of nominal GDP ] Personal consumption expenditures Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product ( percent ) Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Nonresidential Total Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential Change in private inventories See next page for continuation of table | 250-840_text_.pdf Appendix B 2/7/20 : PM Table B Percentage shares of gross domestic product Continued [ Percent of nominal GDP ] Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Net exports of goods and services Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Net exports Exports Total Goods Imports Services Total Goods Federal Services Total Total National defense Nondefense State and local Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Table B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Fixed investment Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product Nonresidential Total Goods Services Total Total Total Structures Equipment Intellectual property products Residential See next page for continuation of table | 250-840_text_.pdf Appendix B 2/7/20 : PM Table B Chain-type price indexes for gross domestic product Continued [ Index numbers = except as noted ; quarterly data seasonally adjusted ] Exports and imports of goods and services Government consumption expenditures and gross investment Federal Year or quarter Exports Imports Total Total National Nondefense defense State and local                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Personal consumption Final expenGross sales of ditures domestic Gross domestic excludpurproduct ing chases domestic product food and energy Percent change Personal consumption expenditures Total Gross domestic Excludpuring chases food and energy Gross domestic product ( GDP ) less exports of goods and services plus imports of goods and services Quarterly percent changes are at annual rates Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) National Income or Expenditure 250-840_text_.pdf | 2/7/20 : PM Table B Gross value added by sector [ Billions of dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV  : I  II  III  IV p  Gross domestic product Total Nonfarm Households and institutions Farm Total Households Nonprofit institutions serving households General government Total Federal State and local Addendum : Gross housing value added Gross domestic business value added equals gross domestic product excluding gross value added of households and institutions and of general government. Nonfarm value added equals gross domestic business value added excluding gross farm value added Equals compensation of employees of nonprofit institutions the rental value of nonresidential fixed assets owned and used by nonprofit institutions serving households and rental income of persons for tenant-occupied housing owned by nonprofit institutions Equals compensation of general government employees plus general government consumption of fixed capital Source : Department of Commerce ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) | 250-840_text_.pdf Appendix B 2/7/20 : PM Table B Real gross value added by sector [ Billions of chained ( ) dollars ; quarterly data at seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Business Year or quarter                                                   p  : I  II 