Economic Report of the President Together with The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers January Economic Report of the President Together with The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers January x Contents Economic Report of the President. The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers. Introduction Part I : Confronting the Largest Postwar Economic Shock : The Federal Response to Mitigate the COVID-19 Pandemic Chapter : Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery. Chapter : Prioritizing America s Households. Chapter : Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses. Chapter : Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System. Part II : The Renaissance of American Greatness Chapter : Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones.. Chapter : Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens. Chapter : Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition.. Chapter : Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights Chapter : Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade.. Part III : An Effort to Rebuild Our Country Chapter : The Year in Review and the Years Ahead.. Chapter : Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity. References Appendix A Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During Appendix B Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production.. ____________ * For a detailed table of contents of the Council s Report see page iii Economic Report of the President x Economic Report of the President To the Congress of the United States : Four years ago on the steps of the United States Capitol I pledged to the citizens of this country to return our Nation to greatness and to thereby enable secure and enhance the prosperity of all Americans. While this would require us to confront challenges and hardships I knew that the American spirit set free from overbearing taxation and regulation would drive the country forward to unimaginable economic success. I was right. Over the course of this Administration the American people demonstrated an indomitable will to prevail and drove our economy to record heights Since my first day in office I have been steadfast in my commitment to put America First. The economic pillars of this movement sweeping tax reform extensive deregulatory actions and fair and reciprocal trade agreements promoted a robust middle class and led to the longest expansion and strongest recovery in history Before the coronavirus came to our country from China our economy created more than million jobs nearly factories returned to our shores and wealth for Americans hit all-time highs. Inequality decreased as wage growth for blue-collar workers outpaced that of their managers and earnings for those in the bottom percent grew faster than earnings for the top percent reversing the trends of past Administrations. Since the start of my Administration median household income grew by more than $ lifting up people no matter their race ethnicity educational background or age group. In alone median household income rose $ more in one year than in the entire years through Even as more than million people returned from the sidelines to enter the labor force the unemployment rate plummeted to percent in February the lowest level in more than half a century This past year our Nation has faced trials the likes of which many have never experienced. Through these challenges however we have witnessed once again the resilience of the American people. In just months this year more than million people saw their livelihoods threatened through no fault of their own as the unemployment rate peaked at percent. Since this spring we have seen more than million jobs return and gross domestic product increase by a record-shattering percent in the third quarter alone thanks to the largest and fastest economic policy response in history When the virus hit my Administration launched the largest industrial mobilization since World War II. We have created the world s most innovative testing system pioneered groundbreaking therapies and treatments Economic Report of the President | and most importantly we have developed and manufactured gold standard vaccines in record time. The pandemic may have begun in China but we are ending it in America Thanks to the pro-growth policies of my Administration our Nation s economy has exceeded expectations at every turn and despite the economic shock due to the China Virus our great American comeback is well underway The Renaissance of American Greatness : Rebuilding Our Country For decades political leaders and privileged elites worked to silence American workers and families even as opportunity and with it hope slipped from the shores of our great Nation. Almost million manufacturing jobs and factories fled our country following the establishment of Permanent Normal Trade Relations with China in Massive tax burdens and overregulation encouraged businesses to invest elsewhere. For decades multinational corporations flooded our Nation with imported goods stripping millions of American families of their livelihoods and their dignity. Decades of these damaging policies led to the prevalence of Made in China as China s leaders ( and those from other countries ) took advantage of establishment politicians who did not have the best interests of American workers at heart Before I took office politicians and their adherence to a globalist doctrine converted our borders and national sovereignty into mere negotiable concepts to be traded away or simply ignored when in conflict with establishment interests. Anti-American ideology flooded into schools universities and media while American wealth intellectual property and innovation rushed out of our country. Cities corroded by years of neglect and mismanagement became commonplace each complete with an allotment of lawless streets that were devoid of prospect educational choice and liberty. International financial crises became matters not of if but of when yet the attention of those charged with governing turned elsewhere and the American people were forgotten Since taking office rather than apologize for America I have stood up for America. From day one of my Presidency I have put America First and I have fought for the American worker harder than anyone ever has. My Administration has adhered to the two simple rules of Buy American and Hire American we have built the most secure border in history and I took the toughest-ever action to stand up to China I have worked every day to restore promise to our Nation through an economic agenda that lifts up all Americans. In just years my Administration s policies brought more than million people out of poverty ; created prosperity through record low unemployment rates for Black Americans Hispanic Americans Asian Americans and those without a college degree ; reduced homelessness among the general population and our veterans ; and saved | Economic Report of the President thousands of lives by stemming the tide of opioid-related deaths. We committed to breaking a cycle that for too long held children s education hostage on the basis of affluence and class background denying children knowledge and unrealized potential. And my Administration returned economic freedom to the American people as we have cut nearly eight regulations for every new significant rule weakening the power of the regulatory state and stifling stealth taxation. The power of fracking has forged the path for American energy independence and delivered personal prosperity alongside national security contributing to a percent decline in the global price of oil. We also created the U.S. Space Force the sixth branch of the military and have given new meaning to Peace through Strength by expanding our capabilities and restoring American leadership in space We unleashed record prosperity at home while also negotiating fair and reciprocal trade agreements. The passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act increased wages for blue-collar workers and the implementation of the United States Mexico Canada Agreement elevated American competitiveness with respect to our regional trading partners. We took the toughest boldest and strongest actions against China in American history and the United States is now collecting billions of dollars in tariff revenue on imports of Chinese goods I took unprecedented action to reduce drug prices and ensure that Americans never pay more for life-saving medicines than consumers in other countries. And my Administration took action to end surprise medical billing. We also eliminated the harmful individual mandate from the so-called Affordable Care Act as between and million Americans gained employment sponsored health coverage from to These actions along with countless other taken by my Administration have not only boosted economic growth and wage gains for all Americans but they have also protected the American people from foreign competitors trying to take advantage of them A Great American Comeback Underway The virus from China required us to close up the greatest economy in the history of the world. Understanding the risks our Nation faced I took bold action to ban travel from China and then later Europe saving countless American lives In a matter of days and weeks the global economy ceased to exist as we knew it. Nations around the world locked down as uncertainty generated tremendous fear. In order to prepare our frontline responders in hospitals and health facilities across the United States we prioritized the safety of the American people over the strength of our economy. In March of this year we implemented an initial plan to slow the spread of the virus in coordination with governors across the Nation. During that time my Administration facilitated the delivery of thousands of ventilators and millions of gloves masks and Economic Report of the President | protective gear to States and territories working to get Americans life-saving medical equipment We promised that no patient suffering from the virus would have to pay for their treatment out of pocket and we provided billions of dollars to hospitals and healthcare providers so that uninsured patients would have access to critical care. By the end of March the Food and Drug Administration issued Emergency Use Authorizations to fast-track more than diagnostic tests and life-saving treatments. Thanks to our efforts the case fatality rate today is more than percent lower than its April peak. Meanwhile Operation Warp Speed has harnessed the innovation of the private sector to develop and manufacture millions of doses of life-saving vaccines decreasing the average development time from years to less than months. This record-shattering work has cleared the path for an end to this cruel pandemic saving millions of lives around the world and trillions of dollars in health and other economic costs Through no fault of their own Americans from all walks of life have been forced to confront the Invisible Enemy. To help the Nation through this difficult time I championed and signed four pieces of legislation. These laws kept Americans connected to their jobs and reduced the economic harm to families and workers. In March the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security ( CARES ) Act the largest piece of economic relief legislation in history authorized direct payments to citizens expanded unemployment insurance and deferred loans for those who needed it most. When Congress later abdicated its duty to expand and extend this relief for short-sided political gain I signed four executive actions to continue providing for the families students and workers of our country. Additionally my Administration worked hand-in-hand with the private sector invoking the Defense Production Act and related authorities more than times to surge production and distribution of ventilators protective equipment and other materials including therapeutics and vaccines The Paycheck Protection Program a core piece of the CARES Act saved or supported more than million American jobs by providing more than million critical loans to small businesses. These loans were crucial lifelines to business owners and their employees that averted widespread bankruptcies This effort alone meant that more than percent of March and April layoffs were temporary as over percent of these businesses that received them are still open today. In addition Economic Impact Payments sent to more than million Americans surged liquidity to every corner of our Nation and provided nearly three months of income to households in the bottom percent of the income distribution. And our Farmers to Families Food Box Program delivered more than million boxes to families children and businesses protecting millions of Americans from food insecurity | Economic Report of the President For the last years I have fought for you the American people in all that I do. The Economic Report of the President that follows describes the policies that have made our country so successful and lays out steps we can take to continue the great American comeback in response to the China Virus. This year s Report is a testament to the resolve of the American people who never falter in the face of adversity and whose courage and relentless drive forge our destiny The White House January Economic Report of the President | The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers x Letter of Transmittal Council of Economic Advisers Washington January Mr. President : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely yours Rachael Seidenschnur Slobodien Chief of Staff Economic Report of the President | x Introduction In the U.S. economy experienced its worst macroeconomic shock since the Great Depression. As a direct result of the arrival of COVID-19 and consequent measures to contain and mitigate viral transmission real output was on pace to contract by as much as percent in which would have constituted the worst economic contraction since Professional forecasters projected that the unemployment rate would reach as high as percent in May its worst level since the Great Depression and more than twice its peak in the aftermath of the global financial crisis. The Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) forecasted a contraction of almost percent during the four quarters of and that the unemployment rate would remain over percent through the end of the year In the face of this exogenous economic shock of historically unprecedented scale and speed that abruptly terminated the U.S. economy s record expansion the Trump Administration responded with equally unprecedented scale and speed. As a result of this response real gross domestic product ( GDP ) in the third quarter of was down percent from its prepandemic level less than half the drop in the early projections and high-frequency forecasts  $ "     /0  '               * %  / $ * )   /0  ' Dollars ( billions chained $ )              *     * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $   * ) " $ * )  '    " /   ! ! $        '0   # $        '  '  / $ * )  * /     (  / #   *     '0   # $   * ) )  ! *   ./  ! *   '      " * 2/ # Economic Report of the President |  $ "     /0  '    * ' '   ( ' * ( ) /         Projection   /0  ' Total nonfarm employees ( millions )              *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $    * ) " $ * )  '    " /   ! ! $            '  '  / $ * )  * /   #    ' '  $ / #    " * !  / #    / *    )    * (   ' '. for the fourth quarter imply a calendar-year decline of percent less than one-third the projected decline ( figure I-1 ) In seven months the U.S. labor market recovered million jobs or percent of job losses in March and April ( figure I-2 ) The unemployment rate declined from a peak of percent in April to percent in November almost percentage points below the yearend unemployment rate projected by the CBO in May. After peaking at percent in April U-6 the broadest measure of labor market underutilization had declined to percent a level lower than that of July more than five years into the previous recovery. Aided by unparalleled fiscal support for households by July retail and new and existing home sales had regained their prepandemic levels The COVID-19 pandemic brought to an end the longest economic expansion in recorded U.S. history which for the first time since the financial crisis was exceeding expectations and delivering real economic gains across the income and wealth distributions ( figure I-3 ) In the three years before the pandemic the U.S. economy added million jobs million more than projected by the nonpartisan CBO in August In the first months of alone the U.S. economy added more jobs ( ) than the CBO projected would be created in the entire months of ( figure I-4 ) Through real median household income rose $ more than five times total gains under the preceding eight years while wage income and wealth inequality declined and the wage gap between African Americans | Economic Report of the President  $ "     /0  '        " 0./        * %  / $ * )   /0  '  " 0./      Dollars ( billions chained $ )           *     * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $   * ) " $ * )  '    " /   ! ! $             '  '  / $ * )  $ "     /0  '    * ' '   ( ' * ( ) /    " 0./      Projection    /0  ' Total nonfarm payrolls ( millions )  " 0./            *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $    * ) " $ * )  '   " /   ! ! $             '  '  / $ * )  * /  #    ' '   (  / #   )        "     Economic Report of the President |  $ "   ) $ / $  '   ) ( ' * ( ) /  )  )    '  $ (  Initial UI claims regular programs ( millions )         /  s $ " )   *    /    $ * )    &  )         *    -/ ( ) /  * !    *        '  '  / $ * ) '     *  and White Americans narrowed. After landmark tax reform in real wealth for the bottom percent of households had risen three times faster than that of the top percent while real wages for the bottom percent grew almost twice as fast as for the top percent marking stark reversals from the preceding expansion when wage income and wealth inequality all rose Although wealth rose across the income distribution the bottom percent s share of real net worth increased while that of the top percent decreased labor s share of income rose and capital s share decreased. In February just before the pandemic hit in force the unemployment rate declined to percent its lowest level in more than years and a full percentage points below the CBO s final forecast COVID-19 constituted an exogenous shock that abruptly terminated this record expansion though it was met with a similarly swift policy response Within a week of the first reported COVID fatality Congress passed and President Trump signed into law the Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act. Within four weeks the President signed into law two more pieces of economic legislation including the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security ( CARES ) Act which provided $ trillion in direct financial support to American firms households medical facilities and State and local governments. These historic policy responses to the adverse shock of COVID-19 as well as the historic strength of the pre-COVID U.S. economy | Economic Report of the President  $ "   )   * !  * # * '   )  * (     ) / $ '   $ / #  ' $ ! Index of household income ( = February )  $ / # * 0/  ' $ !        ) 0'4  " 0./        ) 0'4  " 0./        ) 0'4  " 0./        ) 0'4  " 0./        ) 0'4  " 0./ Household income percentile  *    )      ) /   * '  / $ * )     * ) / # '4   )    ) )  '  *  $  '   )     * ) * ( $    ' ( ) /        '  '  / $ * )  * /        ! *  ( / # *  * ' * " mitigated what was on pace to be a macroeconomic contraction on par with the Great Depression. In particular measures designed to preserve employeremployee relationships most significantly the Paycheck Protection Program ( PPP ) and employee retention tax credit played a key role in allowing firms to retain workers on leave. By limiting eligibility to small and medium-sized enterprises the PPP targeted aid to those employers that were most at risk of needing to terminate employees ( figure I-5 ) Meanwhile income replacement and cost mitigation helped to cushion the shock to household incomes and thereby facilitated stabilization and recovery of consumer spending which alone constitutes percent of the U.S economy. Federal assistance programs including expanded and enhanced Unemployment Insurance and Economic Impact Payments to households earning below set income thresholds largely offset declines in household compensation due to economic shutdowns. Income replacement rates were highest at the lower end of the income distribution indicating that relief was targeted toward households that were more vulnerable to an adverse income shock ( figure I-6 ) Upon expiration of these provisions and in the absence of Congressional action the Trump Administration extended further relief through four executive actions providing supplemental payments through lost wages assistance to unemployed Americans temporary payroll tax relief and extended relief and protection for student borrowers and renters at risk of eviction Economic Report of the President |  $ "     *   -& /    *   * (  $ * )      $ * ) Level of employment ( index prerecession peak = ) Months from prerecession employment peak  *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $     / $ * )  '     * !    * ) * ( $      #        '  '  / $ * ) Though the pace of the recovery vastly exceeded expectations and constituted the most rapid economic recovery on record ( figure I-7 ) in the face of the continuing global COVID-19 pandemic U.S. employment and production remained below prepandemic levels at the end of Recognizing the remaining challenges to full economic recovery most importantly the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic the Administration supports and consistently supported additional fiscal relief including an additional round of the PPP to support small business payroll retention an expanded employee retention tax credit a continuation of enhanced Unemployment Insurance benefits a second round of Economic Impact Payments targeted aid to schools and State and local governments additional nutritional support and temporary relief to specific adversely affected industries. At the time of this writing the U.S. Congress had not agreed to these measures In chapter of this Report we discuss the historic economic gains in the United States on the eve of the pandemic before quantifying the magnitude of the economic shock that hit the U.S. economy in and situating this shock in historical context. In chapters and we then document and estimate the economic effect of the Administration s response to the shock focusing first on households and labor markets then on business and financial markets and finally on healthcare. We then turn in the next five chapters to the role of pre-COVID-19 Administration policies specifically in the areas of Opportunity | Economic Report of the President Zones deregulation school choice space innovation and exploration and international trade in establishing the foundations for longer-run potential economic growth. Finally we review the U.S. economy in and discuss the economic outlook including potential risks before concluding with a discussion of potential future policies to promote further economic recovery and subsequent growth In chapter we document that the beginning of ushered in a strong U.S. economy that was delivering job income and wealth gains to Americans of all backgrounds with historically low unemployment and poverty along with record gains in median income for workers across the socioeconomic spectrum. Moreover the robust state of the economy led forecasters to expect healthy growth through and beyond. However the arrival of COVID-19 with origins in the People s Republic of China brought with it an unprecedented economic and public health crisis. This chapter describes the health of the pre-COVID Trump economy and the nature of the economic shock from COVID-19 and gives an overview of the swift and bold fiscal response undertaken by the Trump Administration to provide relief and lay the foundation for the most rapid economic rebound to date in modern U.S. history We analyze these issues in greater depth in chapter We find that the Trump Administration s pro-growth policies contributed to substantial gains for U.S. households between and Median net worth increased by percent median income increased by percent and poverty reached a record low. As the COVID-19 pandemic brought the historic expansion to a potentially catastrophic halt the Trump Administration helped protect the livelihoods of Americans through legislation and executive actions. Even as the unemployment rate climbed from a 50-year low of percent in February to a record high of percent in April household incomes increased across the distribution especially for lower-income households thanks to Economic Impact Payments and expanded and enhanced Unemployment Insurance Protections against evictions and student loan defaults helped keep people in their homes and out of default. The ultimate success of these efforts will depend on how quickly the economy recovers. Between April and November the unemployment rate fell by percentage points the fastest six-month decline on record paving the way to attaining the same strong economy that prevailed during the first three years of the Trump Administration Chapter analyzes the effects of the economic policy response on businesses and employer-employee ties. The CARES Act which was signed into law by President Trump only two weeks after he issued a National Emergency Declaration provided record economic relief to families and businesses to mitigate the shock from the COVID-19 crisis. In total the fiscal response to COVID-19 stands out as the most rapid and robust crisis-related economic policy mobilization in the post World War II era. Two central objectives have constituted the Trump Administration s approach to combating the economic Economic Report of the President | fallout from COVID-19 : the alleviation of financial distress to reduce hardship and the preservation of underlying economic health to facilitate a faster recovery. Ensuring the vitality and resilience of small businesses plays an essential role in achieving these objectives. This chapter describes the fiscal relief provisions aimed at helping small businesses and their workers principally the PPP and their success in fueling what has been thus far the fastest employment and GDP rebound in U.S. history In chapter we examine how the COVID-19 pandemic constituted a rapidly evolving health and economic crisis in the healthcare sector and for working families across the Nation. The Trump Administration s response to address this multifaceted crisis involved a complementary two-pronged policy approach. First by enacting several pieces of bipartisan legislation the Administration secured significant funding to alleviate the financial burden experienced by hospitals offered tax credits to private employers with fewer than employees to enable them to provide emergency paid family and sick leave for their workers and fully covered the cost of COVID-19 testing and treatment for many low-income and uninsured individuals. Second through a series of deregulatory actions the Administration expanded the use of telemedicine for both COVID-19 screenings and many other health concerns supported the relaxation of occupational licensing requirements for nurse practitioners issued Emergency Use Authorizations for COVID-19 diagnostic tests and accelerated the development authorization and deployment of therapeutics and vaccines for COVID-19. This included the Administration s Operation Warp Speed which the CEA estimates could result in as much as $ trillion in economic benefit through the accelerated availability of an effective vaccine. This chapter explores the various effects of these healthcare policy innovations and achievements some of which are likely to pay dividends after the COVID-19 pandemic is resolved Beginning with chapter we discuss the role of pre-COVID Administration policies in establishing the foundations for longer-run potential economic growth. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of not only broadly lowered taxes for businesses and individuals but also made targeted cuts to spur investment in economically distressed communities designated as Opportunity Zones ( OZs ) This chapter compares the advantages of OZs with those of other Federal antipoverty programs and documents the characteristics of the nearly lowincome communities designated as OZs. The CEA finds that $ billion has been invested in funds for OZs and that this investment is already benefiting OZ residents and potentially having only a small effect on the current Federal budget In chapter we revisit the issue of economic regulation. During the Trump Administration Federal agencies have demonstrated a sustained commitment to regulatory reform. As a result the Administration s regulatory efforts have helped reduce red tape for small businesses and middle-income households One of the most important deregulatory actions the Administration finalized | Economic Report of the President in is the Safer Affordable Fuel Efficient ( SAFE ) Vehicles Rule which we estimate will lead to an increase in real incomes and raise GDP by $ billion annually or about percent. The CEA also finds that the benefits of deregulations such as the SAFE Vehicles Rule tend to favor the lower income quintiles suggesting that lower-income households may have benefited the most relative to household income from the Administration s deregulatory actions In chapter we examine the topic of school choice. During the past years school choice programs have undergone dramatic expansion in the United States. These programs organized at the Federal State and local levels share a common goal of expanding access to education options that exist alongside and ultimately improve public school options for primary and secondary education. The programs have altered primary and secondary education in fundamental ways by increasing competition in the school system and by enhancing educational opportunities for all students especially those from disadvantaged groups. We document the development and expansion of school choice programs and discuss the role of Federal policy including recent actions by the Trump Administration to further this expansion. We explain how educational competition empowers families and incentivizes schools to deliver more value and we document the growing empirical evidence that carefully crafted school choice programs do improve educational outcomes for all students Chapter analyzes important developments in a frontier of economic potential namely innovation and opportunity in the space economy. We review advancements in spaceflight and space policy made during the past year including the first commercial human spaceflight in history and implications for the private sector s role in the space economy. We also discuss the role of the Administration s policies specifically the Executive Order on Encouraging International Support for the Recovery and Use of Space Resources and the Artemis Accords in strengthening investor confidence in the space economy and thereby enabling expansion of the private space sector. After an extensive review of the economic theory of property rights and the empirical property rights literature we find substantial evidence that improving investor expectations in a novel economic sector such as space increases investment in that sector. In addition we estimate that private space investment could as much as double in the next eight years due to the Administration s executive actions and other enhancements of property rights in space In chapter we examine how the Administration has promoted U.S interests in international trade by forging new bilateral trade agreements with China Japan and South Korea and reshaped regional trade by modernizing the trade agreement with our most important trading partners Canada and Mexico. The United States Mexico Canada Agreement achieves new safeguards for U.S. interests across a range of areas including digital services Economic Report of the President | intellectual property and labor protections. These agreements go well beyond formal tariff barriers that have been the focus of past trade agreements by addressing structural and technical barriers to free and fair trade. We also review how the COVID-19 pandemic reduced international trade overall and has brought into focus underappreciated risks of global supply chains In chapter we build on chapters and by summarizing the main macroeconomic developments of and discuss the economic outlook for the years ahead with particular attention to upside and downside risks. We find that though the U.S. economy in was hit with the biggest adverse macroeconomic shock since the Great Depression with effects on output labor capital housing and energy markets all of historic magnitudes the subsequent recovery to date has also been of historic speed breadth and magnitude. We highlight that though official and private forecasters currently project continued strong recovery in aided by an unprecedented economic policy response in a strong pre-COVID economy and the availability of vaccines through Operation Warp Speed substantial risks remain including both pandemic and policy risks In the near term the single greatest downside economic risk is rising COVID-19 cases before the widespread availability of vaccines and the policy and behavioral responses to viral resurgences. Already in December several State and local governments have reimposed shelter-in-place orders in response to rising cases in November and December. For this reason the Administration continues to articulate support for additional fiscal measures to provide a bridge to the widespread availability of vaccine candidates developed under Operation Warp Speed. Over the longer term failure to maintain or implement the types of pro-growth policies discussed in this Report and in the and editions of the Economic Report of the President would constitute additional potential downside risks. But the continuation and expansion of the Administration s pro-growth policies in support of full labor market recovery offer the upside potential for a rapid return to the levels of employment production and real income growth that prevailed on the eve of the pandemic We conclude this Report in chapter by reviewing a collection of policy areas highlighted by the COVID-19 pandemic and we analyze reforms that might meet the ongoing economic challenges faced by the United States. In particular we review potential policies to strengthen connections to the labor force support a balance between work and family advance international coordination to address 21st-century challenges create a more effective healthcare system build a dynamic economy through infrastructure improvement and generate a more skilled and resilient workforce. We find that solving these challenges can ensure that the United States not only recovers to its prepandemic levels of prosperity but also builds a fairer more dynamic and more resilient economy that benefits all Americans | Economic Report of the President x Contents Part I : Confronting the Largest Postwar Economic Shock : The Federal Response to Mitigate the COVID-19 Pandemic. Chapter : Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery. The Historic Strength of the U.S. Economy before COVID-19. The Early Economic Effects of COVID-19.. The U.S. Economy s Resilience in Weathering the COVID-19 Shock. Comparing the COVID-19 Recession and the Great Recession. The State of the Economy before the Crises. The Origins and Progression. Fiscal and Monetary Responses. Federal Support for Low-Income Households. Conclusion. Chapter : Prioritizing America s Households. The Strength of the Pre-COVID Economy and the COVID-19 Shock. Policy Responses Providing Household Relief. March Legislative Acts. President Trump s Executive Actions. The Impact of Policies in Providing Relief to Households. Spurring a Return to the Pre-COVID Economy. Conclusion. Chapter : Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses. Summary of Policies to Assist American Businesses and Their Workers. The Paycheck Protection Program Employee Retention Tax Credits. Economic Injury Disaster Loans and Advances. The Federal Reserve s Lending Facilities. Other Programs. Measuring Small Business s Utilization of Selected CARES Act Business Provisions. Comparing Expected and Actual Small Business Bankruptcies during the COVID-19 Pandemic. The CARES Act s Role in Facilitating Small Business Survival. The Coronavirus Food Assistance Program s Impact on Farm Incomes. The Pandemic s Impact on the Financial Sector and Lending Facilities Role Conclusion. Chapter : Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System. Expediting Research and Development for Novel Therapies and Tests for COVID-19.. Economic Report of the President | Emergency Use Authorizations.. Operation Warp Speed. Supporting the Healthcare System. Deregulation. Financial Support for Healthcare Providers. Subsidizing Beneficial Behaviors and the Cost of COVID-19 Care. Emergency Paid Sick and Medical Leave. Subsidizing the Cost of COVID-19 Care. COVID-19 and Future Healthcare Reform. FDA Reform.. Telemedicine Deregulation.. Scope-of-Practice Deregulation. Additional Changes to Promote Choice and Competition. Conclusion. Part II : The Renaissance of American Greatness. Chapter : Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones.. Comparing Opportunity Zones with Other Antipoverty or Place-Based Programs. Antipoverty Transfer Policies. Federal Place-Based Policies : The New Markets Tax Credit Program. Other Federal Place-Based Development Programs.. Characteristics of Opportunity Zones. The Opportunity Zone Selection Process The Economic State of Opportunity Zones. Opportunity Zones Effect on Total Investment. Capital Raised by Qualified Opportunity Funds. Estimated Investment Growth Caused by the Opportunity Zone Incentive The Industry Focus of Qualified Opportunity Funds.. Opportunity Zones Effects on Business Investment and Housing Values. Equity Investments in Opportunity Zone Businesses. Opportunity Zone Designation and Housing Values Opportunity Zones Effects on Poverty and the Budget. Projected Effects of Opportunity Zones on Poverty. Budgetary Effects of Opportunity Zones. Conclusion. Chapter : Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens.. Regulation in Review. The Safer Affordable Fuel Efficient ( SAFE ) Vehicles Rule. GHG Credit Transaction Data. Estimating the Curve for the Marginal Cost of Compliance The Potentially Regressive Nature of Regulation. Progressive and Regressive Tax Structures The Harm Regressive Regulation Systems Pose. Lower-Income Households Often Gain the Most from Regulatory Reform.. | Economic Report of the President The Regressivity of Federal Regulation Offsets the Progressivity of Federal Taxes. Conclusion. Chapter : Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition. Overview of School Choice Programs and Federal Policy. Private Choice Programs. Public Choice Programs. Examples of School Choice. The Role of Federal Policy in School Choice. School Choice and Competition. Competition between School Districts. Designing School Choice Systems. Evidence on the Impact of School Competition.. Direct Value-Added Effects.. Indirect Procompetitive Effects.. Conclusion. Chapter : Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights Current Issues in Space Policy and the Space Economy. Space Policy Developments. The Economics of Property Rights. Historical Examples of Property Rights Evolution. Investment Responses to Property Right Enhancement. The Effects of Policies on Investment in Space Industries.. Looking Ahead. Flag of Choice. Incentivizing the Private Sector. Conclusion. Chapter : Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade. The Phase One Agreement with China. Background.. Major Provisions. Intellectual Property. Technology Transfer. Agriculture. Financial Services. Currency. Chinese Purchase Commitments. Dispute Resolution. What Is Not in Phase One ? The United States Mexico Canada Agreement. Rules of Origin for Automobile Production.. Digital Trade. Intellectual Property Protection. Labor. Economic Report of the President | Reform of the Investor-State Dispute Mechanism Agricultural Provisions. Trade Facilitation. Overall Economic Effects. Other Trade Agreements. U.S.-Japan Trade Agreements. The U.S.-South Korea Free Trade Agreement. Limited Trade Agreements with Brazil and Ecuador. U.S.-U.K. Negotiations. The Rise of Global Supply Chains. China and the Emergence of Global Supply Chains.. U.S. Firms Begin to Hedge the Risks of Global Supply Chains. The Trade Slowdown in Response to COVID-19. The Decline in Imports of Intermediate Goods.. Evidence That Firms Are Reducing Their Exposure to China. Drivers of Shifting Supply Chains. Conclusion. Part III : An Effort to Rebuild Our Country. Chapter : The Year in Review and the Years Ahead. The Year in Review. Components of Economic Output The Labor Market. Inflation.. The Housing Market. Financial Markets. Interest Rates. Oil Markets. The Global Macroeconomic Situation. The Future Economic Outlook.. Forecasts from the Blue Chip Consensus the Congressional Budget Office and the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee. Economic Objectives and Policy. Near-Term Upside and Downside Risks. Long-Term Upside and Downside Risks. Conclusion. Chapter : Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity. Strengthening Connections to the Labor Force. Dual-Earner Couples.. The Marriage Penalty and the Second-Earner Penalty. Tax Reforms to Mitigate the Second-Earner Penalty and Boost the Labor Supply.. High Marginal Rates for Low Earners. Supporting a Balance between Work and Family. Unequal Access to Paid Family and Medical Leave. Effects of Paid Leave on Employment and Earnings. | Economic Report of the President Implementation of Paid Leave. The Lack of Childcare. Increasing Access to Childcare. Enhancing International Coordination to Meet 21st-Century Challenges. The Economics of Networks Coordination and Standard Setting. The Current Paradigm for Coordination and Standard Setting.. Opportunities for Advancing Coordination. Prospects for U.S.-U.K. Coordination. Creating a More Effective Healthcare System.. Rationalizing the Provision of Healthcare Professionals. Balance Billing. Medicare Inpatient Rates. Building a Dynamic Economy through Infrastructure Improvement. The Federal Government s Role in Infrastructure Investment. Infrastructure and Productivity. The Costs of Building Infrastructure.. The Critical Importance of User Fees. Investing in Port Infrastructure.. Generating a More Skilled and Resilient Workforce. Points-Based Immigration. Estimated Economic Benefits. Estimated Effects on the Wages of Domestic Workers. Estimated Effects on Government Revenue and Expenditures. Improving Postsecondary Education and Skill Development. Increasing Incentives for Schools to Improve the Economic Gains of Students. Improving Support for Educational Programs That Promote Skill Development Conclusion. References.. Appendixes A B Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers During Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production I-1 I-2 I-3 I-4 I-5 I-6 I-7 Actual GDP versus May CBO Projection. Actual Payroll Employment versus May CBO Projection. Actual GDP versus August CBO Projection. Actual Payroll Employment versus August CBO Projection Initial Unemployment Insurance ( UI ) Claims Index of Household Income by Percentile Labor Market Recovery Comparison by Recessions. Evolution of s Gross Domestic Product Forecast Figures Economic Report of the President | | Real Gross Domestic Product Fell and Rose More Sharply Now Than during the Great Recession. The Unemployment Rate versus Preelection Forecasts Real Median Household Income by Householder Race Share of Total Net Worth by Percentile Poverty Rates by Race and Hispanic Origin U.S. Real Gross Domestic Product Percentage of the U.S. Population under Statewide Restrictions Retail Spending during the Early Stages of the Pandemic Seven-Day Average Traffic Congestion during the Early Stages of the Pandemic Median across All States Seven-Day Average Seated Diners in U.S Restaurants per OpenTable during the Early Stages of the Pandemic Seven-Day Average Weekly U.S. Hotel Occupancy Rate during the Early Stages of the Pandemic Percent Change in Small Businesses That Are Open and Hourly Employees Who Are Working in the Early Stages of the Pandemic Unemployment and COVID-19 : The Trump Economy versus the Counterfactual Ratio of Household Sector and Nonfinancial Business Debt to Gross Domestic Product : Q4 : Q2 Timelines for the Fiscal and Monetary Responses to COVID-19 and the Financial Crisis Monthly Disposable Personal Income Index of Household Income by Percentile Index of Household Income for Example Households Percent Below Federal Poverty Line Household Receipt and use of Economic Impact Payment Evictions in Selected Cities by Month Eviction Filings in Select Cities Labor Market Recovery Comparisons by Recessions Private Payroll Job Losses by Sector Since February Share of Total PPP Loan Counts and PPP Loan Amounts by Round. Percentage of Small Businesses Receiving a PPP Loan through August Total Chapter Bankruptcy Filings by U.S. Small Businesses Percent Change in Small Business Chapter Bankruptcies FY from FYs Average Small Business Chapter Bankruptcies FYs Actual versus Predicted Small Business Chapter Bankruptcy Filings Change in the Number of Small Business Hourly Employees Working Change in the Number of Small Businesses Open Seven-Day Average Change in Small Business Revenue Seven-Day Average U.S. Net Farm Income Dow Jones Industrial Average Change during Various Pandemics. Economic Report of the President 6-i Market Volatility Index ( VIX ) BBB Corporate Bond and 10-Year Treasury Note Spread Percentage of U.S. Population under Statewide Restrictions Daily Health and Economic Costs of COVID-19 to the United States If No Vaccine Is Found. Value of Speeding Up a COVID-19 Vaccine Starting September National Medicare Utilization Jan. Oct. Monthly Employment by Sector Average Drug Life Cycle during Patent Period. Average Annual Social Surplus by Approval Time Decrease Cumulative Aggregate Net Present Value of Increased Social Welfare by Approval Time Decrease. State Scope-of-Practice Deregulation. The Geography of Opportunity Zones. Demographics of Opportunity Zones ( OZs ) Average Median Household Income by Census Tract Designation Average Median Household Income by Tract Designation and State Population by Poverty Rates and Census Tract Designation. Growth in Qualified Opportunity Funds Novogradac and SEC Data. Opportunity Zone ( OZ ) Investment Supply-and-Demand Model Percentage of Qualified Opportunity Funds by Industry. Private Equity Investment by Tract Group Significant Final Rules Excluding Deregulatory Actions by Presidential Years Vehicle Market Equilibrium with GHG Standards. GHG Credit Market Equilibrium for Various Standards Consumer Savings from the SAFE Vehicles Rule as a Percentage of Income by Income Quintile. Illustrative Impact of a Percent Grocery Tax by Income Quintile The Impact of Regulation in a Competitive Market Percentage of Income Spent on Outlay Category by Income Quintile Economically Significant Final Rules with Regulatory Flexibility Analysis for Small Businesses by Presidential Years Individual Mandate Penalties as a Percentage of Income by Income Quintile. Consumer Savings on Internet Access from the Restoring Internet Freedom Rule by Income Quintile. Consumer Savings from Selected Deregulatory Actions and the SAFE Vehicles Rule by Income Quintile Consumer Savings from Deregulatory Actions Compared with the Federal Tax Rate by Income Quintile Number of ESAs Vouchers and Tax Credit Scholarships Enrollment in Public Choice Programs over Time Percentage Distribution of Students Age Years Attending Kindergarten through 12th Grade by School Type and Economic Report of the President | 11-i 11-ii 11-iii | Federal Funding per Student for Public Primary and Secondary Schools by State Number of Charter Schools Opened to NASA Outlays and U.S. Private Investment Nongovernmental Equity Investment in Commercial Space Companies Marginal Cost and Benefit of Property Rights Specification. Nongovernmental Equity Investment in Commercial Space Companies in the United States U.S. Imports U.S. Exports U.S. Imports of Goods : Percent Change from Selected Countries U.S. Imports of Goods from the World by Type of Good U.S. Manufacturing Import Ratio U.S. Near-to-Far Ratio Average Monthly Nominal Wages in U.S. Dollars Components of Real GDP Consumption and Wealth Relative Share of Disposable Personal Income ( DPI ) Components of Investment Government Purchases as a Share of GDP Unemployment Rate Labor Force Participation Rate Nominal Compensation and Earnings for Private Industry Workers Consumer Price Inflation ( PCE price index ) U.S. Housing Price Index U.S. New Housing Formation and Single-Family Home Sales U.S. Homeownership Rate Percentage of Rent Payments Made Market Volatility Index ( VIX ) Ten-Year Minus Three-Month Treasury Constant Maturity Rate Employment-to-Population Ratio Distribution of Joint Filers Average Tax Rate on the Pretax Wages of Single Persons and Second-Earners ( without Children ) Average Tax Rate on the Pretax Wages of Single Persons and Second-Earners ( with Children ) The Marginal Effective Rate on Low Earners Pre-TCJA Distribution of MIDs by Adjusted Gross Income. Pre-TCJA Distribution of SALT by Adjusted Gross Income. Homeownership Rates in High-Tax Areas Compared with ow-Tax Areas Change in Employed Workers with Actual Hours Lower Than Usual Hours by Family Type Economic Report of the President 11-iv 11-v 11-vi Access to Paid Leave by Average Wage Cost of Paid Family and Sick Leave as a Share of State Wages The Free Movement of Health Care Labor Percent Change in Medicare FFS DRG Payments Compared with Medicare Advantage and Private Insurers Top Diagnosis-Related Groups U.S. Productivity Number of Seaports by Country among the Top Busiest Seaports in the World Cargo Volumes of the Port of Seattle Compared with the Port of Prince Rupert Share of Permanent Legal Immigration Based on Employment Estimated Educational Attainment of Recent Immigrants Age Years and Older Employment by Educational Attainment. Average Federal State Local Institutional or Other Sources of Grant Aid Awarded to Undergraduate Students Growth in Four-Year Public and Private Universities Expenses by Selected Category Composition of Student Body Population by Income Quintile. Comparative Rates of Return for a Four-Year Degree. Comparison of Real Cumulative Median Net Earnings Tables Growth in Earnings The Federal Response during the Great Recession and COVID-19 Funding of Major Workforce Program Initiatives under the America Reinvestment and Recovery Act Liquidity Programs for Small Businesses during COVID-19 PPP Loan Size by Amount First and Second Round Combined ( data as of Aug. ) PPP Loans by Industry. Estimated Social Surplus by FDA Approval Time Reduction ( billions of real dollars ) The Effect of Opportunity Zone Designation on Home Value Appreciation Selected Deregulatory Actions Annual Impact on Real Income. Demographics of CSP-Funded Schools and District Public Schools Composition of Global Space Economy Summary of Effects of Property Rights Improvement. U.S. Tariff Actions against China U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficit with China in Goods and Services. Agriculture Phase One Agreement Provisions. Additional U.S. Exports to China on Top of the Baseline. The Impact of Canada and Mexico Increasing De Minimis Thresholds U.S. Employment Sector Effects of the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement. Economic Report of the President | Effects of the United States Mexico Canada Agreement on U.S. Trade ( percent changes relative to the baseline in ) Imports and Exports of Services by Sector through September U.S. Imports : Change from Levels for Selected Countries and Regions by Type of Good through October Cumulative Real Gross Domestic Product Losses through : Q3. Economic Forecasts Policy-Inclusive Economic Projections Supply-Side Components of Actual and Potential Real Output Growth Congressional FMLA Tax Proposals Annual Cost of Paid Parental and Medical Leave by Take-Up Scenario ( billions of dollars ) Durations of GATT/WTO Rounds. Congestion Pricing Initiatives Worldwide. Lawful Permanent Resident ( LPR ) Status Obtained by Broad Class of Admission Fiscal Year National Income Increase from a Merit-Based Immigration System 75-Year Net Present Value of Fiscal Benefits from Proposed Changes to the Permanent Legal Immigration System ( billions of dollars ) Boxes | Effects of Regulation on Small Businesses. The Supreme Court s Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue Decision The School Choice Now Act. Public-Private Partnerships for Human Spaceflight. National Security and Space. Bahrain s and the United Arab Emirates Agreements with Israel. Limiting Tax Expenditures to Facilitate Pro-Growth Reform : the SALT+MID Deduction. Continuing the Historic Health Information Technology Modernization Started during COVID-19. 5G Infrastructure. Reforming the NEPA Process. Digital Infrastructure. Historically Black Colleges and Universities. Economic Report of the President x Part I Confronting the Largest Postwar Economic Shock : The Federal Response to Mitigate the COVID-19 Pandemic x Chapter Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery The beginning of ushered in a strong U.S. economy that was delivering job income and wealth gains to Americans of all backgrounds. By February the unemployment rate had fallen to percent the lowest in years and unemployment rates for minority groups and historically disadvantaged Americans were at or near their lowest points in recorded history. Wages were rising faster for workers than for managers income and wealth inequality were on the decline and median incomes for minority households were experiencing especially rapid gains. The fruits of this strong labor market expansion from to also included lifting million people out of poverty which is the largest three-year drop to start any presidency since the War on Poverty began in These accomplishments highlight the success of the Trump Administration s pro-growth pro-worker policies The robust state of the U.S. economy in the three years through led almost all forecasters to expect continued healthy growth through and beyond However in late and the early months of the novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19 with origins in the People s Republic of China began spreading around the globe and eventually within the United States causing a pandemic and bringing with it an unprecedented economic and public health crisis. Both the demand and supply sides of the economy suffered sudden and massive shocks due to the pandemic. During the springtime lockdowns aimed at flattening the curve the labor market lost million jobs and the unemployment rate jumped percentage points to percent the largest monthly changes in the series histories The healthy foundation of the Trump Administration s prepandemic economy coupled with strong and decisive action during the crisis helped the Nation weather the catastrophic COVID-19 shock and rebound faster than either official or private forecasters had projected. After a sharp contraction in the second quarter of the U.S. economy posted a percent annualized gain in gross domestic product ( GDP ) in the third quarter the largest jump on record and nearly double the previous record from years ago. As a result the U.S. economy has recovered two-thirds of the GDP damage from COVID-19 in just one quarter This chapter first documents the strength and resilience of the U.S. economy leading up to the COVID-19 pandemic both in absolute and relative senses. The chapter demonstrates that the U.S. economy under the Trump Administration suffered from fewer macroeconomic vulnerabilities than the pre Great Recession economy and that the economic experience during the pandemic would have been even worse if it had not been for the economic improvement from to the beginning of In addition this chapter details how relative to the Great Recession the Federal Government acted with greater speed and provided more robust relief in response to the COVID-19 crisis. In particular the $ trillion Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security ( CARES ) Act passed by Congress within two weeks of the President s National Emergency Declaration delivered the most extensive fiscal relief in U.S. history. Moreover it was targeted primarily to vulnerable families workers and small businesses in stark contrast to the larger focus on banks and big businesses in the fiscal response to the Great Recession Two overarching objectives have characterized the Federal Government s approach to combating the economic consequences of COVID-19 : the alleviation of financial distress to reduce hardship and the preservation of underlying economic health to facilitate a faster recovery. For example enhanced unemployment insurance benefits and eviction moratoriums supported household balance sheets and the Paycheck Protection Program strengthened the | Chapter connective tissue of the labor market by helping maintain matches between employers and furloughed employees setting the stage for the fastest employment rebound in U.S. history Chapters and of this Report analyze the specific responses that this Administration has implemented to address the dual public health and economic crises resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic T he U.S. economy entered with historically low unemployment and poverty declining inequality and some of the strongest household income and wealth gains on record. In short the American economy was delivering greater opportunity to people across the socioeconomic spectrum. At the time leading forecasters were predicting this prosperity to continue in and beyond with healthy GDP growth. However COVID-19 interrupted this boom after it spread beyond the borders of China and instigated the most severe global public health and economic crisis in almost a century. This chapter describes the healthy state of the U.S. economy before COVID-19 reached American shores the evolution of what has become the largest shock to the U.S. economy since the Great Depression and the historic range of policies that were quickly passed into law to support the economy and lay the foundation for a robust recovery Before delving into each of these issues individually it is worth taking stock of the broader economic account of and just how far the U.S economy has recovered since the peak crisis period of the spring shutdowns As shown in figure leading forecasters had been forecasting healthy percent GDP growth for at the beginning of the year. Then as the pandemic worsened they sharply revised their forecasts down predicting the worst contraction in annual GDP in the post World War II period. However in the face of a much stronger recovery to date than almost anyone had predicted forecasters have responded by substantially revising their predictions for the year upward especially in light of the percent annualized GDP rebound in the third quarter that eclipsed the prior record from years ago Figure puts into stark relief the differences in economic behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic versus during the Great Recession. Each curve plots real GDP indexed to its level five quarters before the trough of each downturn. As shown by the time-0 point on the horizontal axis the onset of COVID-19 led to a drop in indexed GDP more than twice as large as that of the Great Recession. However the figure also reveals the much more dramatic rebound in economic fortunes during the pandemic thus far driven by the Federal government s swift and bold economic interventions to deliver relief Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery |  $ "   * '0/ $ * )  * !    *   * ( ./ $    *   /   *   ./  Percent ( Q4-over-Q4 )  '0   # $          )        ) '  "    /  *  *              '0   # $    * ) * ( $   )  $   / *  * /           '   )    -& /   * ( ( $ //         "  ) $  / $ * )  ! *    * ) * ( $    * *  / $ * )   )    ' * ( ) /.   #          ! *   ./  $  / #   *    ) /   #  ) "  $ "    '   *   * ( ./ $    *   /   ' '   )    *   *   #  -+'4   *  T #  )   $ ) "  / #    /    $ * ) Index ( = five quarters before recession trough )   /    $ * )        $ * ) Quarters ( recession trough = )  *      * !   * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * ) | Chapter particularly to households and small businesses. Provided that the economy continues to receive appropriate and responsive fiscal support the recovery is poised to remain on a healthy trajectory. In contrast in the aftermath of the Great Recession the economy suffered from a weaker and more protracted recovery especially when viewed through the lens of the labor market as this chapter discusses later The Historic Strength of the U.S Economy before COVID-19 Before the COVID-19 pandemic the U.S. economy under President Trump was surpassing milestone after milestone delivering broad-based economic gains to Americans of all backgrounds. After years of historically slow recovery following the Great Recession the unemployment rate fell below percent for the first time since December reaching percent at the end of The more comprehensive U-6 unemployment rate which includes people not looking for work but wanting a job and people working part-time who would prefer to have a full-time job reached an all-time low of percent in December Moreover the advances in labor market opportunity extended to all corners of American society. The unemployment rate for African Americans fell to percent in late down from percent when President Trump took office and the lowest level on record. For reference the lowest rate achieved under any previous administration was percent in April Hispanic Americans also enjoyed the lowest unemployment rate on record with the rate dropping to percent in late Those with a less formal education were also beneficiaries of a labor market of unparalleled strength with the unemployment rate for people with less than a high school diploma reaching percent in late and Americans with only a high school degree facing a percent rate These strong pre-COVID labor market conditions were no mere coincidence ; nor were they a passive continuation of economic momentum carried over from the preceding years of the expansion. Although the unemployment rate had managed to fall below percent after six years of the slowest labor market recovery in recorded history the Congressional Budget Office and the Federal Open Market Committee issued forecasts before the election showing that the unemployment rate would flatten and stay well above percent as shown in figure However the combination of the landmark Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in and the implementation of President Trump s progrowth deregulatory agenda laid the groundwork for the economy to surpass Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery | Figure The Unemployment Rate versus Preelection Forecasts Unemployment rate ( percent ) : Q3 Unemployment rate FOMC median forecast CBO forecast : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 Sources : Congressional Budget Office ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Federal Reserve Note : CBO = Congressional Budget Office ; FOMC = Federal Open Market Committee The CBO forecast is from August ; the FOMC forecast is from September these expectations by boosting economic competitiveness and dynamism ( CEA 2020a ) Besides increasing the abundance of job opportunities a low unemployment rate also confers greater bargaining power on workers when they are negotiating pay with employers. Both when looking to recruit new workers and retain existing talent employers must offer a compelling pay package when unemployment is low or else risk losing valuable workers to their competitors In fact data from the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey ( JOLTS ) shows the highest quit rate since a sign of a challenging environment for employers to retain workers who were availing themselves of the tight competition for their services. Table compares the magnitude of earnings growth for different types of workers under the pre-COVID Trump economy with the expansion period from the previous administration. Table shows that earnings growth was higher across the board in the period since to before COVID-19 and on top of that workers earnings were outpacing those of managers and the bottom percent of wage earners were experiencing more rapid earnings growth than the top percent Chapter in both the and editions of the Economic Report of the President provides a comprehensive analysis of the pro-growth benefits of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Chapter of the Report discusses the benefits of the Trump Administration s focus on deregulation for household income | Chapter Table Growth in Earnings  *  * -&   )  "  *  b   # ' *    # ' *  *  ( *  * // * (    "   )  *    "   )         * ) * (   $ *    ) $ * )   $ *  ( Jul. Dec. ) ( Jan. Feb. )      *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * ) Note : Data represent a compound annual growth rate for : Q3 : Q4 or July December and : Q1 : Q4 or January January For workers and managers earnings are  ! $ )       "  &'4   ) $ ) "   *   ' '  * / #    / " * $   ) $ ) "     ! $ )     (  $  )   '  &'4   ) $ ) "   The CEA finds that higher earnings growth among low-wage workers is a result of rising labor demand in the Trump economy. Although some assert the importance of State-level minimum wage increases based on cross-state comparisons of wage growth since ( Van Dam and Siegel ; Nunn and Shambaugh ; Tung ; Tedeschi ) there are serious limitations and flaws in these analyses that undermine their conclusions. In particular the limitation of these studies is that they do not show that the timing of wage increases aligns with the timing of minimum wage hikes in States that have instituted such hikes. Thus the studies do not distinguish wage growth that occurred before a minimum wage hike from wage growth that occurred after a hike. Because of their failure to consider this timing issue these studies do not provide strong evidence that minimum wage hikes are responsible for wage growth. Additionally wage growth could have been higher in the States that increased their minimum wages even without the increases In contrast the CEA s analysis uses detailed microdata from the Current Population Survey to identify workers with direct exposure to minimum wage hikes based on their position in the wage distribution. The CEA then calculates the effect of the minimum wage by estimating what wage growth for the directly-affected group would have been had no minimum wage hike occurred Based on these calculations and a sensitivity analysis the CEA attributes as an upper bound only percentage points of wage growth among workers in the bottom third of the wage distribution to minimum wage hikes. To put this number in perspective such workers experienced total annual wage growth of percent between and In support of the view that strong labor market conditions not minimum wages drove the observed wage gains research by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta compares wage growth in States that increased their minimum Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery |  $ "     '    $  )  * # * '   )  * (    * # * '      Annual household income ( thousands of CPI-U-RS adjusted dollars )  $  )  ' '     # $ /  ) * /  $  ) $  $  ) $    )     '   &  *   )      ) /   * '  / $ * )     / *    ) )  '   *  $  '   )     * ) * ( $    ' ( ) /.  * /         * ) (   $   )      #   $ wages with those that did not. Robertson ( ) examines the ratio of the 12.5th percentile wage ( i.e. the median wage of the lowest quartile ) relative to the median wage for all workers. Between and this ratio was increasing indicating faster wage growth at the bottom of the distribution Notably the ratio was increasing at about the same rate among States that increased their minimum wages and among States that did not. Robertson ( ) concludes The increased tightness of labor markets or some other factor than hikes in State minimum wages is playing a role in pushing up the pay for those in lower-wage jobs. Looking back further than just the previous administration the $ jump in real median income in marked the largest one-year increase on record capping a nearly percent increase since after adjusting for the U.S. Census s redesign in Moreover figure reveals that the boost to household incomes occurred for all races with minorities experiencing outsized gains. Specifically in real median income for Black households rose by percent Hispanic Americans saw a percent boost and Asian Americans enjoyed an even larger percent increase while White households experienced a smaller but still substantial percent jump. Each of these figures represents record increases and record absolute levels The broad-based income and employment gains before COVID-19 also fueled rising household net worth lower income and wealth concentration | Chapter Figure Share of Total Net Worth by Percentile Share of total net worth ( percent ) Share of total net worth ( percent ) : Q3 Share held by top % of households ( left axis ) Declined percentage point since TCJA Increased percentage point since TCJA Share held by bottom % of households ( right axis ) Sources : Federal Reserve Board ; CEA calculations Note : TCJA = Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and a record fall in the official poverty rate. Through the fourth quarter of the net worth of the bottom percent increased by percent during President Trump s first term while it increased by percent for the top percent. Since the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act passed the wealth share of the top percent fell by percentage point while that of the bottom percent rose by percentage point as shown in figure This broad increase in net worth partly reflects the stark turnaround in the homeownership rate which reached percent in after recovering from a trough of percent. Income concentration also fell with the Gini coefficient a widely used measure of concentration that ranges between and declining from in to in Data from the Survey of Consumer Finances reveal broad wealth increases driven by the lower earners with median net worth in the lower two income quintiles up by over percent since Hispanics and African Americans enjoyed respective gains of percent and percent At the bottom of the income distribution the robust labor market expansion between and lifted million people out of poverty which is the largest three-year reduction to start any presidency since the War on Poverty began in As a proportion of the population the poverty rate fell to an all-time low of percent in with especially large poverty declines for African Americans Hispanics and Asians as figure makes Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery |  $ "    * -/4    /         )   $  ) $    $ " $ )  Percent  '   & $  ) $    )     $  )  ' '     * ) $  ) $    # $ /  *    )    Figure U.S. Real Gross Domestic Product dollars ( trillions ) : Q4 Actual CBO forecast ( Aug. ) FOMC forecast ( Sep. ) Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) ; Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) | Chapter evident. Moreover million children were lifted out of poverty between and driving the child poverty rate down to a 50-year low of percent In the years immediately preceding the pandemic the United States experienced robust GDP growth that exceeded what the Congressional Budget Office and the Federal Open Market Committee had previously forecast for those years as seen in figure Real GDP grew and percent in and respectively faster than any other Group of Seven country. Entering many forecasters slated U.S. output to grow at a healthy pace of about percent in though it is entirely plausible that the U.S. economy could have continued exceeding projections if the global economy had not been hit with the COVID-19 pandemic the largest exogenous shock since the Great Depression The Early Economic Effects of COVID-19 On January Chinese researchers announced the discovery of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus ( SARS-CoV-2 ) which causes the disease COVID-19 in the travel hub city of Wuhan China.2 On January the first case of a person contracting the new coronavirus after traveling from Wuhan was reported in the United States.3 By late February the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention had confirmed the first possible instance of community transmission in the United States and the Standard & Poor s began a sharp sell-off that continued through March losing percent of its value compared with its peak just before the outbreak.4 The Trump Administration responded by promptly putting in place nonpharmaceutical intervention policies to contain the virus.5 Travel restrictions on China were imposed on January and the restrictions were subsequently expanded to countries in Europe and several other countries by mid-March ( White House 2020a 2020b ) On March President Trump declared COVID-19 a national emergency ( White House 2020c ) The adoption of a host of socialdistancing measures which included school closures bans on group gatherings and closures of restaurants became prevalent across States shortly thereafter. By March Statewide school closures and restrictions on bars and restaurants had affected over percent of the U.S. population ( figure Chinese researchers isolated and confirmed a novel coronavirus after identifying a cluster of acute respiratory illnesses in Wuhan on December ( Patel Jernigan and 2019-nCov CDC Response Team ) The CDC announced the first case in the United States when a traveler sought treatment after returning from Wuhan to Washington State a few days earlier ( CDC 2020a ) The first case of COVID-19 with no prior travel to infected regions was confirmed by the CDC ( 2020b ) The CDC defines nonpharmaceutical interventions as actions apart from vaccination and taking medicine that people and communities can take to slow the spread of illnesses like the COVID-19 pandemic ( CDC 2020c ) Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery |  $ "     ) /  "  * !  / #      * '  / $ * )  )    /  / $    ./- $  / $ * )             Population ( percent )   $ ( $ /      )   ./   ) /                /    $ " )       # '/  *    # * * '   ' *             *  New York Times   /  /  * ' $    ) ) * )  ( ) /.        '  '  / $ * ) ) By March States had issued stay-at-home orders with an additional States having issued these orders for State sections. By early April over percent of the U.S. population lived in a State that had issued a stay-at-home order.6 Studies of the economic effects of past pandemics indicate that there are three main channels through which pandemics affect economic activity : ( ) increased mortality ( ) illness and absenteeism and ( ) avoidance behavior to reduce infection. These shocks reduce the size of the labor force aggregate productivity and aggregate demand. Consistent with these observations the economy has experienced sudden large and simultaneous shocks to supply and demand as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak in the United States On the supply side many businesses were shuttered by social-distancing measures that States and local authorities put in place or businesses After the Administration s efforts to inform the American public States began introducing restrictive mandates and regulations dictating protective behavior. The CEA finds that to percent of the observed total increases in a variety of protective behaviors appears to have been driven by the American people s voluntary decisions and the Administration s efforts to encourage these voluntary decisions and only percent to be accounted for by restrictive State mandates See Jonas ( ) ; Kilbourne ( ) ; Burns van der Mensbrugghe and Timmer ( ) ; Verikios et al. ( ) ; McKibbin and Sidorenko ( ) ; CEA ( ) ; and McKibbin ( ) | Chapter  $ "    /  $ '   )  $ ) "   $ ) "   / #    -'4   /  "  * !  / #   )  ( $    )      "  Year-over-year change ( percent )  # '/ $ ) '     )    $ ) $ ) "  CARES Act signed ./- $  / $ * )   " $ )                     *    * $ /  )  $ ) "    /   * /   #          /    $ " )   $ ) / *  '   * )     #   voluntarily adopted to stop the spread of the virus and flatten the curve. Those that remained open faced supply disruptions that prevented them from operating normally. On the demand side many consumers faced stayat-home orders or voluntarily limited their economic activity to reduce the risk of contracting the disease.9 Consumers also changed the composition of their demand ; for example they replaced restaurant meals with home-cooked meals and increased their demand for cleaning supplies High-frequency indicators that serve as proxies for demand across various economic activities show that the downturn began in early March in some cases before Statewide social-distancing measures were implemented and reached its trough at the end of April. Daily retail spending data started plunging in mid-March and bottomed out at a percent year-over-year decline at the end of March ( figure ) By the time shelter-in-place orders and dining E.g. on March ( before President Trump s announcement of COVID-19 as a national emergency ) the NBA had already suspended basketball games indefinitely. The following day Major League Baseball delayed the start of its season the National Hockey League suspended games and March Madness was canceled Baqaee and Farhi ( ) model the distinct shocks to supply and demand and study how the combination of supply and demand shocks explains the data. They argue that without the negative shock to aggregate demand the United States could have experienced stagflation or a combination of rising unemployment and rising prices. Instead the negative shock to aggregate demand has limited inflation Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery |  $ "     ! ! $    * ) " ./ $ * )   $ ) "  / #    -'4   /  "  * !  / #   )  ( $    $  )    *   ' '   /  /   )      "  Year-over-year change ( percent )  # '/ $ ) '    )   $ ) $ ) "  ./- $  / $ * )   " $ )                    *    * (  * (    ) /        '  '  / $ * ) restrictions began daily traffic congestion ( figure ) and seated diners ( figure ) across all States had already dropped over percent year-over-year Similarly weekly hotel occupancy had dropped percent year-over-year in the week these shelter-in-place measures began ( figure ) Supply indicators the number of small businesses that were open the number of hourly employees who were working and number of hours worked also saw the steepest year-over-year contraction in March and April Figure illustrates how these indicators compared with a January preCOVID-19 baseline as reported by Homebase.10 After shelter-in-place orders became widespread in mid-March the proportion of employees working fell from about percent below normal conditions to about to percent As the indicators discussed above show the restrictions on mobility and the shift toward social distancing played a major role in limiting economic activity. Academic research conducted since the COVID-19 pandemic began attempts to quantify the extent to which government restrictions versus voluntary mitigation behaviors can account for the decline in mobility during the Homebase is a company that provides software to help small business owners manage employee timesheets. Since the start of the pandemic Homebase has maintained a database of U.S. small business employment using data from more than businesses that use its software. The data cover more than million employees that were active in the United States in January Most Homebase customers are businesses that are individually owned or operator-managed restaurants food and beverages businesses retail outlets and service establishments | Chapter Figure Seated Diners in U.S. Restaurants per OpenTable during the Early Stages of the Pandemic Seven-Day Average Year-over-year change ( percent ) Shelter-in-place and dining restrictions begin Apr. Feb. Mar. Mar. Apr. Sources : OpenTable ; New York Times ; CEA calculations spring. For example Goolsbee and Syverson ( ) examine cellular phone records data on customer visits to individual businesses across contiguous boundaries with different policies. They conclude that consumer traffic started to decline before State and local restrictions were put in place that the degree of private mitigation behavior was tied to the local severity of the virus ( i.e. number of deaths in the county ) and that overall legal restrictions explained only a small fraction of the total decline in activity. However they do find that the shutdown orders caused a reallocation of consumer activity from nonessential to essential businesses and from restaurants and bars to groceries Another study by Cronin and Evans ( ) contains similar findings concluding that private self-regulating behavior explained more than three-quarters of the decline in foot traffic but that regulations had large effects on foot traffic to restaurants hotels and nonessential retail The pandemic also caused significant disruptions to the labor market and to macroeconomic activity. Due to their short reporting lag initial claims for Unemployment Insurance ( UI ) provide timely information on how the COVID19 pandemic and containment measures have affected the labor market. In March job losses occurred at a level not seen since the Great Depression with initial UI claims spiking from the week ending March to million two weeks later Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery | Figure Weekly U.S. Hotel Occupancy Rate during the Early Stages of the Pandemic Shelter-in-place and dining restrictions begin Year-over-year change ( percent ) Apr. Jan. Jan. Feb. Mar. Mar. Sources : STR ; CEA calculations  $ "     ) /   #  ) "  $ )   (  ' '   $ )  #  /     )   )   * 0-'4   ( ' *   # *     * -& $ ) "  $ )  / #    -'4   /  "  * !  / #    )  ( $   Percent change ( relative to January base )       # '/ $ ) '     )    $ ) $ ) "    /  ./- $  / $ * )   " $ ) $ " )   *  * -&     # * 0-'4  ( ' *  (   * !   $ )  * )             *   * (    * /  ' '   /   * (     " $ )    /   / #  (  $  )  ! *  / #  /     * !  / #  &   $ ) "  / #  $ *    )      #  ) (   * !  # * 0-'4  ( ' *  * -& $ ) "  /-    # *  * -&     # * 0-'4  ( ' *  | Chapter Data on total economic output also reflect the enormous negative shock that the COVID-19 pandemic and containment measures had on the economy First-quarter real GDP declined at an annualized rate of percent itself significant but this drop would later be dwarfed by the annualized percent collapse in second-quarter GDP. In early June the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) estimated that the COVID-19 pandemic and containment measures would decrease U.S. Q4-over-Q4 GDP by percent in in the absence of a second wave in the fall ( single-hit scenario ) or percent if such a wave were to occur ( double-hit scenario ) This forecast was more pessismistic than those provided by the Congressional Budget Office and the Blue Chip survey of the private sector in July which were still large at and percent decreases respectively The U.S. Economy s Resilience in Weathering the COVID-19 Shock Beyond the immediate prosperity that Americans were enjoying before COVID19 the vibrant state of the U.S. economy rendered it more resilient and better prepared to weather the COVID-19 shock than if it had occurred in earlier years To quantify this resilience the CEA simulates the likely path of the unemployment rate if the COVID-19 shock had occurred under the weaker economic conditions of instead of the stronger actual pre-COVID conditions To construct this simulation the CEA uses Current Population Survey data to measure the monthly probability that workers transit between employment unemployment and not being in the labor force. The CEA s analysis assumes that any year-over-year deterioration in transition probabilities from to is attributable to COVID-19 which makes it possible to isolate the magnitude of the COVID-19 shock to labor flows. Then the CEA applies this measured COVID-19 shock to monthly labor market transition probabilities to arrive at likely counterfactual labor market flows and ultimately unemployment dynamics if COVID-19 had occurred under economic conditions The solid blue line in figure shows the actual observed path of unemployment and the solid green line shows the simulated path of the unemployment response to COVID-19 under full conditions specifically starting from the percent February unemployment rate ( compared with percent in February ) and with the worse baseline ( without COVID-19 ) labor dynamism from As the figure shows if COVID-19 had arrived with the U.S. economy in its state the unemployment rate would likely have peaked at a higher rate and been nearly percentage points above the actual level in October. If instead the U.S. economy had entered the COVID-19 crisis with the level of unemployment but the healthier Trump labor market flows as shown in the red dashed curve in the figure the dynamics of unemployment would not have looked substantially different than what has actually Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery |  $ "    ) ( ' * ( ) /   )         #   (    * ) * (   / #    * ) / !   /0  '   /0  '  ! ' *  $ / #     Unemployment rate ( percent )  (  ! ' *  $ / #      0' '    * ) / !   /0  ' Sep.        ) '  "   *    )            '  '  / $ * )  * /      ) $ / $  '  ) ( ' * ( ) /   / occurred. In other words the difference in initial unemployment rates is not the crux of the superior resilience of the Trump economy. To the contrary the gold dashed curve shows that holding fixed the initial February unemployment rate at percent the unemployment rate would have followed a much worse trajectory if the economy had suffered from the worse underlying dynamism of the economy Comparing the COVID-19 Recession and the Great Recession The pre-COVID U.S. economy possessed fewer macroeconomic vulnerabilities than it had in the lead-up up to the Great Recession when overextended household borrowers and a highly leveraged financial sector precipitated the Great Recession. Unlike the previous recession the COVID-19 crisis was not the consequence of underlying economic imbalances and the greater resilience of the pre-COVID U.S. economy coupled with the superior fiscal response augurs well for the continuing prospects of a much more robust recovery. This section sheds light on the comparative health of the U.S. economy before the current crisis relative to the years before the financial crisis and Great Recession | Chapter The State of the Economy before the Crises This subsection looks at various sectors of the U.S. economy before the crises We consider households nonfinancial businesses and banks Households. The financial situation of the household sector was stronger in early than at the start of the Great Recession. From to household liabilities as a share of personal disposable income rose from percent to percent before falling back to below percent before COVID19 according to the Federal Reserve s Flow of Funds data. However examining only aggregates can obscure the true level of risk which is captured more accurately by the tails of the distribution. Even along this dimension however the U.S. economy was in a stronger position before the COVID-19 crisis than it was back in before the start of the financial crisis. The share of mortgages with debt-to-income ratios above percent fell from percent in to only percent in Though the loan-to-value ratio for new mortgages was similar to what it was in credit had shifted toward borrowers with high credit scores. Whereas percent of borrowers taking out a mortgage had below a credit score in that share was only percent in Borrowers were also taking out safer loans by The share of mortgages with less than full amortization fell from percent in to percent in and mortgages for which borrowers were only required to provide minimal documentation at origination saw their share drop from percent in to percent in ( Davis et al. ) Looking beyond mortgages the share of credit card volume going to subprime borrowers was under percent in compared with percent before the financial crisis according to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The bureau also shows that for automobile loans the share going to subprime borrowers was under percent in before COVID-19 versus nearly percent in Before COVID-19 researchers ran stress tests on households to examine how negative shocks to the economy would translate into defaults on household debt. One study simulates a fall in house prices similar to what occurred in the Great Recession and generates a much smaller peak in foreclosures ; the average shocked stressed default rate which represents for a particular loan its expected default rate if it were hit shortly after origination with a replay of the financial crisis was percent in compared with percent in ( Davis et al. ) Another study simulates a large house price decline and unemployment spike meant to mimic the financial crisis. When faced with the same shocks from to the simulated economic response generates fewer defaults because of healthier household balance sheets ( Bhutta et al. ) Although the COVID-19 economic shock differs from that of the last crisis the combined effect of stronger household balance sheets and a bolder fiscal response has greatly reduced the amount of actual financial distress that one would expect from such a large disruption Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery |  $ "     / $ *  * !  * # * '     / *   )    * ) ! $ )  )  $  '   $ )    /  / *   *   * ( ./ $    *   /    Debt-to-GDP ( ratio )  * # * '    / *    /  * ) ! $ )  )  $  '   $ )    /        *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $     '     *          '  '  / $ * )  * /  * # * '    / *    /  $ )  '0     /  * )     ) * ) * ! $ /  * "  ) $  / $ * )    /  $   ! $ )     * 0./  )  $ ) "  ' *  )   )     /   $ / $   #   $ ) "  ) * /     $ * )  Nonfinancial businesses. Although households were in good shape before the COVID-19 pandemic the nonfinancial business sector had become more leveraged. By early the aggregate debt-to-GDP ratio for nonfinancial businesses had reached levels not seen since the financial crisis ( figure ) One reason nonfinancial business debt has risen however is that interest rates are at historic lows. This reduces the burden of servicing debt. A basic measure of the debt burden is the ratio of company earnings to their interest payments or the interest coverage ratio. In the years leading up to the pandemic the interest coverage ratio for the median firm remained high ( Federal Reserve ) The sales-weighted shares of nonfinancial public corporations that use more than percent percent or percent of their earnings to make interest payments were all declining ; and in early at the onset of COVID-19 these shares were all lower than at the start of the Great Recession ( Crouzet and Gourio ) Despite historically low costs of borrowing the Federal Reserve and the International Monetary Fund have expressed concern about the quality of corporate debt. In early about percent of investment-grade debt was rated BBB an amount that was near a historical high. BBB is the lowest rating category for investment-grade debt and thus carries more risk of default than higher-grade debt. Another concern is that in recent years loans to large These ratios spiked in the second quarter of as GDP contracted sharply | Chapter corporations have increasingly focused on highly leveraged firms. In February at the onset of the pandemic recession the rate was higher than at the start of the Great Recession ( Federal Reserve ; IMF ) Overall the second quarter of had the highest quarterly volume of defaults in leveraged loans since the first quarter of ( LCD News ) Banks. The banking sector was well capitalized at the start of the COVID19 pandemic. According to data compiled by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation as of the fourth quarter of the commercial banking and savings and loan sector stood at a record or near-record in various measures of industry solvency and liquidity. This status was largely attributable to the continuous growth in the economy since the end of the Great Recession and the passage and continuing implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act of which dramatically raised regulatory oversight and capital standards for the industry The number of banks on the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation s Problem Bank List leading up to COVID-19 was exceptionally low. The number of problem banks fell from in : Q4 to by : Q4 the lowest number of problem banks since : Q4. Total assets of problem banks increased from $ billion in to $ billion in The commercial banking sector also entered the crisis with stable indicators of asset quality The Origins and Progression This subsection reviews the different origins of the COVID-19-induced recession and the Great Recession and the important differences in how these shocks played out over time. The financial crisis and resulting Great Recession of started with an overheated housing market. In housing market weakness began to emerge first in the form of longer selling delays indicating a deterioration in housing liquidity followed by deceleration and reversal in house price growth. The weakness in housing then spilled over into the rest of the economy because of the damage it wreaked on household and bank balance sheets alike By March there were reports that the housing slump had hit some hedge funds hard. In their book First Responders Bernanke Geithner and Paulson ( ) state that if we had to pick the date that the crisis began it would be August when the French bank BNP Paribas froze withdrawals from three funds that held securities backed by U.S. subprime mortgages. By the late summer of the investment bank Bear Stearns was liquidating two hedge funds that were heavily invested in subprime mortgages. Over the next year the contagion spread to every corner of financial markets and turned into a full-blown crisis. Facing deteriorating balance sheets and frozen markets lenders cut the supply of credit to the economy which caused households and businesses to curtail spending. As the economy hemorrhaged jobs higher unemployment accelerated the collapse in the housing market which further fueled the cascading spiral of economic misery Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery | The unemployment rate increased from percent in November to a peak of percent in October Moreover unemployment remained above percent for two years after the technical end of the recession ( i.e. when GDP stopped contracting ) and the average duration of unemployment for jobless workers stayed near historic highs. Households saw their housing wealth evaporate as prices fell by nearly percent on average with larger declines on the coasts and in several Sun Belt States at the same time that their retirement portfolios suffered a percent drop in the Dow Jones from peak to trough on March In addition million homes were foreclosed between and ( Dharmasankar and Mazumder ) Even with all the major interventions that were considered unprecedented at the time it took years for the U.S. economy to fully recover as scars from the crisis persisted Both the origins of the COVID-19 recession and the progression of the recovery have been quite different from those of the Great Recession. First as discussed above the pre-COVID U.S. economy was in a much healthier state lacking the household balance sheet vulnerabilities that exacerbated the wave of defaults and financial distress during the financial crisis. House prices have also remained remarkably stable likely buoyed by the surge in personal income fueled by the CARES Act and these prices are boosting family finances and have helped prevent a repeated wave of foreclosures like the one that ripped through the economy during the Great Recession. Most important the speed of the recovery to date has been dramatically faster with the unemployment rate spending only months above percent during the COVID-19 pandemic compared with the over two years it hovered above percent during the sclerotic recovery from the last recession. In the months of data since the trough of employment during COVID-19 the U.S. economy has already recovered percent of the lost jobs. By comparison it took months to gain back more than half the jobs lost in the aftermath of the Great Recession. Moreover the broader U-6 unemployment rate spent five years above percent during the slow recovery from the Great Recession whereas during COVID-19 the rate fell below that level after just months Fiscal and Monetary Responses Despite the health and resilience of the U.S. economy at the beginning of the initial negative shock was unprecedented. Moreover even though the immediate economic losses were concentrated in the second quarter of when shutdowns were widely in place throughout the United States the Federal Government took action to combat the short-term liquidity crisis and minimize the extent to which it could turn into a widespread solvency crisis for families and businesses with long-lasting negative effects on bankruptcies unemployment and production. This subsection compares the speed and scale of the Federal response to COVID-19 with the actions taken to combat | Chapter the Great Recession. Later chapters analyze the economic effect of the specific COVID-19 economic interventions The Federal Government s policies to address the financial crisis of evolved over a number of years and they ranged from the fiscal stimulus of increased government expenditures for infrastructure health education energy independence tax rebates targeting low- and middle-income families and tax incentives for business investment ; to assistance on refinancing or modifying mortgages to monetary open market operations and liquidityenhancing programs to bailouts and subsidies of various entities ; and finally to substantial regulatory changes. On the monetary policy side the Federal Reserve employed open market operations and later a program of largescale asset purchases ( commonly referred to as quantitative easing ) after the Federal Funds rate hit the zero lower bound. The Federal Reserve also took a variety of approaches to help provide liquidity to various markets and market participants primarily through the creation of several funding credit liquidity and loan facilities Besides these and other Federal Reserve interventions Congress passed significant stimulus bills over the course of the crisis. In February in an effort to ameliorate the growing crisis the Economic Stimulus Act of was passed offering tax recovery rebates to individuals and their dependents and targeting low- and middle-income taxpayers. The act also created incentives for business investment by permitting the accelerated depreciation or immediate expensing for certain assets. In October the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of was passed allocating $ billion to address the financial crisis by purchasing or insuring troubled assets and attempting to avert the failure of financial institutions identified as systemically important This established the Troubled Asset Relief Program known as TARP. In the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act was passed which included tax cuts and government expenditures totaling over $ billion for national infrastructure energy independence education health care and tax relief The Federal Government also stepped in to bail out the automobile industry In the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act was enacted entailing substantial changes to the regulatory architecture of U.S financial markets In addition the Federal Government took several actions to directly aid the housing market. It instituted the First-Time Homebuyer Tax Credit between and with the goal of stimulating home buying and house prices The government also created the Home Affordable Modification Program ( HAMP ) and Home Affordable Refinance Program ( HARP ) to prevent distressed or underwater borrowers from going into foreclosure. The main distinction between the two was that HAMP modified a borrower s existing mortgage contract often by extending the term or lowering the rate to reduce payments whereas HARP loosened underwriting requirements to allow underwater Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery | <BILL : PHOTO-REDUCE TO FIT ? >  $ "   Timelines for the  $   '   )    * ) /    * )  / *       )   / #   $ )  )  $  '   $ $  $ )  )  $  '  c- $ $  t $ ( ' $ )      t $ ( ' $ )  # $ )   * -/.  $ /.  ! $ -./         / #  Jan.      '     " ' *   '  #  '/ #  ( " )   Jan.  $  ) /   (  ./- $  /.  /-  '  ! * (   # $ )   Jan. Diamond Princess  " $ )    ) / $ ) Feb. * $ ) "     '   0-./.  $ / #  / #  '  " ./  $ ) " '       $ )  # * (   '  $ )  /2 *      Feb.  ) $ /    /  /  * -/.  ! $ -./         / #  Feb.  * * )  $     )   )    * )   ' ( ) /  '   * $  / $ * )    /  $ " )   $ ) / *  '   Mar.    ) /0-4   $ )  )  $  '  / #  '  " ./      $ (  ' )   ! $ ' s ! *    ) &-0+/  Apr.  $  ) /   (    '     n  / $ * )  '  e ( " )   Mar.   ( $ ' $   $ -./   * * )  $   * )    /  $ " )   $ ) / *  '   Mar.  $ -./  # '/ $ ) '    *        /  /  Mar. The  )  #    ) &        $    ! -ee5 s  $ / #    '.  ! * (  / #  ! )   / #  /  # o '    $ / $     &         $ (  ( * -/ "  " Aug.  $ (     '    $ /     $ ' $ /4  *  / $ * )  ' Mar.  * )    -& /   0/0  '   )   $ $  $ /4     $ ' $ /4  *  / $ * )  '  Mar.         /   $ " )   $ ) / *  '  Mar.  * ( (  $  '      )  $ ) "     $ ' $ /4  *  / $ * )  ' Apr.  (    / $ * )     $ ' $ /4      $ ) $ / $  /  Dec.    #  &   * /  / $ * )   * "  (  $ $  $ /4     $ ' $ /4  *  / $ * )  '  Apr.   * ) * ( $    / $ ( 0'0.    /  )   /  Feb.    #  &   * /  / $ * )   * "  (   )    '/ #      ) #  )  ( ) /    /  $ " )   $ ) / *  '   Apr.  $ (     '    $ /     $ ' $ /4       and   (    $ / $  )  $ ) "     $ ' $ /4        /  Mar.     /  )  collapses   )   $   * " # /      * "  )   #  Mar.   ) ) $     and     $      '     $ ) / *  c * )  / * # $ Sep. Leh (  )   * / #    '   bankruptcy Sep.  ( " )     * ) * ( $    /   $ ' $  / $ * )    /  signed into law  ./   ' $ # $ ) "      Oct.  (   /    &     $ / $  *  )     $ ' $ /4      $ ) /- *    Nov.  /- $ ' ' $ * )   " )    * -/ "  "    &     $ / $    #    * "  (   " $ ) Jan.  ( $   )    *   )    $ ) ./ ( ) /    /       signed into law Feb.  *   New York Times  )  ) &   $ / # )   )     0'. * )   Note : WHO = World Health Organization          )   "      $ / $    ' $   $  /  ) ./ ( ) /   * "  (      ./   ' $ #  Mar. borrowers with negative home equity to take advantage of lower interest rates through refinancing Relative to the Great Recession the Federal Government has responded with even greater speed and coordination to COVID-19 and with an even more expansive range of policies ( figure ) The Federal Reserve rapidly cut the Federal Funds rate target range to percent at the effective lower bound ( percent ) and it began to reactivate liquidity facilities that it had set up during the financial crisis. In a matter of just a couple of months the Federal Reserve s balance sheet jumped by over $ trillion compared with the five years it took to expand by that amount during the Great Recession. The | Chapter Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery |  / *  % * $ ) /  ! $ '   )      )  ) /    $ ' ' $ * )  / $ ( 0'0.   #  &  / *  % * $ ) /  ! $ '   )      )  ) /    $ ' ' $ * ) * # * '     /   ' $ ! * (  ! ! *    '   *  $ ! $   / $ * )  * "  ( ; * (  ! ! *    '   ! $ )  )    * "  (  *  ' *   &'4  ' ( ) /   ( *  / * $ ( ; &  3/ ) $ * )   $  / $ * ) ( *  / * $ (  )    / *  $ )  '0   ' ! ( ' *    )   * / #  # *   * ) o/   ' $ !  ! *  " '       $ ' ' $ * )   ) ( ' * ( ) /  )  )   &'4  ' ( ) /   / *   &  3/ ) $ * )    '    f   $ ' $ / $    $ ' ' $ * ) ;  $ ' $ )  ' *  ) "   ) /   )   * ' '  "  ) / ;    / $ * )  '   $ /4  $ / $   '   $ )  ' *  )  "   ) /   $ ' ' $ * )  $   )   "   $ )   ' $ !        $ ' ' $ * )  ' ' *   /     $ ' ' $ * )   $  ;    '    f   $ ' $ / $ ;    ) &  $ )  )    )     $ /  (  -& /  $ )  )  ;   0/ *  $ )  0./-4 * -/    #  &  * /  / $ * )  * "  (    $ ' ' $ * ) ;  ( ' *  / ) / $ * )       $ / ;     ' *  )  ) $ * )  ( *  $ ! $   / $ * )  (  ' '   $ )   ' $ !     ' *  )   % 0./ ( ) /    ' $   #  '/ #   )    #  * $  / $ * ) ;  * $    ' $ !   )     $ ' ' $ * )     / $ * )  /   $ ' $  / $ * )  )    $ ' ' $ * ) ;  /0  ) /    /   !  '  /  / and *   '   * ) ( ) /   $   )   ! *  * "  (  * (  # $ " # ' $ " # /  / # * " # * 0/  / # is /   '   ( $ ) $ ./    S/  /   )   ' *   '  " * ) ( ) /.   $  * 0/    / # F   '  " * ) ( ) /    $ ' ' $ * )  * * )  $   ' $ !  ( *  ( ' * $    )  ! 0' '   * ' '  /     $ ' ' $ * )  !  ' ;  ( *   ) $ * )  * !   /    / $ ) "  *       &. ;  ! -red   ( ) /.  * !   *  $  '    $ /4 /   / # * " #   (       0/.    $ /.   '/ #       / $ * )  )    !  '  '/ #      # * * '   ( *   $  $  / $ * )  * ' '   )  ( ' * $      $ ' ' $ * ) !   $ ' $ /4  ) /  " * $ ) /  )  $ ) "   * ' '  /    0/   $ ' ' $ * ) )  * (  /     / $ trillion ( $ billion FFCRA $ trillion CARES $ billion PPHCEA ) Total Legislative Fiscal Relief $ trillion ( $ billion ESA $ billion ARRA $ billion TARP ) Sources : Great Recession : Economic Stimulus Act of ( ESA ) ; American Recovery and Reinvestment Act ; Troubled Asset Relief Program ( TARP ) ; COVID-19 : Families First Coronavirus Response Act ; CARES Act ; Paycheck Protection and Health Care Enhancement Act COVID-19 Pandemic ( Nominal ) Relief Category Great Recession ( Nominal )    '   The    '   * )   $ ) "  / #    /    $ * )   )       <BILL : MAKE THIS A TURNED TABLE FULL PAGE AND PHOTO-REDUCE IF NECESSARY> Federal Reserve has also created Main Street Lending Facilities to direct relief to a larger swath of small and mid-sized firms The fiscal response to COVID-19 has also been swifter and larger ( figure ) During the Great Recession a fiscal stimulus was rolled out in phases over the course of a year : the Economic Stimulus Act ( ESA ) in February the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act in October and the American Reinvestment and Recovery Act ( ARRA ) in February By contrast during COVID-19 the Federal government passed the Families First COVID-19 Response Act and the CARES Act both within March ( along with the smaller Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act ) Moreover the CARES Act delivered $ trillion in fiscal relief compared with a bit over $ billion by the ARRA ( or about $ billion after adjusting for inflation ) In terms of composition both fiscal packages delivered direct aid to households in the form of rebates and unemployment insurance. The ARRA also contained a payroll tax cut and direct aid to States to address revenue shortfalls. Unlike in the Great Recession however the CARES Act during COVID19 established the Paycheck Protection Program ( PPP ) which has disbursed $ billion in loans to small businesses to help them maintain payrolls and avoid insolvency Table provides a summary comparison of the fiscal response to COVID-19 to that of the Great Recession. As is evident not only has the magnitude of legislative fiscal relief during COVID-19 been nearly twice as large overall but the increased aid has also gone primarily to households and small businesses with more generous unemployment insurance and Economic Impact Payments to the former and the novel PPP to the latter. The next subsection provides a more detailed account of how the policy response to COVID-19 has been unprecedented in the support provided to low-income workers Federal Support for Low-Income Households A primary focus of the CARES Act and other relief bills has been the provision of cash and economic support to economically vulnerable households. This subsection compares these unprecedented measures with those adopted during the Great Recession Economic Impact Payments and other tax provisions. In both the COVID-19 recession and the Great Recession the Federal Government used tax provisions to provide economic support to households. The Economic Stimulus Act of ( ESA ) passed during the Bush Administration included an individual income tax recovery rebate. The rebates were sent to taxpayers in the form of stimulus checks. The typical tax filer received a credit of up to $ for single filers or up to $ for joint filers. Eligible individuals received an additional $ per dependent child. Individuals without a net tax liability were still eligible for the rebate but only if they had earnings of at least $ annually The rebate was phased out at a rate of percent for incomes over $ and | Chapter $ for those filing jointly ( the same as the CARES Act ) ARRA passed in under the Obama Administration authorized a Making Work Pay personal tax credit for and which provided a refundable tax credit of up to $ for single working individuals and up to $ per couple. The credit was phased out for incomes over $ ( or $ for joint filers ) at a rate of cents per $ of higher income. ARRA also included one-time stimulus payments of $ for seniors persons with disabilities and veterans During the COVID-19 recession the Federal Government has also used tax provisions to provide economic relief to households. The support was larger in monetary value than in the ESA or ARRA and it was not limited to households with Federal income tax liability so it thereby extended relief to the lowestincome households. In the CARES Act the U.S. government provided swift Economic Impact Payments to individuals generally based on and tax return information. Those not receiving the advance payments in can file for them as a tax credit on taxes. Although the phase-out rate and income thresholds are the same as under ESA and ARRA the CARES Act payments were significantly larger offering up to $ to individuals and $ to joint filers ( El-Sibaie et al. ) The CARES Act payments were also larger for eligible individuals with children. ESA offered an extra $ tax credit per dependent child while ARRA expanded eligibility for the child tax credit. The CARES Act by comparison provided a $ tax rebate per dependent child using the same eligibility criteria for dependent children as the child tax credit Unlike the ESA tax credit the CARES tax rebate does not require a minimum tax liability to receive the full rebate ( Marr et al. ) meaning that those at the very lowest end of the income distribution received income support Some types of tax relief enacted under ARRA were not paralleled in the CARES Act. ARRA enhanced the Earned Income Tax Credit by expanding its coverage and raising the credit claimed by workers with three or more children Although these changes were initially enacted on a temporary basis Congress later made them permanent. ARRA also subsidized the purchase of cars and first-time homeowners through an automobile sales tax credit ( $ billion total ) and a homeownership tax credit ( $ billion ) Workforce programs. In its response to both recessions the Federal Government provided support for the Nation s workforce. Overall the CARES Act provided significantly more support. The support was also targeted to reflect the different nature of the crisis. In the Great Recession out of the $ billion ARRA stimulus package about $ billion helped finance various public workforce programs to accommodate expanded participation ( table ) State unemployment insurance agencies received $ million in administrative support funding and $ billion in modernization funds to address increased demand ( BLS ) By comparison the Families First COVID-19 Response Act authorized $ billion in additional funding to support UI administration Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery |    '    )  $ ) "  * !    % *   * -& ! *    * "  (  ) $ / $  / $  )   / #   ( $     $ ) ./ ( ) /   )     *    /    )  $ ) "  A ( * ) /  $ ' ' $ * ) s of   * ' '      ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )    *  ) $  / $ * ) Wagner Peyser Act grants to States Wagner Peyser Act reemployment services      0'/     $ ' *   /    * -&     $ ' *   /    * -&    / $ * )  '   $ " #   * 2/ #   )    ( " $ ) "  )  0./-4  "  ) /     * 0/ # *    *  * 0/ #  $ '   ) $ *   * ( ( ) $ /4   $    ( ' * ( ) /   * "  (   /  F0 )  $ ) "  C  / " *  *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $      '   )   *  (  )   * /       * -& ! *   ) ./ ( ) /    /  to assist States with processing increased caseloads and expanded programs ( Emsellem and Evermore ; Goger Loh and George ) Congress also funded additional enhancements and extensions to the Unemployment Insurance program. In response to the rise in the number of workers unemployed for more than weeks Congress enacted a temporary extension UI. The Emergency Unemployment Compensation Act of and its extensions included additional tiers of benefit weeks to supplement regular State UI and expanded Extended Benefits programs. In combination between November and September these programs extended the maximum number of weeks UI recipients could receive benefits for up to weeks In ARRA added to these benefits providing both for expanded UI duration and an additional benefit of $ per eligible worker in weekly UI benefits through temporary Emergency Unemployment Compensation. This benefit enhancement cost the Federal Government $ billion during the period The permanent Extended Benefits program became completely federally funded through January and State eligibility rules were relaxed to make more unemployed workers eligible. These Extended Benefits cost the Federal Government $ billion during ARRA also temporarily suspended the taxation of the first $ of UI benefits In response to the COVID-19 recession Congress both temporarily extended the duration of UI benefits and increased their level considerably relative to the Great Recession. Under the CARES Act UI benefits were extended for up to an additional weeks and States were allowed to eliminate the | Chapter mandatory 1-week waiting period before benefits can be released to recipients The CARES Act also offered a considerable increase in additional UI income times greater than the additional benefit of $ that was offered during the Great Recession. Workers claiming UI received a $ weekly supplement through July Furthermore unlike the Recovery Act the CARES Act added a new program to expand eligibility for UI benefits to include the selfemployed gig workers workers with limited work history and other types of workers who would not otherwise qualify for regular UI benefits. After the $ weekly supplement expired in July and in the absence of Congressional action the Trump Administration extended relief to unemployed workers by issuing a Presidential Memorandum creating the Lost Wages Assistance Program which authorized the use of Disaster Relief Funds to make supplemental payments of up to $ ( $ Federal contribution $ optional State contribution ) per week for lost wages. Forty-nine states along with Washington DC and some US territories ultimately signed up for the program which provided six weeks worth of benefits to every State and territory that applied by September During the Great Recession under ARRA individuals eligible for UI were referred to the Employment Service for job referral and reemployment services. ARRA allocated an additional $ million in Reemployment Services Grants to local employment offices to better serve UI recipients. The Bureau of Labor Statistics notes that despite increased funding the local offices still faced major constraints which resulted in increased enrollment in low-cost services ( e.g. orientations assessments ) but smaller increases in expensive and labor-intensive services ( e.g. counseling education training ) Other employment services such as the Workforce Innovation Dislocated Worker program and the Workforce Innovation Adult program also received increased funding ( table ) The CARES Act does not have a parallel to ARRA s increase in funding for Reemployment Services Grants and Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act formula programs. As outlined in a previous CEA report ( ) many government training programs lack rigorous evidence-based results that demonstrate their effectiveness in training or retraining workers and helping them find employment. The CARES Act does however provide $ million in Dislocated Worker Grants to prevent prepare for and respond to COVID-19. In addition the act offers incentives to States to adopt or make better-use of short-time compensation programs which would allow employers to avoid laying off their employees by reducing their hours. Under these programs workers would still be eligible for UI benefits to make up for their reduced working hours The CARES Act goes far beyond ARRA to support the workforce through its funding of the PPP. The program was designed to support small business employers and their employees during the pandemic. The CARES Act authorized $ billion in PPP loans to support payroll and other expenses for America s small businesses self-employed individuals Tribal business Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery | concerns and nonprofit/veterans organizations. As part of the PPP and Health Care Enhancement Act an additional $ billion was authorized bringing the total amount authorized for the PPP to $ billion. While the funds will be used to guarantee and forgive loans a condition for making the loans fully forgivable is that no less than percent ( originally percent ) of the funds be spent on payroll expenses within a 24-week ( originally 8-week ) period Healthcare. The Federal response to support healthcare during the COVID-19 recession has been much different from its response in the Great Recession because of the need to directly address the effects of the COVID-19 health crisis. There was no parallel to this in the Great Recession which was driven by a financial crisis rather than a health-related crisis During the Great Recession the Federal response for healthcare focused on temporarily increasing healthcare benefits for people who lost their jobs Before the Great Recession the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act ( COBRA ) required many employers to provide continued healthcare coverage to workers ( and their dependents ) who lost their jobs but it did not require employers to continue subsidizing the premium payments. ARRA provided a percent subsidy for employers to help cover the premium payments of most COBRA-eligible workers who lost their jobs between September and May This subsidy covered workers and their dependents for up to months ( later extended to months ) The CARES Act did not change the terms of COBRA but the Department of Labor temporarily extended deadlines for workers who lost their jobs to sign up for coverage and pay premiums To respond directly to the COVID-19 health-crisis the CARES Act established the Provider Relief Fund to support healthcare providers in the midst of the pandemic. The CARES Act through the Department of Health and Human Services allotted $ billion to hospitals and other healthcare providers. The Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act provided an additional $ billion for the Provider Relief Fund to healthcare providers to reimburse heightened costs and lost revenues that are attributable to COVID19. The Department of Health and Human Services is currently allocating this $ billion in aid. The aid includes specific programs to provide safety net relief to hospitals that serve the most vulnerable segment of the population as well as rural hospitals and those in small metropolitan areas Although this aid is substantial the portion going to hospitals is unlikely to fully offset the losses that hospitals have experienced during the pandemic The American Hospital Association estimates that the pandemic imposed over $ billion in losses on the American healthcare system in the four-month period between March and June Over percent of this estimated cost is due to revenue losses from canceled surgeries and other services. This includes both elective and nonelective procedures outpatient treatments and emergency department services. The remaining or so percent of estimated losses are based on the direct costs of COVID-19 to hospitals : losses from COVID-19 | Chapter hospitalizations additional purchases of personal protective equipment and additional support that hospitals provide to their front-line workers The CARES Act also provided $ billion to help increase COVID-19 testing. This includes up to $ billion to reimburse the cost of testing uninsured individuals in addition to the $ billion previously appropriated for this purpose by the Families First Coronavirus Relief Act ( FFCRA ) The FFCRA also as amended by the CARES Act requires Medicare Part B State Medicaid and Children s Health Insurance Programs and group health plans and health insurance issuers to cover COVID-19 diagnostic testing without cost sharing for patients. Uninsured individuals may also obtain COVID-19 diagnostic testing free of charge under State Medicaid programs if a State offers this option. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services has made an accessible and easy-touse toolkit for States to amend their Medicaid programs in order to offer this service Education. During the Great Recession the Federal Government directed a considerable portion of stimulus spending to education allocating $ billion in additional spending under ARRA. A central goal of the funding was to avert layoffs in school districts and universities. About half the funding was allocated to State governors for use in primary secondary and higher education through the State Fiscal Stabilization Fund. An additional $ billion was targeted to low-income students and about $ billion was designated to support students with disabilities. About $ billion was used to increase the funding available for Pell Grants for higher education that support students from low-income households. ARRA also established the American Opportunity Tax Credit which modified an existing education credit ( the HOPE credit ) by relaxing income-based eligibility limits to cover more students qualifying more expenses for the credit and allowing the credit to be claimed not only for study at two-year institutions but also for study at four-year higher education institutions Under the CARES Act the Federal Government provided $ billion in emergency relief to educational institutions. This includes about $ billion for K-12 schools allocated mainly in proportion to a State s enrollments of low-income students. Another $ billion is allocated to higher education with most of the allocation based on an institution s share of Pell Grant recipients but with about $ billion allocated to Historically Black Colleges and Universities and other institutions serving students of color which are discussed further in chapter of this Report. Another $ billion in relief is for governors to distribute to schools or higher educational institutions that have been particularly affected by COVID-19 A major difference between the Great Recession and the current crisis is the large number of school closures across the country in response to the pandemic. Between the first and third weeks of March close to percent of kindergarten primary and secondary schools were shut down. These closures Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery | have had a substantial negative effect both on the U.S. economy and on children themselves. Prorated estimates based on analyses by Angrist and Krueger ( ) and Bhuller Mogstad and Salvanes ( ) suggest that children are likely to experience a persistent percent decline in future earnings as a result of lower human capital accumulation from the shortened school year Meanwhile parents who have had to miss work entirely because of childcare duties induced by school closures may also experience a reduction in lifetime earnings. The CEA estimates that percent of the workforce may experience a persistent percent drop in lifetime earnings because of lost job experience due to school closures. The effects are likely to be particularly severe for earlycareer single mothers who will experience not just lower earnings but also less secure job prospects. Accordingly the safe reopening of schools will help to boost the economy and support economically vulnerable students and their families Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program. The Federal Response in both recessions included support for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) the Federal program that provides nutritional assistance to help America s neediest families purchase food. During the Great Recession ARRA allocated $ billion in additional SNAP benefits for all participants and raised the minimum benefits. As a result of these changes in the average monthly SNAP benefit increased by $ In addition to increasing the monthly benefit ARRA suspended work requirements for nondisabled childless adults between April and September The Families First COVID-19 Response Act provided authority for work requirement waivers and SNAP benefit increases up to the maximum allotment for households not already receiving the maximum. The CARES Act provided over $ billion in additional contingency funding for the increased costs associated with the FFCRA provisions as well as anticipated increased participation in SNAP. As provided by the FFCRA and the CARES Act the Department of Agriculture also provided waivers of certain requirements so that nutrition programs could reach families and children during the social-distancing restrictions. The FFCRA also suspended work requirements for nondisabled childless adults through the month after the end of the COVID-19 public health emergency Housing assistance programs. During the Great Recession the Federal response under ARRA provided $ billion for programs administered by the Department of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) including $ billion for the Homelessness Prevention and Rapid Re-Housing Program. As discussed in chapter of this Report the CARES Act provided housing relief to homeowners and renters in the form of forbearance for federally backed mortgages and a 120-day eviction moratorium that was subsequently extended by the Trump Administration via Executive Order Fighting the Spread of COVID-19 by Providing Assistance to Renters and Homeowners. The CARES | Chapter Act also allocated $ billion for programs administered by HUD for fiscal year The funding includes $ billion for the homeless who are among the most vulnerable and hardest hit by the pandemic. These funds will support the Emergency Solutions Grants program which assists homeless populations or populations at risk of becoming homeless. About $ billion of these funds are being used to operate emergency shelters ( covering food rent security etc. ) make even more emergency shelters available provide essential services to homeless populations ( including childcare employment assistance and mental health services ) and prevent individuals from becoming homeless through rapid rehousing Conclusion The COVID-19 pandemic has had a profound effect on what had been a robust U.S. economy at the start of The Blue Chip panel of professional forecasters immediately began to sharply revise down its GDP projections in March as the pandemic was taking hold as did the Federal Reserve and the OECD when updating their forecasts. Instead of predicting GDP growth of about percent for all three issued dire warnings of a GDP contraction of about percent to as much as percent which would have marked the steepest contraction since the 1930s. However the swift and dramatic fiscal interventions implemented in late March and early April by the Federal Government paid dividends throughout the summer and the U.S. economy consistently outperformed expectations As a result as of the fall of all three leading forecasters were taking a much more sanguine view of GDP growth for the year predicting that GDP will end up falling by less than percent. Whether this robust recovery maintains a healthy pace depends partly on the progression of virus mitigation efforts and the continuation of appropriate and responsive levels of fiscal support. The chapters that follow provide an in-depth discussion of the major components of the fiscal response and their ensuing effects on different aspects of the U.S economy Creating the Fastest Economic Recovery | x Chapter Prioritizing America s Households The economic and health crises stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic required a coordinated response from all levels of government to protect the livelihoods of Americans. The Trump Administration took decisive action and worked with Congress to pass and sign three major bills in March the largest of which was the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security ( CARES ) Act to address the economic fallout from the pandemic. As CARES Act provisions began to expire or dissipate in August and in the absence of further Congressional action President Trump followed up with a series of executive actions that extended further relief to American households A key goal of these policies was to provide financial support to American households weathering the sharp pandemic-fueled economic contraction These policies were highly successful against this unprecedented event Even as the unemployment rate climbed from a 50-year low of percent in February to percent two months later in April household incomes increased thanks to Economic Impact Payments and to expanded and enhanced Unemployment Insurance. Lower-income households generally experienced the largest percentage income increases and their monthly income in every month through at least August exceeded pre-COVID levels In addition to providing direct financial relief the CARES Act and follow-up executive branch actions from the Trump Administration protected Americans against the risk of eviction and student loan defaults. Evictions fell below preCOVID levels in cities across the United States averting bouts of homelessness or shared housing that could pose additional health risks in the midst of the pandemic The long-run success of actions taken to support households will depend on the pace and depth of the economic recovery. Between April and November the unemployment rate fell by percentage points from percent to percent the largest seven-month decline on record. Almost percent of all jobs lost between February and April had been recovered by November as employment increased by million over this period Continued economic recovery supported by President Trump s executive actions designed to extend assistance beyond the expiration of CARES Act provisions can pave the way back to the same strong economy that prevailed during the first three years of the Trump Administration which was spurred in part by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and other pro-growth policies. Between and median net worth increased by percent with an increase of percent for Black-headed households and percent for Hispanic-headed households. Median income increased by percent between and and the one-year percent increase in was the largest one-year increase ever recorded. Poverty hit a record low in for all racial and ethnic groups and fell by the largest amount ( percentage points ) in over years. With continued pro-growth policies including deregulation and the continued benefits of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act the pre-COVID economy can be attained again and households will continue to benefit from the gains experienced during the first three years of the Trump Administration T he partial shutdown of the U.S. economy in response to COVID-19 was unprecedented. Over percent of Americans were affected by statewide school closures and restrictions on bars and restaurants by late March and were subject to State-level stay-at-home orders by early April. As a result of these events between February and April the unemployment rate increased from the lowest level in over years ( percent ) to the highest level since the Great Depression ( percent ) Aggregate pretransfer disposable income in the United States fell by percent between February and April the largest two-month reduction ever recorded. Because job losses were concentrated among lower-wage workers the reduction in pretransfer income hit lower-income households the hardest threatening their ability to pay for rent food and other basic necessities | Chapter Due to the rapid and unprecedented actions taken by President Trump and Congress these harmful effects on American households were strongly mitigated. On March President Trump delayed Tax Day providing liquidity to Americans with tax liabilities. And following two other important pieces of legislation on March President Trump signed the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security ( CARES ) Act into law providing $ trillion in relief for households and businesses. A family with two children and an income below $ received an Economic Impact Payment of $ almost twice as much as the maximum $ stimulus checks provided during the Great Recession. And unlike the Great Recession stimulus payments full Economic Impact Payments were available to the lowest-income households with no tax liability. The CARES Act also provided unprecedented relief to those workers who lost their jobs. A supplemental $ weekly Unemployment Insurance ( UI ) payment ensured that most workers who lost their jobs did not experience a reduction in income and eligibility was expanded to workers not typically eligible for UI benefits. The CARES Act further placed a moratorium on foreclosures and evictions in homes with federally backed mortgages. Earlier legislation extended paid leave benefits for families that could not work due to illness or to care for children affected by school closures President Trump provided additional relief to households when CARES Act provisions expired and Congress was unable to reach a consensus on extensions. He issued several important executive actions on August providing $ a week in supplemental Federal assistance to unemployed workers ; deferring the employee portion of payroll taxes through the end of ; issuing an order to assist renters unable to pay their rent and ultimately imposing a moratorium on evictions from all rental housing through the end of ; and extending the deferral of student loan payments with no interest through the end of These executive branch actions ensured that many households would continue to receive relief in the absence of further legislative packages Due to the CARES Act and subsequent executive action by the Trump Administration poverty and income inequality fell and most workers who lost their jobs experienced no income loss while receiving supplemental unemployment benefits. In the months immediately after passage of the CARES Act households across the income distribution saw an increase in income relative to pre-COVID levels. The gains were largest for the lowest-income households For example for households at the 25th percentile monthly incomes spiked by percent in April largely due to Economic Impact Payments ; and these households were still above pre-COVID levels from May through August largely due to expanded UI benefits. In fact Economic Impact Payments alone were large enough to keep a family of four out of poverty for months even if they lost all other income. Expanded UI benefits ensured that the vast majority of unemployed workers received at least as much from UI as they did from Prioritizing America s Households | working. Though these UI payments would typically create strong work disincentives the partial economic shutdown between April and July mitigated such concerns ( Altonji et al. ; Bartik et al. ; Marinescu Skandalis and Zhao ) The somewhat reduced emergency lost wages assistance issued under President Trump s executive action in August alleviated some of the work disincentives of the $ payments as the recovery from March and April proceeded while continuing to provide additional support to unemployed workers These actions helped pave the way for a strong economic recovery Between April and November the unemployment rate fell by percentage points from percent to percent the largest seven-month decline on record. Continued economic recovery combined with President Trump s executive actions extending assistance to many households beyond the expiration of key CARES Act provisions can pave the way to attaining the historically strong pre-COVID labor market and overall economy A strong economy is the most effective tool for lifting up households in the long term. From when President Trump was elected in until median net worth increased by percent with the biggest gains for minority groups. Median net worth increased by percent for Black-headed households and by percent for Hispanic-headed households ( Federal Reserve Board of Governors ( 2020a 2020c ) Median income increased by percent between and and increased by percent in alone the largest one-year increase ever recorded. In poverty fell by the largest amount ( percentage points ) in over years and hit a record low. Black poverty fell below percent for the first time ever. Continued pro-growth policies including deregulation and the continued benefits of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) can help ensure that the pre-COVID economy can be attained again allowing households to continue seeing the gains experienced during the first three years of the Trump Administration.1 The Strength of the Pre-COVID Economy and the COVID-19 Shock The Trump Administration s policies have focused on spurring economic growth and job creation. Deregulation has reduced the costs for businesses to invest and hire workers. Tax reform has encouraged new capital investment and has reduced taxes on households that impose high effective tax rates on work particularly at the lower end of the income distribution. Other policies such as expanded childcare assistance for low-income workers Opportunity Zones and record investments to lessen the opioid epidemic have helped The CEA previously released research on some of the topics discussed in this chapter. The text of this chapter builds on the CEA report Evaluating the Effects of the Economic Response to COVID19 ( CEA ) | Chapter spur job growth for those remaining on the sidelines of the labor market. Until COVID-19 struck the result of these policies was higher economic growth and a strong labor market especially for the most disadvantaged Americans Between January when President Trump took office and February the U.S. unemployment rate fell from to percent the lowest level in years. Traditionally disadvantaged Americans experienced the largest labor market gains. Between January and February the unemployment rate for Black Americans fell by percentage points and for Hispanic Americans by percentage points which was even larger than the overall decline of percentage points The rise in labor demand not only brought more workers into the workforce but also increased wages. Real average hourly earnings rose percent between January and February Wage growth was fastest for the lowest-wage workers who through the first three years of the Trump Administration saw a nominal wage increase of percent percentage points higher than the growth of median wages for all workers during the same period Increased employment and wages translated into large income gains for households. Between and U.S. median pretax household income increased by percent. Due to the TCJA after-tax income grew even faster For example a family of four with an income of $ now pays $ less in taxes than before the TCJA according to the Tax Policy Center s Tax Cuts and Jobs Act Calculator Households across the income distribution experienced income gains during the first three years of the Trump Administration. Pro-growth policies reduced poverty by percentage points ( million people ) between and And the poverty rate reached an all-time record low of percent in All racial and ethnic groups reached record low poverty rates with the Black poverty rate falling below percent for the first time ever Family wealth also increased during the Trump Administration. Between and overall median net worth increased by percent with increases of percent for Black-headed families and percent for Hispanicheaded families. Net worth increased the most for lower-middle-wealth families ( those between the 25th and 50th percentiles of net worth ) who saw a percent increase in mean net worth. Homeownership increased by percentage points between and the first three-year increase documented by the Survey of Consumer Finances since ( Federal Reserve Board of Governors 2020b 2020d ) The strong economic growth that lifted up all households between and was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Between February and April the unemployment rate spiked from percent to percent and this 11.2-percentage-point increase alone was larger than the peak unemployment rate reached during the Great Recession. Job vacancies Prioritizing America s Households | fell more than percent by late April ( Forsythe et al. ) The Congressional Budget Office forecasted in May that the unemployment rate would be percent in : Q3 and percent in : Q4 which would mean an unemployment rate that continued to exceed the Great Recession s peak for the remainder of In reality the unemployment rate fell lower than these predictions ; in November it was only percent well below what the office ( CBO ) had predicted Policy Responses Providing Household Relief In response to the sudden and severe shock caused by COVID-19 Congress quickly passed and President Trump signed into law three pieces of legislation in March : the Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act on March ; the Families First Coronavirus Response Act on March ; and the CARES Act on March ( which was supplemented in April by the Paycheck Protection and Health Care Enhancement Act ) After certain provisions of these acts expired and in the absence of forthcoming legislation President Trump issued a series of important executive actions on August : an Executive Order on Fighting the Spread of COVID19 by Providing Assistance to Renters and Homeowners ( White House 2020a ) ; a Memorandum on Deferring Payroll Tax Obligations in Light of the Ongoing COVID-19 Disaster ( White House 2020d ) ; a Memorandum on Authorizing the Other Needs Assistance Program for Major Disaster Declarations Related to Coronavirus Disease ( White House 2020b ) ; and a Memorandum on Continued Student Loan Payment Relief During the COVID-19 Pandemic ( White House 2020c ) This section summarizes the provisions of these laws and executive actions that have provided direct relief to American households March Legislative Acts The Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act which was signed into law by President Trump on March provided $ billion to fund the initial health response to COVID-19. The funding focused on vaccines therapeutics testing and general responses to the health emergency in addition to funding international relief efforts The Families First Coronavirus Response Act ( FFCRA ) which was signed into law by President Trump on March provided assistance for households and State governments at an estimated cost of $ billion. The FFCRA required certain employers with fewer than employees to provide their employees with paid sick and family leave for COVID-related work absences which would be fully reimbursed by the Federal government through refundable tax credits. To help fund the provision of leave benefits up front firms were allowed to access tax withholdings that would otherwise be required to be deposited with the Internal Revenue Service ( IRS ) or to receive the tax | Chapter credit as an advanced payment from the IRS for the amount not covered by previously withheld taxes. Workers were entitled to weeks of paid sick leave covering up to percent of wages and to an additional weeks of paid family and medical leave covering up to percent of wages with certain caps on wages. The FFCRA also increased Federal funding for Unemployment Insurance Extended Benefits and Medicaid suspended work requirements in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and provided no-fee COVID-19 testing and emergency care for all Americans covered by Medicare Medicaid and the Children s Health Insurance Program The largest legislative package was the CARES Act which was signed into law by President Trump on March The CARES Act provided $ trillion in relief to households and businesses affected by COVID-19. For context the major legislative response to the Great Recession the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of provided $ billion over years ( in dollars ) Economic Impact Payments at a cost of $ billion ( JCT ) were a key provision of the CARES Act intended to provide immediate relief to households. Each eligible adult could receive up to $ and $ for each qualifying child and these payments were phased out at higher incomes. A family making less than $ a year with two parents and two children would receive $ even if they had no tax liability. By contrast stimulus payments during the Great Recession offered a family of four a maximum of $ and offered no payment at all to those with no tax liability and less than $ in qualifying income. Economic Impact Payments were distributed quickly with the IRS reporting that it had sent out nearly $ billion in payments to million Americans by June The CARES Act provided an additional $ billion in targeted relief to Americans who lost their jobs. Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation ( FPUC ) offered every beneficiary of unemployment insurance an additional $ a week in unemployment benefits from March through July For example a worker typically earning $ a week may receive $ in regular UI benefits upon becoming unemployed. Under FPUC the worker would receive an additional $ for a total of $ per week. Pandemic Emergency Unemployment Compensation provided an additional weeks of UI benefits for workers who exhaust their regular State benefits for a total of weeks of coverage in most States ( in addition to potential coverage by Extended Benefits ) Pandemic Unemployment Assistance granted UI benefits to workers not eligible for regular State unemployment insurance benefits such as self-employed workers gig workers business owners independent contractors not participating in the UI elective coverage program and workers with insufficient work history to normally receive unemployment benefits This assistance for unemployed workers was complemented by the Paycheck Protection Program ( PPP ) which helped ensure that businesses could keep their workers on payroll and avoid the need to draw unemployment assistance Prioritizing America s Households | The CARES Act also provided loan repayment assistance. Homeowners with federally backed mortgages who experienced financial hardship due to COVID-19 were allowed to suspend payments for up to days with the possibility of an extension of up to more days. During this period no interest or fees would accrue. The CARES Act also prohibited foreclosures on homes with federally backed single-family mortgages for at least days starting on March and prohibited evictions of tenants in certain federally supported rental properties for days starting March To allow families to borrow money if needed holders of individual retirement accounts ( IRAs ) that were adversely affected by COVID-19 could take a distribution from their IRA and treat this distribution as a tax-free rollover provided they recontribute the amount within three years. The CARES Act also ensured that consumers credit did not suffer due to the virus ; if consumers had an agreement with their lender to delay payments or make a partial repayment they would not receive a negative credit report The CARES Act also included provisions to protect student loan borrowers. Employers were provided with the ability to make up to $ in student loan payments through December for each employee without incurring taxes. In addition through September student loan payments and interest accruals for Department of Education-held Federal student loans were suspended and involuntary collections related to student loans through wage garnishments tax refund reductions and negative credit reporting were also suspended for loans held by the Department of Education Finally the CARES Act also allowed for $ billion in State and local government aid. Because many State and local governments particularly those without savings or whose revenues rely heavily on sales taxes have struggled to retain employees during the pandemic this measure is estimated to have saved over public sector jobs ( Green and Loualiche ) President Trump s Executive Actions Key CARES Act provisions expired in July and although the economy was in the midst of a strong recovery a substantial share of Americans had yet to return to work. The last week of July was the final week for which the CARES Act provided enhanced UI benefits to unemployed workers. The moratorium on evictions and foreclosures in homes with federally backed mortgages expired on July In the absence of Congressional action the Trump Administration took a series of executive actions on August President Trump s Memorandum on Authorizing the Other Needs Assistance Program for Major Disaster Declarations Related to Coronavirus Disease directed up to $ billion to be provided in Federal lost wages assistance. In order to be eligible for Federal lost wages assistance claimants were required to self-certify that they were unemployed or partially unemployed due to COVID-19 and that they had already received at least $ a | Chapter week in benefits. As a result in addition to their regular UI benefits claimants were eligible for up to another $ a week $ of which was provided by the Federal Government. These benefits were set to terminate when Federal funds were exhausted but no later than December Executive Order aimed to minimize evictions and foreclosures and thereby prevent homelessness or shared housing situations during the pandemic. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) reported that some racial and ethnic groups were disproportionately more likely to be evicted and that homeless shelters and shared housing are particularly susceptible to COVID outbreaks. The order authorized the CDC Director to temporarily halt evictions for failure to pay rent the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) to identify available Federal funds for temporary financial assistance to homeowners suffering financial hardship resulting from COVID and the Secretary of HUD to aid homeowners and renters in avoiding foreclosure for example by providing housing authorities or landlords with financial assistance In addition the Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency ( FHFA ) was directed to review resources that might be used to prevent evictions and foreclosures due to COVID-19. In response to Executive Order FHFA extended the moratorium on foreclosures in homes with federally backed mortgages through the end of and CDC declared that eligible renters in any type of property facing potential homelessness or shared housing situations could not be evicted President Trump s Memorandum on Deferring Payroll Tax Obligations in Light of the Ongoing COVID-19 Disaster authorized the Secretary of the Treasury to defer certain payroll tax obligations for Americans in need relaxing temporary liquidity constraints for workers. At the employer s discretion this deferral was available to employees with pretax biweekly wages below $ In addition President Trump instructed the Secretary of the Treasury to explore additional avenues to eliminate the obligation to eventually pay these deferred taxes Finally President Trump s Memorandum on Continued Student Loan Payment Relief During the COVID-19 Pandemic extended the deferment of payments and waived interest on student loans held by the Department of Education through December The Impact of Policies in Providing Relief to Households Due to their magnitude and coverage the legislative acts and executive actions taken to counter the negative consequences of COVID-19 had large effects on U.S. households. As shown in figure in real disposable income excluding government transfers experienced the largest two-month decline on record Prioritizing America s Households |  $ "    * ) / # '4  $ *   '   * )  '  )  * (  Dollars ( billions )  ) ( ' * ( ) /  )  )    /.   ) / $ )    ! * (       * ) * ( $   (   /    ( ) /  * ) ( ) /  /-  ) !  '    and     $ *   '  * )  '  $ )  * (  '  /-  ) !  )     '   *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $       '  '  / $ * ) Note : UI = Unemployment Insurance benefits ; EIPs = Economic Impact Payments between February and April ( percent ) and remained suppressed through August. However real disposable income including government transfers experienced the largest two-month increase on record between February and April ( percent ) and remained elevated through the time of publication The historic rise in posttransfer disposable income was a result of CARES Act provisions that provided relief to households. In combination total Economic Impact Payments and Unemployment Insurance benefits paid between April and August were over twice as large as the loss in pretransfer disposable income incurred over the same period. Economic Impact Payments alone replaced percent of the total reduction in pretransfer disposable income and UI benefits on their own replaced percent of the total reduction in pretransfer disposable income. This is largely a result of the $ Federal UI weekly supplement. Ganong Noel and Vavra ( ) estimate that percent of workers who were eligible for regular UI benefits in April through July received more in unemployment assistance than they would have received from their typical earnings. Though such assistance would normally create severe employment disincentives these concerns were mitigated by the health benefits of staying home during the pandemic As a result of the Federal Government s unprecedented response to the pandemic-induced economic crisis lower-income households experienced the largest income gains during the COVID crisis. Figure simulates the trajectory of household income at different points of the income distribution with and | Chapter  $ "   )   * !  * # * '   )  * (     ) / $ '   $ / #  ' $ !  $ / # * 0/  ' $ ! Index of household income ( = February )        ) 0'4  " 0./        ) 0'4  " 0./        ) 0'4  " 0./        ) 0'4  " 0./        ) 0'4  " 0./ Household income percentile  *    )      ) /   * '  / $ * )     * ) / # '4   )    ) )  '  *  $  '   )     * ) * ( $    ' ( ) /        '  '  / $ * ) Note : For the methodology used here see CEA ( ) without Economic Impact Payments and expanded UI. Without these provisions a household at the 10th percentile of the income distribution would have experienced a percent reduction in income in April compared with its February level and its income would have remained percent lower by August. However because of expanded UI and the Economic Impact Payments its monthly income was percent higher in April percent higher in May percent higher in June and July and percent higher in August compared with February The spike in income in April is largely a result of the Economic Impact Payments while the continued elevated income in May through August is largely a result of expanded UI Because figure includes all households it does not show how important the CARES Act and later executive actions were for preserving the income of households experiencing job losses. Figure provides a more specific example of a household with two adults and two children with one worker who loses their job starting in April and where all income is assumed to come from earnings. The worker in the low-wage household is assumed to earn $ a week and the worker in the high-wage household is assumed to earn $ a week Without expanded UI and the Economic Impact Payment the illustrative low-wage household would have experienced a percent reduction in income Prioritizing America s Households |  $ "   )   * !  * # * '   )  * (  ! *   ( '  * # * '  With relief W $ / # * 0/  ' $ ! Household income ( = February ) *  "  # * # * '   " 0./ 0'4 )         " 0./ )        0'4 $ " #  "  # * # * '   *   )      ) /   * '  / $ * )     * ) / # '4   )    ) )  '   *  $  '   )     * ) * ( $    ' ( ) /        '  '  / $ * )  Note : A low-wage household earns $ a week and a high-wage one earns $ For  the methodology used here see CEA ( )  $ "    )   * !  * # * '   )  * (  ! *   ( '       *       in April through August while the illustrative high-wage household would have experienced a percent reduction in these two months. As a result of Federal action the low-wage household instead experiences a percent increase in income in April a percent increase in May through July and a percent increase in August relative to its income in February. The high-wage household instead experiences a percent increase in April a percent decrease in May through July and a percent decrease in August. Thus not only did Federal action provide greater income protection for both households relative to the counterfactual scenario with no CARES Act but also provided greater income protection for lower-wage households than higher-wage households The especially large increases in incomes for lower-income households can also be seen in reductions in poverty in the months immediately following the CARES Act. Han Meyer and Sullivan ( ) use near real-time data from the monthly Current Population Survey to estimate poverty rates each month based on the previous months of income. In updated analysis they find that the poverty rate in every month between March and September was near or below the pre-COVID poverty rate of percent in February ( see figure ) Han Meyer and Sullivan estimate that CARES Act provisions reduced the poverty rate by percentage points in the months ending June Parolin Curran and Wimer ( ) project that CARES Act provisions could significantly reduce the poverty rate for calendar year | Chapter * # * '   $ "     ) /   ' *     '   * -/4  $ )  Population below percent of the Federal poverty line ( percent )   )  0'.   /.  )  0'. Source : Meyer and Sullivan ( ) As of June data from the Census Bureau Household Pulse Survey indicate that the vast majority ( percent ) of households had received an Economic Impact Payment ( figure ) The quick timing of Economic Impact Payments helped ensure that households could meet their basic needs Indeed as of June only percent of households reported mostly using their Economic Impact Payment to add to their savings accounts and percent mostly used it to pay off debt such as car loans student loans and credit cards. By contrast about percent of households used their Economic Impact Payment to pay for expenses such as food clothing and shelter. Baker and others ( ) show that over percent of Economic Impact Payments were spent within days of receipt and spending increased the most for food rent bills and nondurables. Chetty and others ( ) find that Economic Impact Payments had a large effect on spending by low-income households allowing them to return their spending levels to pre-COVID levels by late April In addition to helping ensure that households did not experience income losses the CARES Act attempted to help households maintain housing stability by halting all foreclosures and evictions for properties with federally backed mortgages. Estimates by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta suggest that this covered between and percent of all rental units. This partial eviction moratorium in combination with local eviction moratoriums in many cities Prioritizing America s Households |  $ "   * # * '  s    $ +/   )   U.  * !    * ) * ( $   (   /    ( ) /   $   ) * /   )    *  ) * /   /  / *   $    ./ $ ( 0'0.   ( ) /  * ./'4  / *      / *   $ ) "  * ./'4  / *    * ! !    /     ' *  )  ./0  ) /  ' *  )    $ /      * ./'4  / *    ! *  )  ! * *    ' * / # $ ) "  # '/  /  Households ( percent ) )  )  )  0'4  0'4  0'4   *   )     * # * '    0'.          '  '  / $ * ) helped reduce evictions to below pre-COVID levels. According to data from the Eviction Lab evictions in all the cities that it tracks were on average percent lower in April through August than in February ( figure ) The Trump Administration s temporary nationwide moratorium on evictions for eligible renters beginning on September appears to have helped reduce evictions as well. Figure shows evictions in the nine cities tracked by the Eviction Lab that did not have a local eviction moratorium at the time of the CDC order. Relative to the total number of evictions in these nine cities during the week beginning August ( before the CDC order ) evictions were percent percent and percent lower during the next three weeks One risk with an eviction moratorium is that nonpayment of rent could have increased leaving landlords unable to pay mortgages and other costs However unprecedented income support via Economic Impact Payments and expanded UI benefits may have mitigated this problem. In fact data from the National Multifamily Housing Council ( ) show that the rate of missed rental payments in multifamily housing properties had increased by only to percentage points in May through September of compared with the same month one year earlier | Chapter  $ "    $  / $ * )  $ )   '  /    $ / $     * ) / #  Eviction filings ( thousands )  )        ) '  "   *    )  * $   )    ( * )         '  '  / $ * ) Note : Eviction counts are for Austin Boston Bridgeport Charleston Cincinnati Cleveland Columbus Fort Worth Gainesville Hartford Houston Jacksonville Kansas City Memphis Milwaukee Phoenix Pittsburgh Richmond Saint Louis Tampa and Wilmington  $ "    $  / $ * )  $ ' $ ) " $ )   '  /ed   $ / $   $ )  $ ) )  / $  ' '  )  * 0./ * )  )    $ /4  * '0 (   * -/   * -/ #  $ '2  0&  * /  ' Index of eviction filings ( base period week beginning Aug. = ) '  '   "      *      "   *    )        '  '  / $ * )    ! )  &  #   * /    /  $  &'4    /   * * )   / *  ! $ -./     * !  / # * !   "     $   '  / *   ! *   ' '  $   )           *   / ( *  $ '4   *  / #   * ) /-4  ) /  $ ) / *  ! !  / '  '   "   "   "     *    ) * $   )    ( * )         '  '  / $ * )  * /    /  are  &'4    /   * * )   / *  the ! $ -./     * !  / #  ! )   &   #     $ *   / # &  * !   " 0./   +/ (    $   '  / *   ! *   ' '  $   )   +/ (          *   / ( *  $ '4  #  '/ $ ) "  $  / $ * )    *  / #   * ) /-4  ) /  $ ) / *  ! !  / Prioritizing America s Households | Spurring a Return to the Pre-COVID Economy Provisions in the CARES Act and other legislation along with President Trump s executive actions provided immediate relief to U.S. households. However the most important way to ensure long-term gains in living standards is a rapid economic recovery A central CARES Act component intended to promote a rapid recovery was the Paycheck Protection Program which helped keep workers employed by authorizing $ billion to support payroll and other expenses for small businesses self-employed individuals Tribal business concerns and nonprofit or veterans organizations during the COVID-19 crisis. As part of the PPP and Health Care Enhancement Act an additional $ billion was appropriated to the program. Although the funds were issued as loans they could be fully forgiven if no less than percent ( originally percent ) of the funds were used for payroll. Other expenses eligible for loan forgiveness included mortgage interest rent and utilities. To further encourage employers to maintain ties with workers employers whose operations were disrupted by COVID-19 but did not receive a PPP loan were offered an employee retention tax credit worth up to $ per retained employee As discussed further in chapter of this Report these policies helped hasten the economic recovery. For example Autor and others ( ) use administrative payroll data to compare employment changes at firms that were somewhat below and somewhat above the 500-employee cutoff for PPP loan eligibility. They find that the PPP saved between million and million jobs through the first week of June based on an assumption that firms somewhat below the eligibility cutoff would have seen employment changes similar to those experienced by firms somewhat above the eligibility cutoff If however smaller firms would have experienced larger employment losses than larger firms in the absence of the PPP then the true impact of the PPP would be significantly larger than that estimated by the authors. Other studies find a range of early effects of PPP on employment ( Bartik et al. ; Chetty et al. ; Granja et al. ) It is important to note that because PPP stemmed business closures the total employment effect is likely to be considerably larger over time as those salvaged businesses rehire furloughed workers. In total Standard & Poor s U.S. Chief Economist Beth Ann Bovino estimates that PPP could have saved upward of million jobs and JPMorgan Chase s Jamie Dimon estimates that PPP saved million jobs ( Fox et al. ; Ruhle Miranda and Capetta ) After the unemployment rate rose from percent in February to percent in April forecasters expected that it would continue increasing and remain above percent for the remainder of However contrary to expectations the unemployment rate fell to percent just seven months later. By comparison after the unemployment reached its peak in October | Chapter  $ "     *    -& /    *   * (  $ * )      $ * ) Indexed employment level ( pre-recession peak = )  / *     " Months from pre-recession employment peak  *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $    ) /   ( ' * ( ) /   /  / $ ./ $     / $ * )  '     * !    * ) * ( $      #        '  '  / $ * ) during the Great Recession in over a decade it had still not fallen by as much as it did between April and November Figure shows that the recovery from the COVID shock has been much faster than that from the Great Recession and all other postwar recessions in regaining lost employment Workers in every major private sector industry have experienced employment gains. Between April and November the leisure and hospitality industry regained percent ( million ) of jobs lost ; trade transportation and utilities regained percent ( million ) ; and education and health services regained percent ( million ) ( figure ) Black workers have regained percent Hispanic workers have regained percent Asian American workers have regained percent and White workers have regained percent of jobs lost The policy response to the most sudden and severe economic downturn since the Great Depression was unprecedented. It provided extensive relief to households that would otherwise have suffered substantial losses of income and it set the economic recovery on a strong footing. Of course continued progress is needed to return to the strong pre-COVID economy. In addition there is near-term risk that policy and behavioral responses to a resurgence of COVID-19 could disrupt the considerable labor market recovery observed to date. For this reason in late the Administration continued to articulate support for additional fiscal measures to provide a bridge to the widespread availability of vaccine candidates developed under Operation Warp Speed ( Goodspeed and Navarro ) Prioritizing America s Households |  $ "    $  /    * ' '  *   *      / *  s $ )       *  ! * (      / *   $ '   $ )  ! * (   $ '  / *   * (  Employment change ( millions ) $   )   # * $ /  ' $ /4     /-  ) * -/  / $ * )  )   0/ $ ' $ / $     / $ * )   )   #  '/ #  $   * ! $ * )  '   )    $ )  $   * *  *   $ ) "  ' '  * / #  $   *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $    ) /   ( ' * ( ) /   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * )   * /   ' '  * / #  $   $  / #  (  * !  / #  ! $ )  )  $  '    / $ $ / $  $ ) ! * (  / $ * )   )   * / # $     / " * $ Conclusion The COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent lockdowns caused a historic shock to the U.S. economy. The unemployment rate increased from a 50-year low of percent in February to percent just two months later. Experts forecasted that the unemployment rate would remain above percent for the remainder of Without policy action the loss in employment and earnings threatened the ability of millions of American households to pay for food housing and other basic necessities Fortunately the policy response from the Federal Government was immediate unprecedented in scale and targeted to the most vulnerable households and firms. The Trump Administration worked with Congress to pass and sign three major bills in March providing over $ trillion in relief to fund direct payments to U.S. households assistance to employers to keep workers on payroll expanded and enhanced unemployment assistance measures to prevent housing foreclosures and evictions and a number of other measures intended to provide relief to Americans and bolster the economy s recovery. In August President Trump followed up with a series of executive actions that extended further relief to American households including providing lost wages assistance and a moratorium on residential evictions These actions led to historic increases in household incomes especially at the lower end of the income distribution along with decreases in poverty | Chapter and evictions. In the long run however the success of actions taken to support households will depend on how quickly the economy recovers. Between April and November the unemployment rate fell by percentage points from to percent the largest seven-month decline on record. Although more progress is needed the economy has recovered much more quickly than forecasters initially expected. Fortunately the strong pre-COVID economy in which unemployment fell to a 50-year low labor force participation grew stronger the poverty rate reached a record low and median income experienced the largest one-year increase in years together with unprecedented Federal action during the COVID-19 crisis has paved the way for a strong economic recovery Prioritizing America s Households | x Chapter Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses The Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security ( CARES ) Act which was signed into law by President Trump in March has authorized unprecedented levels of financial support providing much-needed relief to families and workers during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Federal Government has also implemented through the CARES Act and additional means several critical measures to support small businesses as they have weathered this unique and exogenous economic shock. With businesses facing a significant loss in revenue and demand as a result of stay-at-home orders and social distancing by households the Trump Administration has taken decisive actions to keep small businesses afloat thus far averting a swath of bankruptcies and a collapse of the financial system similar to the Great Recession In one of the CARES Act s most significant provisions to help American small businesses the Paycheck Protection Program ( PPP ) authorized hundreds of billions of dollars in forgivable loans to boost the retention of employees and preserve the relationships between employers and their workers. This program was successful in targeting the small businesses that needed loans the most ; million small businesses and nonprofit organizations received a loan and the vast majority of loans went to small businesses and organizations with very few employees. Estimates find that the PPP has saved or supported tens of millions of jobs In addition to the PPP the CARES Act funded several measures to provide liquidity to businesses in the midst of this economic shock. As a result the economy in did not see a wave of bankruptcies like during the Great Recession. Indeed though bankruptcies did spike during the pandemic they increased at a much lower rate than during the Great Recession despite the fact that the pandemic caused an economic shock significantly larger than that of The robust labor market before the pandemic helped enable businesses and households to better weather this crisis further contributing to the lower rates of small business bankruptcies during the pandemic The Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve also played critical roles in easing financial strain and ensuring access to liquidity for businesses To accomplish this the CARES Act authorized emergency actions to stabilize the financial system and to provide direct support for credit. In doing so the act has helped avert a potential collapse of the financial system similar to what occurred during the Great Recession thereby greatly improving the outlook for a swift economic recovery In analyzing numerous financial and economic indicators related to the pandemic this chapter demonstrates that the CARES Act and the Trump Administration s actions have preserved American businesses and saved millions of jobs. These actions have been historic in their speed and magnitude and the data show that small businesses have benefited the most from these unprecedented actions. As a result the economy has recovered more rapidly than many people anticipated and is poised to continue its return to the level of prosperity it experienced before the COVID-19 pandemic provided that fiscal policy continues to provide appropriate support T his chapter focuses on the effects that the extraordinary actions taken by the Federal Government in response to the COVID-19 pandemic have had on businesses with a particular focus on small businesses Just as forecasters have significantly revised their expectations for gross domestic product ( GDP ) upward so too did businesses experience an uptick in their outlook. Between April and October the small business optimism index compiled by the National Federation of Independent Business rose from to one of the steepest annual increases in the index s history. The federation attributes some of the improvement to the loan forgiveness feature of the | Chapter Paycheck Protection Program ( PPP ) which is discussed here along with other business-oriented provisions of the CARES Act Summary of Policies to Assist American Businesses and Their Workers Much of the analysis in this chapter focuses on the PPP and the Federal Reserve s lending facilities given that these are the largest business provisions and have received the most attention by academic researchers but here we also include a summary of several of the main provisions in the CARES Act directed at small mid-sized and large businesses. In total $ trillion was allocated ( excluding Federal Reserve lending facilities ) and about $ billion has been disbursed as of October The Paycheck Protection Program The CARES Act authorized $ billion in forgivable PPP loans to support payroll and other expenses for America s small businesses self-employed individuals Tribal businesses and nonprofit/veterans organizations. As part of the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act which was signed into law by President Trump in April an additional $ billion was authorized bringing the total amount for the PPP to $ billion. Though the funds are used to guarantee and forgive loans a condition for full loan forgiveness is that recipient businesses must spend no less than percent of the loaned funds on payroll expenses within a 24-week span called the covered period.1 Other expenses eligible for loan forgiveness include interest on mortgages rent and utilities Employee Retention Tax Credits The CARES Act provided refundable tax credits against payroll taxes for employers that either were required to shut down because of COVID-19-related government mandates or suffered at least a percent decline in year-overyear revenue during a quarter. The credit amount is percent of qualified wages up to a maximum of $ Like the PPP these credits act as a wage subsidy to boost retention and the Joint Committee on Taxation estimated a $ billion cost of the provision in March although it is unclear how high the uptake will end up being in light of eligibility restrictions. In addition qualified wages of firms with more than workers include only wages paid to inactive employees ( e.g. those furloughed ) Before the Paycheck Protection Flexibility Act of which was signed into law by President Trump in June the forgiveness criteria required a percent payroll requirement and an eight-week covered period Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses | Economic Injury Disaster Loans and Advances The Economic Injury Disaster Loans and Advances ( EIDL ) program of the U.S Small Business Administration ( SBA ) which predates the COVID-19 crisis provides relief to small businesses and nonprofit organizations experiencing a temporary loss of revenue. Relative to PPP loans EIDL loans tend to be longer in duration have a higher interest rate and are not forgivable outside the advance itself that is the loan must be repaid in full. The Coronavirus Preparedness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act which preceded the CARES Act made COVID-19 losses an eligible disaster under the SBA disaster program allowing affected businesses to apply for the program s loans. The CARES Act along with the Paycheck Protection Program and Healthcare Enhancement Act then expanded eligibility and eased application requirements. The acts also added $ billion in funds to allow more entities to receive the $ EIDL advances. As of November $ billion in EIDL loans had been approved for just over million loans The Federal Reserve s Lending Facilities The U.S. Department of the Treasury made available $ billion via the CARES Act to backstop some of the emergency lending facilities set up by the Federal Reserve under Section ( ) of the Federal Reserve Act. The purpose of this Treasury backing was to ensure that the Federal Reserve would not be put in a position to need to absorb losses. For the facilities created by this collaboration Federal Reserve Banks lend to private firms to nonprofit organizations or to State and local governments The facilities can broadly be divided into two groups : those that are aimed at supplying credit to the macroeconomy ( which rely on CARES Act capital funding ) the Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility the Municipal Liquidity Facility and the Main Street Lending Program and those that are aimed at funding markets ( which are backed by funding from the Treasury s Exchange Stabilization Fund ( ESF ) or are secured by collateral ) the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility and the Commercial Paper Funding Facility. The Federal Reserve also created the Primary Dealer Credit Facility and the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility neither of which received economic support or investments from the Treasury. This chapter goes into greater depth on these facilities in a later section Other Programs Small Business Administration debt relief. The CARES Act appropriated $ billion to go toward debt relief for new and existing SBA borrowers. Specifically the SBA is required under this provision to pay the principal interest and fees owed on specified loans for six months. This debt relief is distinct from the conditional forgiveness offered for newly created PPP loans | Chapter Deferral of employer payroll taxes. The CARES Act allowed employers to defer payment of their portion of payroll taxes incurred from March through December Businesses will repay their deferred liabilities in two installments in December and This deferral is a de facto loan to businesses giving them short-term liquidity without directly altering their long-term financial situation except to the extent that the injection of liquidity is necessary for some of them to survive the crisis Modifications for net operating losses. The CARES Act permitted taxpayers to offset percent of taxable income in taxable years beginning after and before with net operating losses ( NOLs ) Before the CARES Act taxpayers NOLs from taxable years beginning after were limited to offsetting percent of taxable income in such years. The CARES Act also temporarily allowed taxpayers to carry back recently computed NOLs to offset income ( and potentially claim refunds of all or part of their tax liabilities ) for the previous five taxable years if the losses were incurred in taxable years beginning after and before The Joint Committee on Taxation estimated that this provision would reduce revenues by $ billion in and by $ billion during the window Direct sector-specific aid. The CARES Act authorized $ billion in loans loan guarantees and other investments for certain affected industries Specifically the CARES Act authorized $ billion for passenger air carriers $ billion for cargo air carriers and $ billion for businesses deemed critical to maintaining national security. In exchange for receiving these funds passenger air carriers agreed to certain conditions including a requirement not to reduce employment by more than percent through September Measuring Small Business s Utilization of Selected CARES Act Business Provisions Table illustrates the percentage of small businesses that have accessed different programs since March as reported in the Census Small Business Pulse Survey. Small businesses may also have accessed Economic Impact Payments and Unemployment Insurance or Pandemic Unemployment Assistance As of August at the time of the PPP s closing the SBA had approved over million small business loans worth more than $ billion supporting an estimated million jobs and representing percent of the small business payroll in all States. The average loan size was about $ The loans were overwhelmingly distributed to small businesses with few employees More than percent of the total approved loans totaling over one-quarter of the total approved loan amount were for $ or less ( table ) Over In addition to the NOL rule changes the CARES Act included a separate rule change that deferred limits on owners losses from pass-through businesses which could have an impact on individuals computation of their NOLs Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses |    '   $ $  $ /4   * "  (  ! *   (  ' '   $ )   $ ) "         ) /age  * !   (  ' '   $ )    $ $ ) "   $ ./  )    * "  (     #  &   * /  / $ * )   * "  (         * ) * ( $   ) %   $  ./  *  )       (  ' '   $ )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )        /  ' $ !    / #     '  * "  (    # $   $ )  #   ) * /   $   ! $ )  )  $  '         $ ./  )   ! * (   )     '  * "  (    *    )           '  '  / $ * )   * /   #  (  * !  / #   *  ) * /   '   because   $ )   * '   '  /  ( 0'/ $ '   )    .0'/.    ! *  / #  $ *    * (      #      )  defines a small business as a single location business with employment between   )     )    $ pts of at least $ The sample consists of about  $ )     '       *  )   $     ( * ) /   $ -./   )     * )    * )    * (  $ )     /     * !   "    *  )   $  / # *  )   * !   * ' '    *   *  )    * ) /    )   )    *   *  )   * /  '     ) /  "    ) /  "   ( * ) /  * !   * ) /  * !   ( * ) /   $ ' ' $ * )   * ' '                                      *  / #  )                 * /  '       *       (  ' '   $ )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )   * /          #  &   * /  / $ * )   * "  (  percent of the total approved loans totaling more than percent of the total approved loan amount were for $ or less. Because the maximum loan for which a business can apply is a function of its total payroll costs the vast majority of PPP loans were approved for small businesses and organizations with very few employees The first round of the PPP which ended April when funds ran out approved fewer loans but consisted of a larger share of the total loan amounts ( figure ) Round had a change in the composition of which firms received the loans with a shift toward smaller businesses. Conditional on participation | Chapter  $ "    #   * !   * /  '      *  )   * ) /.   )       *  )   ( * ) /.     * )  Percent  * )    * )   *  )   * ) / *  )   ( * ) /  *   U.S. Small Business Administration (    )        '  '  / $ * )  * /   #  ' *  )   * ) /.   )    ( * ) /.  ! *  * )       $   $ ) "  the      " 0./    / which  shares data specific to round the average loan size fell from $ in round to $ in round Overall percent of small businesses received PPP loans as indicated in table Moreover at the time the program closed over $ billion in authorized PPP funds remained unspent which provides suggestive evidence that most small businesses that were eligible and applied for a PPP loan received one The presence of leftover funds does not indicate that PPP demand is satiated however. Rather the leftover funds are more likely in part a consequence of the restriction against businesses receiving more than one PPP loan for example against businesses receiving a second loan to carry themselves through the fall after receiving an initial loan to get through the spring and early summer Further legislation would need to provide such authorization Recent research by Autor and others ( ) provides evidence that through just the first week of June the PPP saved between and million jobs. The rehiring of furloughed workers in the months since in order to qualify for PPP loan forgiveness is likely to result in a much higher total number of jobs saved attributable to the PPP. In total Standard & Poor s ( S&P ) U.S. Chief Economist Beth Ann Bovino estimates that PPP could have saved upward of million jobs while JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon suggests an even larger figure of million jobs ( Fox et al. ; Ruhle Miranda and Cappetta ) As of August healthcare and social assistance ; professional scientific and technical services ; construction ; and manufacturing accounted Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses | for percent of the total amount of approved dollars in both rounds of PPP ( table ) Figure shows PPP coverage for each State as a percentage of total payroll expenses incurred over a 2.5-month period by businesses with fewer than employees ( the duration used to determine PPP loan size and the firm size cutoff for eligibility ) Those States with most if not all their small An early analysis of the PPP program found that some funds initially flowed to geographic regions that were less adversely impacted by the pandemic ( Granja et al. ) | Chapter              * ( ( *   / $ * )   )   ! * *   $    /  $ '  /-     / #  $    +/   ' $     ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )   # * '  '  /-                                '  ./  /   )   ) /  '   )   '  $ ) "   $ )  )    )   $ )  )       / $ * )  '  $    )  '  $ ! $   ./   ' $ # ( ) /.   -/.  ) / -/  $ ) ( ) /   )     / $ * )   " $  0'/0-  ! * ./-4  ! $ # $ ) "   )   # ) / $ ) "   $ ) $ ) "    ' $     ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )    )  " ( ) /  * !   * (  ) $   )   ) / $   / $ ' $ / $         * /  '   *       (  ' '   $ )    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )        '  '  / $ * )   * /  NAICS = North American Industry Classification System ;         #  &   * /  / $ * )   * "  (  ) ! * (  / $ * )    ) * -/  / $ * )   )    # * $ ) "          )   (  $  / $ * )  $       ( $ ) $ ./-  / $   )   * -/   )    ./  (  )  " ( ) /    * ) ./-0  / $ * )    ) !   /0- $ ) "         *    * ' '    $ ' ' $ * )   *   *  )   * ! $ * )  '   $ ) / $ ! $    )   /  # ) $   '  $    '/ #      )   *  $  '   $ ./  )           / *    $ +/ $ * )     '       *  )    )  0./-4 <BILL : PLEASE TURN THIS TABLE AND PHOTO-REDUCE TO FIT>                        ) /  "  * !  *  )                         ) /  "  * !   ( * ) /   $ "     ) /age  * !   (  ' '   $ )    $ $ ) "        *  )  / # * " #   " 0./   / *   / *   / *   / *   *   U.S. Small Business Administration  U.S.  )        '  '  / $ * )  * /   #   ( * ) /  * !   * ' '   * (  ! * (   ) s           % 0./   / *    * ' '   and / # )      / *   ( * ) / #  * -/ #   (  ' '   $ )     ! $ )     ( ' * ( ) /  * !   to people   * ' * $ / # $   '. *   $       ' *  )  *  * (  ./  /   $   ( *  / #  )  percent  * !  / # $   * ' ' businesses payroll covered by PPP are predominantly in the Southeast and Midwest. As data on retail consumer spending reveal PPP loans went especially to States that saw more drastic declines in consumer spending. The Census Small Business Pulse Survey reports that percent of small businesses nationwide have received a PPP loan since the spring Comparing Expected and Actual Small Business Bankruptcies during the COVID-19 Pandemic There are signs that the disruptive effects of the COVID-19 pandemic have led to greater business churn with the Census Bureau reporting that business applications in are twice as high as they have been at any point in the past decade. However measuring business exits is far more challenging both because of an absence of live-tracking data and because of the unique nature of the economic shock from COVID-19.4 In particular it is difficult to distinguish between businesses that have exited permanently from those which have closed temporarily. Bankruptcies can serve as a proxy for the subset of business exits caused by the inability of owners to meet debt obligations. This Crane et al. ( ) discuss some of these measurement challenges as well as a range of alternative measures and indicators of business exit Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses |  $ "    * /  '   #  +/     ) &-0+/    $ ' $ ) " by U.S. Small Businesses Percent change in from average of to  *   U.S.   -/ ( ) /  * !  0./ $         '  '  / $ * )  * /    / *  &'4  * -/ $ ) " / #  0'4  $ *   $  )   " 0./    )   / #   " 0./  $ *   $ August section compares observed bankruptcies with what an empirical analysis of historical economic relationships predicts are the volume of bankruptcies we would expect to observe in the United States given the magnitude of the COVID-19 economic shock Data from the Department of Justice make it possible to monitor weekly changes in small business bankruptcies ( specifically those filed under Chapter ) and also to compare the monthly totals for with the same month in prior years to see if small business bankruptcies have spiked as a result of the crisis.5 Figure shows a spike in February and March before COVID-19 had begun to wreak havoc likely due to a new Subchapter provision that came into effect in February.6 The data then show a sharp decline in April when most of the country was under lockdowns which may have prevented business owners from physically filing for bankruptcy due to social-distancing measures or courts being unable to accept filings for the same reason ( Tett ) Businesses may also have been waiting to see how economic uncertainty would unfold before filing for bankruptcy ( Keshner ) In addition the strong economy before the pandemic likely put businesses in a better position to survive for When referred to as small business the data reflect businesses that classify themselves as small when they are filing for a Chapter bankruptcy Subchapter of Chapter makes it easier for smaller businesses to reorganize under Chapter bankruptcy. Under the CARES Act the threshold debt level for businesses that could apply for Subchapter bankruptcy was raised further allowing more small businesses to be eligible for this chapter | Chapter  $ "     ) /   #  ) "  $ )   (  ' '   $ )   #  +/     ) &-0+/  $     ! * (        "  / *   / *   / *   / *   *        -/ ( ) /  * !  0./ $         '  '  / $ * )   * /   '    (    )    * -/ #    * ' $ )   #   ) *    /     $ '   '    / #    ) * /  )   / #  % $  $  / $ * )  * !  / #   ) $ /    /  /   -0./   * "  (   #  ' " )   # *    #   -/ $ '      ! $   '   some time even in the face of COVID-related disruptions. Regardless of the reasons for the April decline bankruptcy filings started to rise in the late spring and early summer before showing a larger rise in July August September and October of respectively and percent. However this level was still percent below that during the peak of the financial crisis Figure shows which States saw an uptick in small business Chapter bankruptcies in fiscal year ( FY ) through September compared with their averages. There are States with higher FY small business Chapter bankruptcies than their averages between and These States account for percent of total small business Chapter bankruptcies in FY Figure uses the Department of Justice s data on small business bankruptcy filings to compare bankruptcy dynamics with those during the Great Recession and its aftermath. There was a large increase in small business Chapter bankruptcies during and and small business Chapter bankruptcies fell as the recovery continued. The data for show a much smaller initial uptick in bankruptcies which is striking given that secondquarter gross domestic product fell by an annualized percent during the spring compared with only percent during the worst quarter of the Great Recession ( : Q4 ) Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses |  $ "    (  ' '   $ )   #  +/     ) &-0+/  $     Bankruptcies per small businesses  *     -/ ( ) /  * !  0./ $         '  '  / $ * ) Note : FY = fiscal year Assessing how these observed bankruptcy filings compare with what one would expect given the disruption from COVID-19 requires a deeper analysis The foremost explanation of why the increase in bankruptcies was not sharper is that the swift passage and implementation of record fiscal relief through the CARES Act helped businesses absorb the shock to cash flows that in the past would have forced them to declare bankruptcy ; as we discuss below in the absence of such a vigorous policy response multitudes of companies would have been forced to permanently close One way to forecast small business Chapter bankruptcies is through a vector autoregression estimate of unemployment insurance claims with three-month lags from January to December An advantage of this approach is that it can determine the lag between the negative economic shock and its effect on bankruptcies. In figure the gap between actual and predicted bankruptcies represents averted bankruptcies. Small business bankruptcies from April to September as a whole were predicted to increase by percent while actual filings rose by a much smaller percent. This analysis suggests that the historic economic policy response in the spring and summer mitigated the macroeconomic shock and concomitant financial distress. However this success does not preclude the possibility of a large future | Chapter  $ "     /0  '     $  /    (  ' '   $ )   #  +/   ) &-0+/    $ ' $ ) "  Year-over-year change ( percent )   /.   $  /    /0  '  )  )  )  )  )  *   U.S. Department of Justice ; U.S.   -/ ( ) /  * !    *        '  '  / $ * )  * /    $  /   ! $ ' $ ) "        * )  / #   / *   0/ * " $ * )  .0'/.  * !    / # ( * ) / #  '  "  $ ) "  $ ) $ / $  ' U ) ( ' * ( ) /  I )  )    '  $ (  bankruptcy spike especially if the U.S. Congress fails to pass additional relief and recovery legislation in the coming months The CARES Act s Role in Facilitating Small Business Survival The gap between predicted and actual bankruptcies through September ( see figure ) could arise from a number of factors. First earlier in the pandemic social-distancing mechanisms may have affected bankruptcy filing rates both for the court systems and debtors. If business owners are unable to connect with lawyers or face difficulties submitting electronic filings this could lead to filing delays that could show up as higher filings later in the data. At the same time the courts ability to take on cases was likely affected by State restrictions. A second important factor is the PPP s role in enabling businesses to stay afloat. By giving businesses loans that can be forgiven the PPP allows them to meet expenses while facing a shock to cash flows. With this liquidity many businesses that would otherwise have filed for bankruptcy are able to sustain themselves. The eligibility criterion disallowing firms in the process of filing for bankruptcy from accessing PPP loans also acts as a strong bankruptcy Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses | disincentive with considerable quantitative significance in light of the fact that nearly three-quarters of small businesses report having accessed PPP loans Finally other elements of the CARES Act might have helped businesses avoid bankruptcy. For instance Pandemic Unemployment Assistance extends unemployment insurance to the self-employed sole proprietors and others who may not qualify for traditional unemployment benefits providing liquidity to help small businesses meet their monthly expenses. Their employees would be able to claim expanded unemployment insurance as well if they are placed on temporary furlough. The loan forbearance provision additionally enables businesses to defer certain expenses such as rental and mortgage expenses. In other words the PPP and other elements of the CARES Act have likely played a significant role in helping businesses avoid bankruptcy Recent academic estimates also highlight the promise and success of the PPP in keeping small businesses afloat. For example Elenev Landvoigt and Van Nieuwerburgh ( ) simulate the effect of a PPP-type program in a general equilibrium macroeconomic model and show that it along with a Main Street Lending type program successfully stems corporate bankruptcies Using an instrumental variables approach Bartik and others ( ) find that PPP loans led to a to 30-percentage-point increase in a business expected survival. Clearly to the extent that the PPP helped mitigate business closures it saved many of these businesses jobs Although important bankruptcies are only one measure of small business health during the crisis. The remainder of this section discusses data from Homebase that gives insight into a range of relevant small business metrics Homebase is a company that provides software to help small business owners manage employee timesheets. Since the pandemic started Homebase has maintained a database of U.S. small business employment using data from more than businesses that use its software. The data cover more than million employees who were active in the United States in January Most Homebase customers are restaurant food and beverage retail and service businesses that are individually owned or managed by their operators The Homebase data show the dramatic effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on small businesses. Figure illustrates the daily change in the number of hourly employees working at small businesses using Homebase compared with a January baseline. After shelter-in-place orders became widespread in mid-March the number of employees working fell to a level about to percent lower than normal conditions. However the passage of the CARES Act marked a significant inflection point that reversed this decline. The data reveal that small businesses have regained significant ground since then though the number of hourly employees working at small businesses has plateaued at about percent below normal conditions suggesting that a full small business recovery is still very much a work in progress | Chapter  $ "    #  ) "  $ )  / #   (   * !   (  ' '   $ )  * 0-'4  ( ' *   * -& $ ) "  Percent change ( relative to January base ) Oct. CARES Act signed * ' $   Mar. Apr. May Jul. Aug. Sep.  *   * (    * /   ' '  / #   /   * (   / #  /     1er.us  / #  (  $  )  ! *  / #     * !  / #  &  ! *  / #  $ *  January Company-specific data on PPP loan receipts and employment provide an insight into the role the program played in keeping workers attached to their employers before which the extent was unclear.7 Recent research by Autor and others ( ) using administrative payroll data finds that the PPP saved between and million jobs through just the first week of June. However because the PPP has also stemmed business closures the total employment effect is likely to be considerably larger over time as these businesses rehire furloughed workers. As stated above the U.S. Chief Economist for S&P Global Ratings Services Beth Ann Bovino estimates that the PPP could have saved upward of million jobs Opportunity Insights a nonprofit research organization based at Harvard University has also developed a data set to track the impact of COVID-19 on small businesses since January It pulls data from different sources of credit card processors payroll firms and financial services firms to construct a time series to track the effect of COVID-19 ( Chetty et al. ) Figure shows that by mid-April the number of open small businesses had fallen over percent compared with January. This trend began to increase in midApril as initial PPP loans were disbursed and as States began to gradually lift restrictions on mobility and economic activity. As with the hourly employees Analysis by Chetty et al. ( ) shows a limited impact of PPP on employment levels at small businesses. However their analysis is also constrained by the lack of firm-level data on PPP loan receipts and employment Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses |  $ "    #  ) "  $ )  / #   (   * !   (  ' '   $ )   )   )      "  Percent change ( relative to January base )   /          /  s $ " )           )   "    /   *    * -/0 ) $ /4  ) $ " # /.  * /   ' '  / #   /   * (   / #  /      / #  (  $  )  ! *  / #     * !  / #  &  ! *  / #  $ *    )      $ "    #  ) "  $ )   (  ' '   $ )   )   )      "  Percent change ( relative to January base )   /          /  s $ " )           )   "    /   *   * -/0 ) $ /4  ) $ " # /.  * /   ' '  / #   /   * (   / #  /      / #  (  $  )  ! *  / #     * !  / #  &  ! *  / #  $ *    )    | Chapter data discussed above the number of open small businesses remains about percent down from its pre-COVID levels. However it is not currently possible to tell how many of these businesses have closed permanently versus how many remain temporarily inactive as a result either of residual or reimposed restrictions from State and local governments or from continued lower-than-usual levels of demand Opportunity Insights also tracks how much total small business revenue has fallen ( figure ) At its trough in late March small business revenue had fallen by nearly percent. Between the end of April and early June revenues recovered substantially to about percent below pre-COVID levels but there has been no further progress since then for these data The Coronavirus Food Assistance Program s Impact on Farm Incomes The CARES Act contained provisions that authorized support to farmers who were harmed by the consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. These provisions took the form of the U.S. Department of Agriculture s Coronavirus Food Assistance Program ( CFAP ) The COVID-19 pandemic and the associated economic response disrupted food and agricultural markets resulting in a  $ "       /    (  )  * (  Billions of dollars forecast pre-COVID forecast with COVID impact forecast with COVID impact and CFAP Actual net farm income   *        -/ ( ) /  * !   " $  0'/0-   * *    )    " $  0'/0-  '   * ' $      #  ) ./ $ /0/        '  '  / $ * ) Note : 2020F denotes a forecast ; CFAP = Coronavirus Food Assistance Program Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses | dramatic drop in farm income for a wide array of agricultural products. CFAP made available $ billion in financial assistance for producers of affected commodities including $ billion to compensate for losses due to commodity price reductions between mid-January and mid-April and another $ billion for ongoing market disruptions. In early February before the extent of the pandemic s impact on agricultural markets was fully apparent U.S. net farm income for was forecast to be $ billion which would have been a percent increase over and the highest net farm income since By June as the magnitude of the pandemic became evident analysts had revised the forecast for net farm income down by more than $ billion ( percent ) when CFAP payments are excluded. Including the $ billion in emergency farm payments raises forecasts for net farm income to $ billion ( figure ) The Pandemic s Impact on the Financial Sector and Lending Facilities Role As the threat of the COVID-19 pandemic increased the financial system came under stress in February and March Stock prices plummeted and market volatility rose. A recent analysis by Baker and others ( ) shows that COVID-19 has had an unprecedented effect on the stock market especially in comparison with other infectious disease outbreaks including that of Spanish Influenza in ( figure ) Businesses which already held a historically high level of debt at the beginning of were suddenly at higher risk of default leading to a decline in the availability of credit and households ability to repay their debts in the face of job and income loss became uncertain. With potential defaults looming the risk of the real economic shock impairing assets of lenders and thereby infecting credit markets more broadly was substantial Under these conditions monetary or fiscal problems abroad especially in Europe China and emerging market economies could have spilled over to the United States compounding the stress on the financial system The CARES Act together with emergency powers under section ( ) of the Federal Reserve Act authorized the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department to take actions to stabilize the system and prevent a financial crisis like that of the Great Recession. In accord with the Federal Reserve s Financial Stability Report the Federal Reserve undertook aggressive monetary policy interventions and also took actions to stabilize short-term funding markets and provide direct support for credit. In addition Chairman Jerome Powell testified that the Federal Reserve took measures to allow and encourage banks to use their substantial capital and liquidity levels built up over the past decade to support the economy during this difficult time. Here we summarize some of the findings from the Financial Stability Report ( Federal Reserve ) | Chapter  $ "    * * )  )  0./- $  '    "   #  ) "  during   $ *    )  ( $  Index ( = month of first confirmed case )   ) $ #  Influenza   $ -./   * ) ! $ (         $ )        $  )  Influenza       Months since first confirmed case  *    *  * )        '  '  / $ * )  * /   # t  ( * ) / #  we-  those with the ! $ -./   * ) ! $ (   " ' *   '      )   were   $ '             )    )     ' '  the pandemics  +/  / #   $  ) Infl0enza   / # ir  ! $ -./        $ / # $ )  / #   (  ( * ) / #    as their first global case Monetary policy interventions. The Federal Reserve lowered its policy rate close to zero to make borrowing less expensive. The Federal Open Market Committee began buying longer-term Treasury securities as well as agency mortgage-backed securities and commercial mortgage-backed securities after investors moved toward cash and short-term government securities because of volatility and uncertainty which had the effect of smoothing and improving market conditions Stabilizing short-term funding markets and providing direct credit support In a dash for liquidity investors stopped purchasing commercial paper and pulled out of money market mutual funds that hold such paper along with other short-term debt instruments leading to a cash shortage for businesses that rely on commercial paper to help fund their operations. In response and pursuant to Section ( ) of the Federal Reserve Act and with Treasury s approval the Federal Reserve established a number of emergency lending facilities to support the flow of credit to businesses nonprofit organizations States and municipalities Several facilities commenced before the CARES Act. The Primary Dealer Credit Facility allows primary dealers to support smooth market functioning and facilitate the availability of credit to businesses and households. The Commercial Paper Funding Facility ( CPFF ) provides liquidity to short-term funding markets. The Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility ( MMLF ) Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses | makes loans available to eligible financial institutions secured by high-quality assets purchased by the financial institution from money market mutual funds A number of additional facilities commenced after enactment of the CARES Act. The Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility ( PMCCF ) and the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility ( SMCCF together with the PMCCF the CCF ) provide liquidity for investment grade corporate bonds ( or the bonds of certain companies that were investment grade as of March ) as well as for exchange traded funds ( ETFs ) whose objective is to provide broad exposure to the market for U.S. corporate bonds. The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility ( TALF ) supports the provision of credit to consumers and businesses by enabling the issuance of asset-backed securities backed by private student loans automobile loans and leases consumer and corporate credit card receivables certain loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration and other assets. The Municipal Lending Facility ( MLF ) supports lending to State city and county governments certain multistate entities and other issuers of municipal securities. The Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility offers a source of liquidity to financial institution lenders that lend to small businesses through the Small Business Administration s Paycheck Protection Program. The Main Street Lending Program ( MSLP ) supports lending to small and medium-sized businesses and nonprofit organizations that were in sound financial condition before the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. MSLP operates five subfacilities : the Main Street New Loan Facility the Main Street Priority Loan Facility the Main Street Expanded Loan Facility the Nonprofit Organization New Loan Facility and the Nonprofit Organization Expanded Loan Facility. In support of these facilities the Treasury Department has made equity investments in the CPFF CCF TALF MLF and MSLP and has provided a backstop commitment to the MMLF These facilities resulted in a drop in the issuance of overnight commercial paper and redemptions from money market funds easing market strains Commercial and industrial loans from the Nation s commercial banks grew by $ billion during the nine weeks from March through May far in excess of the growth during any similar interval since records were first collected in Li Strahan and Zhang ( ) argue that banks were able to accommodate this demand because of Federal Reserve bank liquidity programs strong preshock bank capital and coincident inflows from depositors In addition a variety of indicators of financial distress that spiked early in the COVID-19 pandemic period have receded as of October Although many other shocks have hit the economy including news about the pandemic itself one can argue that public policy has mitigated the contagion of the pandemic into financial markets The VIX ( the Chicago Board Options Exchange s Volatility Index ) an index of expected stock market volatility derived from options prices spiked from in late February to a peak of on March ( figure ) It has generally fallen | Chapter  $ "     -& /  * '  / $ ' $ /4  )       Index Oct.  *   Wall Street Journal Note : VIX = Chicago Board Options Exchange s Volatility Index. Shading denotes a recession since then but remains somewhat elevated ( as of October the VIX was ) Similarly corporate bond spreads such as the spread between BBB bonds relative to Treasury notes show a similar pattern peaking on about March and then receding ( figure ) The trends in these indicators and others suggest that lending facilities likely played an important role in easing financial market strain and ensuring access to liquidity for businesses in Recent academic work also confirms these findings. For example Cox Greenwald and Ludvigson ( ) analyze stock market behavior in the early weeks of COVID-19 and attribute the large market swings to fluctuations in the pricing of risk driven either by shifts in risk aversion or sentiment. They also find evidence that the Federal Reserve s unconventional monetary policy announcements outlining steps to support the economy played a role in the market turnabout leading to gains of percent in the S&P and percent in the Russell index. Importantly they conclude that much of the benefit came from the signaling value of the Federal Reserve s statements even as only a fraction of the credit that it has stood ready to provide has been extended. Haddad Moreira and Muir ( ) trace the recovery in the corporate bond market to the unprecedented actions the Fed took to purchase bonds finding that the announcement on March to buy investment-grade debt boosted prices and lowered bond spreads. The announcement on April had a large effect both on investment-grade and Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses |  $ "       * *  /   * )   )         * /     Percentage points Oct.  *    ' * * (  " high-yield bonds even for the riskier end. Gilchrist and others ( ) come to similar conclusions finding that the announcements regarding the Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility led to a reduction in credit spreads on bonds eligible for purchase by basis points Finally the large-scale income and small business revenue replacement debt relief and cost mitigation provisions in the CARES Act had a salutary impact on financial market stability. Such extensive relief helped ameliorate financial distress that could have created widespread default activity that would have threatened the proper functioning of secondary debt markets Such liquidity provision helped buffer households and small businesses against the immediate shock to cash flows from COVID-19 and also helped preserve the health of their underlying balance sheets thereby improving their long-term ability to service their financial obligations Conclusion The health of U.S. businesses has seen a dramatic turnaround from the depths of the COVID-19 crisis during the spring lockdowns. The number of employees working at small businesses the number of open businesses and small business revenue have all recovered more than half the losses experienced in April. The Federal Government s decisive and bold action to | Chapter inject more than $ trillion into targeted income replacement and other key programs helped bolster the ability of businesses to remain financially viable to retain or rehire their employees and ultimately to restart activities. At this stage there is still considerable ground to regain to return to the historic level of prosperity that existed just before the pandemic but all indicators thus far point to a much more rapid recovery with fewer scars than in the aftermath of the Great Recession despite an adverse shock several orders of magnitude greater than that experienced in Additional fiscal support to mitigate business closures stem layoffs and accelerate the pace of hiring would further reduce the risk of economic scars For example allowing hard-hit and at-risk small businesses to receive secondround PPP loans would help them to survive and emerge healthy from the pandemic. In fact an October survey by the National Federation of Independent Business found that percent of small businesses would apply or consider applying for a second-round PPP loan if allowed to do so. Also expanding the eligibility of the Employee Retention Tax Credit ( ERTC ) but targeting it to reward only net retention and hiring could significantly accelerate hiring. With regard to eligibility if the main objective of the ERTC is to maximize hiring then restricting access to businesses suffering significant revenue losses leaves out many employers that are willing and able to hire workers out of unemployment but may need the extra push from the ERTC incentive in light of ongoing economic uncertainty This problem is especially salient given that businesses in the direst straits may or may not be those with the highest propensity to hire depending on the outlook for them individually and for their industry. As for the design of the incentive itself subsidizing the retention of a business s entire workforce means paying the business to retain inframarginal workers that it likely would have kept anyway unless it was on the verge of shutting down. Redesigning the ERTC to only subsidize net expansion above a company s head count or wage bill in some statutorily specified benchmark would specifically reward firms for returning to or exceeding the size of their pre-COVID workforce thus accelerating the reabsorption of unemployed workers into gainful employment. This design especially benefits hard-hit firms that have the deepest employment hole from which to recover while also mobilizing other businesses to step up their recruiting. Recent research by Hamilton ( ) also finds promising labor market benefits from ERTC expansion. Both these policy actions would support the continuation of the fastest recovery on record as the economy regains its full potential Assisting Entrepreneurs and Workers through Aid to Businesses | x Chapter Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System In the face of the global COVID-19 pandemic the Trump Administration has taken decisive action to address the strain the health and economic crisis placed on the healthcare sector and on working families. This response has been twofold : financial support for hospitals and workers and deregulation within the healthcare sector to accelerate the availability of testing and the development of vaccines and advanced therapeutics In March President Trump signed the bipartisan CARES Act which appropriated $ billion for healthcare providers and which has alleviated the financial burden hospitals are experiencing during the COVID-19 pandemic This was supplemented by an additional $ billion for the Provider Relief Fund as part of the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act and also funding for testing provided by the Families First Coronavirus Relief Act resulting in $ billion in direct aid to the healthcare sector. As a result the CEA finds that the healthcare system has been one of the most resilient industries during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Administration also established emergency paid family and sick leave through tax credits available to private employers with fewer than employees for leave payments through December This has served to protect public health by encouraging workers to stay home rather than working while ill and has allowed employees to care for sick family members without trading off work hours. In addition the Administration provided funds to offer COVID-19 testing and treatment at no cost to uninsured patients removing cost barriers for low-income and high-risk individuals and in turn helped the United States identify positive COVID-19 cases and mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic When the United States needed to ramp up its testing capabilities for the virus at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic the Trump Administration through the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) took action to issue Emergency Use Authorizations for COVID-19 diagnostic tests. As a result the FDA permitted the use of over diagnostic COVID-19 tests by the end of March helping public health officials track the spread of the coronavirus throughout the United States Similarly the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services relaxed many of the regulations surrounding the use of telemedicine to allow patients seeking COVID-19 screening or advice on non-life-threatening conditions to do so from the safety of their homes. This reduced nonessential in-person healthcare visits decreasing the strain on overburdened healthcare facilities and diminishing the potential transmission of COVID-19 throughout hospitals and healthcare facilities In one of the largest efforts during the pandemic the Trump Administration mobilized the public and private sectors through Operation Warp Speed ( OWS ) in order to accelerate the development production and distribution of a safe and effective COVID-19 vaccine. OWS accomplishes this by identifying promising vaccines earlier in development standardizing testing protocols preparing manufacturing capacity and funding infrastructure for vaccine distribution Not only will the accelerated vaccine timeline provide an enormous benefit to public health but the CEA estimates that OWS could provide an economic benefit of $ billion if it pushes the arrival of the vaccine one month earlier or $ trillion if scientists were to deliver the vaccine by January As of mid-November four vaccine candidates had entered Phase III clinical trials. The highly promising results of interim analyses of these candidates raise the possibility that researchers may develop a vaccine before the end of for widespread use among a set of targeted populations | Chapter The deregulatory actions of the Trump Administration can continue to improve healthcare outcomes for the American people far beyond the scope of the COVID-19 pandemic. For example the CEA estimates that more widespread adoption of telemedicine would allow rural Americans to save $ per visit in travel-related opportunity costs while increasing their access to high-quality healthcare nationwide. In addition the CEA estimates that a permanent reduction in FDA approval times by one two or three years for new drugs would provide trillions of dollars in social surplus. Moreover the CEA calculates that expanding occupational licensing deregulation for nurse practitioners nationwide could result in $ billion in cost savings annually. Also this chapter explores the effects of several healthcare policy achievements beyond the response to the COVID-19 pandemic that will promote additional choice and competition in the market. Permanently deregulating aspects of the healthcare sector will provide better healthcare options and higher monetary savings for Americans as the Nation emerges from the COVID-19 pandemic T he United States endured a major adverse health and economic shock in due to the arrival of the SARS-CoV-2 virus in the United States The impact of this pandemic is likely to persist past as widespread mitigation takes hold. COVID-19 the disease stemming from the novel coronavirus led to a global pandemic that as of November has resulted in over million confirmed cases worldwide and a global death toll of at least million people. In the United States there have been over million confirmed cases and over deaths. This disease has taken a toll on the American people that has been manifested not just as a tremendous mortality and morbidity burden but also as a significant economic burden that affects the Nation at every level. In the first and second quarters of the U.S economy contracted by percent and total employment declined by percent between February and April after a record million decrease in employment in April. At its peak the unemployment rate was percent in April. Initial claims for regular State unemployment insurance peaked in the week ending March at million whereas insured unemployment in regular State programs peaked in the week ending May at million. This unprecedented level of economic disruption resulted in the highest levels of unemployment since the Great Depression and had a direct impact on the economic well-being of millions of Americans Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System | COVID-19 s dual effects on public health and the economy necessitated a response on two fronts. The first one as discussed in the previous chapters of this Report has consisted of efforts to address the economic effects of the crisis The second front which this chapter discusses is the Trump Administration s efforts to address the underlying health crisis itself The resolution of any healthcare crisis relies largely on the efforts of three groups of people. First it relies on the efforts of scientists to develop new treatments and tests for the disease. Second it relies on the efforts of healthcare providers and healthcare systems to treat affected patients. And third it relies on the efforts of the public to take appropriate actions during the crisis. These efforts require coordinated governance at the local State and Federal levels At the Federal level the Trump Administration moved to eliminate regulatory barriers that could hinder the development of new treatments or the ability of healthcare providers to care for their patients. The CEA finds that these deregulatory efforts have had tremendous economic value. For example the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ( CMS ) relaxed many of the regulations surrounding the use of telemedicine and the share of telemedicine Medicare primary care visits increased dramatically from percent in February to percent in April In addition understanding that healthcare during a pandemic requires an economically strong healthcare system the Administration moved to ensure the financial security of the healthcare system. Under the CARES Act and the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act ( PPP/ HCE Act ) Congress made up to $ billion available for healthcare providers to support their financial health and livelihood. As a result of this and other Administration actions the CEA finds that the healthcare system has been one of the most resilient industries during the first three quarters of based on employment and indeed appears to be one of the industries that recovered most quickly from the initial shock caused by COVID-19. A key threat to the healthcare system early during the pandemic was sudden surges in demand for healthcare services that overwhelmed locally available resources. To combat this risk and slow the spread of the virus more broadly local and State governments began implementing lockdown orders and other restrictions to combat the spread at the cost of economic activity. As the pandemic spread throughout the country lockdown measures expanded commensurately with over percent of the population residing in States that had closed schools and limited bar and restaurant activity by March and with over percent residing in States that had issued shelter-in-place orders by April ( figure ) Finally the Trump Administration s efforts focused on protecting Americans from the costs of care related to COVID-19 and on providing incentives for Americans to engage in appropriate behaviors during the crisis. For example the Administration established emergency paid family and sick leave for COVID-19 patients to encourage these patients to stay at home instead of | Chapter  $ "     ) /age  * !      * '  / $ * )  u )    /  / $   ./- $  / $ * )  #    # * * '   ' *   )   ' $ ( $ /       )   Population ( percent ) ./   ) /.  $ ( $ /      )   ./   ) /  #   # '/   *    # '/  *    # * * '   ' * Mar. Mar. Mar. Apr.  *  New York Times   /  /  * ' $    ) ) * )  ( ) /.        '  '  / $ * ) working while ill. This also allowed family members to take leave so they could look after those affected by COVID-19. Similarly though much has been written on the Administration s effort to increase testing capacity from an economic perspective other important and overlooked parts of its approach were its efforts to decrease the barriers for Americans to receive testing. In the absence of treatment testing may be of limited value to the individual because a positive test will have little impact on disease management. However testing does provide social value from a public health perspective because it enables public health approaches that can limit the spread of the disease such as quarantining and contact tracing for infected individuals. Because individuals do not face the full social incentives for testing making COVID-19 testing free at point-of-care by requiring that it be covered by insurers and reimbursing providers for the cost of testing for the uninsured are an important way to align the individual and social incentives for testing. The Kaiser Family Foundation found that in July data from hospitals revealed that COVID-19 diagnostic test prices ranged from $ to $ per diagnostic test with a median cost of $ The Administration s subsidies probably increased the likelihood of COVID-19 testing especially for lower-income Americans The President s response to the unique dual health and economic crises caused by COVID-19 include an agenda for healthcare reform and deregulation Although regulation is intended to benefit the public whether it actually does so in practice is an empirical question one that has been partly answered by Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System | the Administration s efforts to suspend and relax many regulations to address COVID-19. The benefits of deregulation to bolster the pandemic response are clear. For example effective treatments and vaccines for COVID-19 have been and will be introduced at an extremely fast pace and healthcare providers face fewer restrictions in providing care. If the absence of many regulations has improved social welfare a natural question is why these regulations need to be reimposed when the pandemic subsides. Indeed the CEA finds substantial benefits from extending many of the existing deregulatory efforts. For example the CEA finds that expanding occupational licensing deregulation nationwide could result in $ billion in cost savings annually This chapter begins with an overview of the Administration s efforts to promote research and development for COVID treatments and vaccines followed by a discussion of the Administration s efforts to support the healthcare system. Next we discuss the Administration s effort to protect the broader American public by subsidizing appropriate behaviors and the cost of COVID care. Finally we conclude with an analysis of how healthcare can be improved by extending COVID-19 related reforms Expediting Research and Development for Novel Therapies and Tests for COVID-19 One important aspect of research and development for COVID-19 treatments and vaccines is the issuance of Emergency Use Authorizations to facilitate availability of pharmaceutical products in the event of an emergency. In addition to accelerate the availability of effective COVID-19 therapeutics and vaccines the Administration launched Operation Warp Speed a public-private partnership to support the development production and distribution of treatments diagnostics and vaccines Emergency Use Authorizations Ultimately the solution to any healthcare crisis is to find a treatment for the underlying disease and the Trump Administration moved aggressively to field treatments as quickly and in as widespread a manner as possible. A key roadblock in the development of treatments is the heavily regulated drug and vaccine development processes. On average it takes years to bring a new drug or vaccine to market with just the preclinical phase of vaccine development taking six months to three years ( Andr ; CEA ; DiMasi Grabowski and Hansen ; Grady et al. ; Mullard ; Plotkin et al. ; Pronker et al ) These timelines are not tenable in the face of a global pandemic Early returns from these efforts appear promising. For example Remdesivir an antiviral received an Emergency Use Authorization ( EUA ) from the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) on May within months of the first reported case of COVID-19 in the United States. By October Remdesivir | Chapter had been approved by the FDA for treatment of COVID-19. Similarly the Trump Administration quickly solved early COVID-19 testing capacity problems Pre-pandemic FDA rules required that the FDA provide premarket clearance approval or EUA review for COVID-19 diagnostic tests before their use in clinical labs which led to significant delays in adequate testing capacity at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Indeed in February only CDC s COVID19 diagnostic test had been authorized by the FDA for emergency use in labs across the nation. While it can take years for the FDA to ultimately approve new diagnostic tests by the end of March the FDA had issued EUAs permitting the emergency use of over diagnostic tests for COVID-19 ( FDA ; Ivanov ) This rapid access to numerous COVID-19 tests was made possible by FDA granting unprecedented flexibility to manufacturers and labs including allowing labs to begin developing and using their own tests before FDA review of their validation data. And finally as of September four vaccine candidates had entered Phase III clinical trials raising the possibility that a vaccine may be developed before the end of ( Milken Institute ) Emergency Use Authorization is an authority granted to the FDA by the Federal Food Drug and Cosmetic Act and it allows the FDA to permit the production and distribution of an unapproved product or temporarily allow an unapproved use of an approved product during a state of emergency. This does not constitute approval of the new product or use and can be revoked by the FDA once the emergency has ended or evidence arises that suggests that the EUA is not in accordance with public health. EUAs have been employed in previous pandemics including for the development of influenza testing and treatment as well as the test for the Novel Coronavirus more commonly known as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome ( MERS ) Operation Warp Speed The Trump Administration also worked to expedite the development and largescale production of new vaccine treatments. Operation Warp Speed ( OWS ) is a public-private partnership that encompasses most of these Administration efforts to expedite the availability of vaccines. OWS accelerated vaccine deployment by identifying promising vaccines earlier in development standardizing safety and efficacy protocols preparing manufacturing capacity and funding infrastructure for vaccine distribution Under a traditional timeline a COVID-19 vaccine would likely not be ready until September But under OWS initial doses of the vaccine could become available as early as the end of December or beginning of January If OWS accelerates initial vaccine deployment by these months the CEA estimates that OWS would save $ trillion in economic and health costs. Even if OWS only accelerates a vaccine by one month OWS still provides an expected benefit of $ billion Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System | Traditionally vaccine candidates are developed individually by different firms and are not compared with each other until after they are approved and commercialized. However under OWS animal studies of candidate vaccines were compared with each other ( before additional testing in humans ) to ensure that resources were directed toward the most promising candidates As of August the Federal government financially supported and approved additional testing for seven vaccine candidates. Notably OWS does not change the number or types of trials required for vaccines nor their safety and efficacy tests but it does change when they can occur Moreover manufacturing and distribution infrastructure are typically not established until a vaccine has demonstrated safety and efficacy in clinical trials leading to additional delays in vaccine deployment. But under OWS the Federal government invested in manufacturing capacity for the promising vaccine candidates while they were still being tested rather than waiting until they were approved. Manufacturing capacity that is developed will be used for whatever vaccine is eventually successful if possible given the nature of the successful product regardless of which firms have developed the capacity OWS also preemptively expands the supplies of materials that are necessary to scale up production of any vaccine such as glass vials. On October the President announced that the department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) and the Department of Defense will form a partnership with CVS and Walgreens to deliver the vaccine once it is available to vulnerable Americans in long-term-care facilities free of charge The CEA estimates that OWS has the potential to bring tremendous economic benefits given COVID-19 s unprecedented costs. Figure provides an estimate of the daily cost to the United States of not having a vaccine separated into the costs due to COVID-19 deaths ( health costs ) and the costs due to lower economic activity ( economic costs ) As is common for many infectious diseases the economic costs of preventing a disease are often of comparable magnitudes to the direct mortality and health costs induced by the disease Daily costs were highest in early April due to the peak of COVID-19 deaths at that time. However one prominent model that of the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation ( IHME ) projects a second wave in which suggests the possibility of additional high future costs. Though IHME is just one among several COVID-19 forecasting models currently used by public health authorities it is the only one that has released projections Figure demonstrates why even small delays in vaccine deployment can be costly. Consider a vaccine that has initial doses deployed on January which is shown by the gray vertical line. In this case the value of the vaccine is equal to the sum of the daily health costs for all days January or later plus the sum of the daily gross domestic product costs through April or later assuming that it will take days for the economy to return to normal. However the vaccine can not reverse damage that has already | Chapter  $ "     $ '4   '/ #   )     * ) * ( $    * ./.  * !       / *  / #  ) $ /    /  /  I !   *      $ )  I.   * )  Dollars ( billions )  *  '  v    $ )  a1  $ '   '  d  /      '/ #  c * ./  )   * ) * ( $   c * ./     )     *   ) ./ $ /0/ ! *   '/ #   /- $    )     '0  / $ * )   ) / -s ! *   $    * ) /- * '   )   ) / $ * )   * ) " $ * )  '   " /   ! ! $         '  '  / $ * ) occurred so the costs to the left of the gray line can not be recovered even with the introduction of a vaccine in January Figure demonstrates the value of faster vaccine development. We assume that without OWS a vaccine would be available in September based on internal HHS projections. However this should be viewed as a lowerbound estimate of the benefits of OWS given that vaccines traditionally take years to develop. The vertical axis gives the dollar value of an earlier vaccine depending on the date at which it becomes initially available ( horizontal axis ) If OWS could accelerate vaccine deployment by months ( from September to January ) then the CEA estimates that the benefits would be $ trillion above traditional deployment ( the intersection of the red line and the left vertical gray line in figure ) The full value of the vaccine on January would be $ trillion Some estimates suggest that traditional vaccine development processes would not result in a COVID-19 vaccine until September at which point it would provide benefits of $ trillion. The benefit of the eight-month acceleration from OWS ( $ trillion ) is the difference between the $ trillion value in January and the $ trillion value in September The CEA s methodology to create figures and has two aspects First for the value of lives lost ( the health cost ) the CEA used a widely cited model developed by the IHME. The model s most recent update reports the actual number of COVID-19 deaths in the United States for each day between Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System |  $ "     '0  * !    +/ (     $ ) "               $ )  Starting Vaccine availability $ / # * 0/ OWS  *  ' for v    $ )  a1  $ '   '  d  / Dollars ( trillions )     $ )  '0  "  $ )   ! * (   $ ) "    ' * ( ) / 0'.   /.  )  Date when vaccine becomes available 0'.  *   ) ./ $ /0/ ! *   '/ #   /- $    )     '0  / $ * )   ) / -s ! *   $    * ) /- * '   )   ) / $ * )   * ) " $ * )  '   " /   ! ! $         '  '  / $ * )  Note : OWS = Operation Warp Speed February and October and then projects the daily number of deaths for each day through February The CEA lacks information on what will happen after February and thus assumes for this exercise ( absent a vaccine ) a percent daily decline in deaths after February recognizing that costs would be greater or less if the future path of pandemic mortality were more or less severe. The CEA then converted the number of deaths for each day to an economic cost by using the age-adjusted value of a statistical life which is the standard way of evaluating economic costs of mortality ( CEA ) The CEA assumes that as soon as the vaccine becomes available it will immediately eliminate the health costs of COVID-19. However because the vaccine will take time to deploy only critical populations will get access to it first and many will not take the vaccine at all the CEA notes that this is a very optimistic scenario Second to estimate the value of forgone gross domestic product ( the economic cost ) the CEA used the Congressional Budget Office s forecasts ( CBO ) through to calculate the output losses between the current and preCOVID baseline ( January ) projections. These projections only take into account current law meaning that the projections do not take any additional fiscal relief packages into account. Once a vaccine is available for the sake of simplicity the CEA optimistically assumes that the economy will return to preCOVID conditions after days although it is likely that COVID-19 may have inflicted some permanent scarring on the economy Although the CEA makes these optimistic assumptions for simplicity they do not significantly bias the estimate of the value of OWS. This is because they apply equally to both the case that a vaccine is developed by January | Chapter and the counterfactual comparison without OWS that it is not developed until September. The CEA s analysis likely underestimates the true value of a COVID-19 vaccine because it does not include harder-to-measure factors such as loss of human capital and non-COVID negative health effects or the value of a vaccine to countries other than the United States Supporting the Healthcare System Along with the Administration s efforts directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic it is undertaking deregulatory initiatives to support the healthcare system more broadly. In addition providing financial support to healthcare providers is critical to avoid exacerbating health risks for Americans Deregulation Beyond working toward a vaccine the Trump Administration has expanded short-term supply of healthcare services to meet the needs of the pandemic by enacting a variety of deregulatory actions across Federal agencies. Some of the larger changes such as granting nurse practitioners more autonomy by loosening scope-of-practice regulations and removing restrictions on the provision of telemedicine are dealt with more thoroughly later in this chapter because they represent significant opportunities for long-term improvements in the regulatory space. In addition to these major actions regulators at various agencies within HHS took a number of less quantifiable but significant actions that increased the capacity of healthcare providers to meet the needs of their communities One of the primary public health concerns at the onset of the pandemic was the dearth of testing capabilities. To quickly expand diagnostic capacity the FDA utilized EUA procedures and allowed for the production of tests earlier in their life cycle. To supplement these actions on the production side the Trump Administration increased consumers ability to access COVID-19 diagnostic testing by relaxing scope-of-practice regulations with regard to which healthcare providers were able to administer testing and by reducing or eliminating the out-of-pocket cost of testing through the CARES Act. The National Institutes of Health expanded on diagnostic efforts by investing in improvements in rapid testing technology As some localities began to be hit hard by COVID-19 outbreaks one of the key public health risks was the limited supply of healthcare providers. To address this concern CMS relaxed a plethora of occupational licensing restrictions to increase the number of providers. The supply of doctors and nurses was increased by allowing those with licenses that had expired or were still under review to practice. CMS also used deregulatory action to increase the supply of other healthcare workers by waiving certain licensing requirements for positions like nurse aides and paid feeding assistants. Such actions were Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System | particularly beneficial for hard-hit long-term-care facilities whose patients are disproportionately at risk from COVID-19. CMS also encouraged out-of-State practitioners to assist in harder-hit areas by removing Federal restrictions on their ability to provide care to Medicare beneficiaries outside their State of licensure The Administration also helped to mitigate dangerous shortages of personal protective equipment ( PPE ) During the early months of the pandemic a key risk to healthcare workers was the limited supply of PPE and stringent Federal regulations on how it must be used. To provide a temporary increase in the supply of PPE and protect healthcare providers working in settings that put them at high risk of contracting COVID-19 the FDA s EUA and the Families First Coronavirus Relief Act ( FFCRA ) allowed for highly protective facemasks initially designed for use in industrial settings to also be used in medical settings Furthermore CMS removed regulations that limited the ability of healthcare providers to store and reuse masks which gave hospitals increased autonomy in determining what PPE policies they wanted to implement and substantially decreased demand for new masks in facilities that chose to capitalize on the deregulation In addition to using deregulation to increase the number of healthcare providers and the supply of PPE the Trump Administration loosened regulations of hospital classifications and facilities. To reduce the spread of COVID-19 within hospitals HHS allowed hospitals to screen potential patients offsite to prevent the spread of COVID-19. As hotspots arose in large cities CMS allowed for the expansion of patient care areas to respond to sudden increases in demand for medical services. CMS also waived eligibility requirements for several classifications of rural hospitals to allow them to expand their capacity and serve their communities during the pandemic. Many of CMS s deregulatory actions for facilities benefited long-term-care facilities including waiving resident group requirements for in-person meetings statutory limitations on transfers and discharges and requirements to honor resident roommate requests. All these actions were undertaken to decrease the risk of COVID-19 spreading among both the patient and provider populations Finally CMS temporarily waived a number of paperwork and bureaucratic requirements during the pandemic to allow healthcare providers to make informed decisions about how to prioritize their time and best meet their patients needs. These included regulations of the time frame for reporting requirements the necessity of verbal orders discharge planning emergency preparedness plans patient privacy utilization reviews and food plans Financial Support for Healthcare Providers The COVID-19 pandemic represented a threat to the financial solvency of healthcare providers across the country restricting their ability to ensure high-quality | Chapter care for patients in their communities. In response the Administration worked with Congress to pass the CARES Act which established the Provider Relief Fund to help healthcare providers in the midst of the pandemic. The CARES Act through HHS made up to $ billion available to eligible hospitals and other healthcare providers which constituted about percent of spending from the bill. The PPP/HCE Act provided an additional $ billion for the Provider Relief Fund to reimburse healthcare providers for expenses related to healthcare and lost revenues that are attributable to COVID-19. In addition the PPP/ HCE Act provided $ billion to help increase COVID-19 testing. This includes up to $ billion to reimburse the cost of testing uninsured individuals in addition to the $ billion previously appropriated for this purpose by the FFCRA The FFCRA also as amended by the CARES Act requires Medicare Part B State Medicaid Children s Health Insurance Programs ( CHIP ) and group health plans and health insurance issuers to cover COVID-19 diagnostic testing without cost sharing for patients. Uninsured individuals may also obtain COVID-19 diagnostic testing free of charge under the State Medicaid programs if the State offers this option. CMS has developed an accessible easy-to-use toolkit for States to amend their Medicaid programs so they can offer this service. The CARES Act also appropriated $ billion for the Coronavirus Relief Fund which is administered by the Department of the Treasury to reimburse expenses incurred by State local and Tribal governments as part of their response to the COVID-19 pandemic With funding allocated by the CARES Act and the PPP/HCE Act HHS can allocate up to $ billion of aid to eligible hospitals and other healthcare providers to offset these costs. Over $ billion had been paid to hospitals and other providers by early October. This includes relief to hospitals that serve the most vulnerable segment of the population as well as rural hospitals and those in small metropolitan areas Canceling elective surgeries played a major role in declining revenue for many providers. Following the advice of both State-level policymakers and the surgeon general in mid-March elective surgeries were canceled or postponed as part of the effort to curb the spread of COVID-19 and prevent the potential straining of healthcare infrastructure and resources during the pandemic. Figure shows the decline and subsequent recovery of five types of visits of Medicare patients relative to the comparable week in with total knee arthroplasties reaching as low as percent of their baseline volume in mid-April. As restrictions were lifted throughout the summer elective surgery volumes rebounded with most at or near their baseline figures by early July This likely represents a temporary surge in volume for those who rescheduled surgeries immediately after the end of restrictions but an overall lower demand for elective surgeries in the Medicare population However due in part to the financial support that was provided to providers healthcare has proven to be one of the most resilient labor markets Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System |  $ "     / $ * )  '    $    / $ ' $  / $ * )  Jan. Oct. Knee replacement Non-COVID ER visit Cholecystectomy Visits ( percentage of baseline ) Hip replacement Colonoscopy Oct. Jan Feb. Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct .Sources : Department of Health and Human Services ; CEA calculations Note : ER = emergency room during the pandemic. Figure shows employment by sector for each month of as a percentage of the baseline using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) Healthcare employment fell to percent of its level in April the second-smallest decline of any sector. In contrast average employment in all sectors in April was percent and employment in leisure and hospitality was particularly volatile falling to percent. Healthcare has so far remained the second-most-resilient sector after financial services for the duration of the recovery and has steadily regained employment rising to percent of its level in October One major concern from the rapid job losses in March and April due to COVID-19 was the loss of health insurance for those obtaining benefits through employment. As of May the Kaiser Family Foundation estimated that million people who were covered by employer-sponsored insurance ( ESI ) were part of a family in which someone had lost a job ( CBO ; Garfield et al. ) Of this group about million could potentially lose their health insurance with the remaining million retaining ESI though another worker in their family or another source of coverage. Given this consideration all but million would then be eligible for publicly subsidized coverage via Medicaid or marketplace subsidies significantly reducing the share of job losses that result in a lack of health insurance | Chapter  $ "    * ) / # '4  ( ' * ( ) /      / *  Healthcare Manufacturing Business services Mining/logging Trade Education Construction Finance Leisure/hospitality Employment ( percentage of baseline ) Oct. Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct ources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations S However these projections have not been borne out in the data thus far Data from Americans in the Household Pulse Survey from the Census Bureau showed minimal changes in ESI coverage between the end of April and the end of September as Americans reported being both insured and uninsured at slightly lower rates with a substantial increase in those who did not report or reported don t know. In fact between the end of April and the end of August Pulse results showed that uninsurance rates had actually declined by percentage point. The disparity between the observed changes in ESI coverage and initial projections may in part be due to the PPP/HCE Act allowing forgivable loans to employers to cover payroll costs including employer contributions to health insurance coverage. Ultimately although microsimulation modeling can be used to approximate the decline in health insurance coverage due to COVID-19 survey data to quantify the effect remains inconclusive at this time Subsidizing Beneficial Behaviors and the Cost of COVID-19 Care Testing is essential to identifying positive COVID-19 cases quarantining and treating sick patients and implementing contact tracing protocols. Test costs may be a barrier to some members of the public which could thwart efforts to contain a pandemic. Passage of the FFCRA on March reduced this Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System | potential cost barrier for American families. Nearly all public and private insurance plans are required by this legislation to cover FDA-approved COVID-19 tests and any costs associated with diagnostic testing with no cost sharing as long as the test is deemed medically appropriate by an attending health care provider and the federally declared public health emergency is in effect. The CARES Act which was enacted on March further mandated that private plans reimburse out-of-network COVID-19 tests up to a publicly reported cash price. The FFCRA Relief Fund includes up to $ billion ( $ billion appropriated through the FFCRA and up to $ billion appropriated through the PPP/ HCE Act ) to reimburse healthcare providers who conduct COVID-19 testing for uninsured individuals which could raise the likelihood that these individuals seek testing when they feel ill and therefore contribute to the nation s public health objective of mitigating the COVID-19 pandemic. As of September the CDC has awarded over $ billion to States Tribes localities and territories. This total includes $ billion for critical support to enhance COVID19 testing and related activities at the State and local levels. All these Federal protections have reduced the cost barriers of COVID-19 testing which in turn has helped the United States identify positive COVID-19 cases and deliver care to individuals who have contracted COVID-19 Emergency Paid Sick and Medical Leave To slow the spread and contain the COVID-19 pandemic the Administration has encouraged members of the public to stay home when they are sick or caring for a family member who is sick. At the same time the Administration has firmly acted to prevent American workers from trading off work hours for their own or a family member s health and the broader public s health protection. As provided by the FFCRA on April the U.S. Department of Labor announced that private employers with fewer than employees are eligible for tax credits for costs associated with providing paid leave for COVID-19 until December These dollar-for-dollar reimbursements through tax credits enable employers to keep their workers on the payroll when their employees become sick or are caring for someone with COVID-19 and are unable to work which promotes public health and maintains the flow of financial support to both employers and employees. For employers that could not cover the cost of paid leave with funds they would otherwise pay to the Internal Revenue Service in payroll taxes the FFCRA enabled employers to seek an expedited advance from the Internal Revenue Service through streamlined reimbursement claims Subsidizing the Cost of COVID-19 Care In addition to financing the detection of COVID-19 in order to implement containment and mitigation procedures the Administration has also provided Federal support to reduce the cost of COVID-19 treatment. The Administration has responded in several ways to ensure that individuals seek the care that they need | Chapter Many private Medicare health plans known as Medicare Advantage plans have expanded coverage to meet the unique needs of Medicare beneficiaries during a pandemic including telehealth and medical transportation benefits These types of support are especially important for lower-income individuals in the elderly population who would otherwise face cost or mobility constraints that would make obtaining medical care for COVID-19 difficult In addition through the use of waivers the Administration has created greater flexibility for Medicaid Medicare and CHIP requirements that can sometimes pose challenges for healthcare providers to provide medical care and for States to manage their Medicaid and CHIP programs during a national emergency such as the COVID-19 pandemic. The reduced administrative burden facilitated by these waivers has helped providers deliver medical care in these high-risk medical populations. When granted the ultimate goal of these is to improve the ability of States and the healthcare sector to meet the needs of Medicare Medicaid and CHIP beneficiaries and expand access to medical services for these beneficiaries during the COVID-19 pandemic Finally the Administration has taken actions to address the significant out-of-pocket medical cost burden faced by uninsured individuals when they become ill. Life during a pandemic is especially daunting for the uninsured because they do not have an insurance buffer in the event that they are exposed to COVID-19 and end up suffering from it. As noted above a total of up to $ billion in Federal funds appropriated by the FFCRA and the PPP/HCE Act reduce testing cost barriers among the uninsured population. However the Administration has also acted to address treatment cost barriers for these Americans. HHS is providing claims reimbursement to healthcare providers that treat uninsured patients with COVID-19. As of November $ billion had been distributed to providers to reimburse the cost of testing and treating uninsured COVID-19 patients. Of this amount representing almost claims $ million was for testing and $ billion was for treatment. The CARES Act established and appropriated a total of $ billion to the Provider Relief Fund and the PPP/HCE Act appropriated an additional $ billion in relief funds. A portion of the Provider Relief Fund was used to reimburse providers that are treating uninsured individuals with COVID-19. In April the Administration began requiring providers to certify that as a condition for supplemental COVID-19 funding they would not seek to collect out-of-pocket expenses from a patient in an amount greater than what the patient would have otherwise been required to pay for in-network care COVID-19 and Future Healthcare Reform Several other key initiatives are related to COVID-19 and the future of healthcare reform. These include reform of the FDA drug approval process the Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System | expansion of telemedicine and the deregulation of scope-of-practice requirements for nurse practitioners FDA Reform The pandemic has also shown the value of speed in the development of new medical breakthroughs and the key role that deregulation can play in such efforts. At the onset of COVID-19 one of the reasons that testing was limited was extensive Federal regulations including the long FDA approval process. To combat this the Trump Administration took action through the FDA to issue EUAs for COVID-19 diagnostic tests. Such decisive actions played a key role in quickly ramping up testing capacity after initial delays and they demonstrate the value of expedited the approval of medical breakthroughs. Currently the United States has some of the most stringent regulations of new drugs in the world with some approvals taking roughly years from FDA application to market entry. As with COVID-19 testing and treatment other new drugs have the potential to save lives and substantially improve well-being which creates high opportunity costs for a long approval process. The CEA estimates that the net present value of the social surplus gained by decreasing FDA drug approval times by one two or three years would be $ trillion $ trillion and $ trillion respectively. Experience with the Prescription Drug User Fee Act ( PDUFA ) in the 1990s suggests that changes in policy can reduce approval times on this scale To estimate the value of shorter approval times the CEA first estimates the annual social surplus generated by a drug for each year it is under patent protection. Because the FDA s approval time does not directly affect the patent expiration date of the average drug the utility gained after postpatent expiration is assumed to be unchanged. Furthermore the CEA s estimates of the value produced by such a policy change likely understates the true value because the number of new drugs introduced is treated as exogenous. In reality shorter approval times increase the profitability of new entrants and would lead to further advances in medical technology providing additional value for both consumers and pharmaceutical companies. ( All dollar amounts are dollars. ) Figure shows an average drug s life cycle broken down into costs producer surplus and consumer surplus. The model updates the average drug revenue profile described by Philipson and others ( ) using data from the FDA BLS and the Saint Louis Federal Reserve on the change in the number and prices of new drug approvals. Using this updated drug revenue profile the CEA applies further calculations ( described below ) to estimate the producer and consumer surplus generated by the average drug. Of course in reality most drugs will have very different revenue profiles but the constructed average drug in the model uses data on average total revenue over the course | Chapter  $ "     "  "  $ ! C4  '  d0- $ ) "  the   / ) /   $ *   * ./  *    .0-+'0  * ) (  s0-+'0 Dollars ( billions ) Year  *    # $ ' $ * ) /   '    * *    )    "    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )    * !    *   /  / $ ./ $    aint  * $     '   Bank        '  '  / $ * ) of the patent period and average share of revenue in each year to construct a representative example Although overall revenue profiles can be easily estimated using publicly available data on consumer expenditures it is more difficult to calculate precise measures of producer and consumer surpluses in large part due to the wide variation of producers and products in the pharmaceutical industry. The CEA estimates that the producer surplus in each year of the patent period is percent of revenues based on the finding that marginal costs are roughly percent of revenue ( Berndt Cockburn and Griliches ; Caves Whinston and Hurwitz ; Grabowski and Vernon ; Philipson et al. ) Of course pharmaceutical companies also face high fixed costs early on in the life cycle of a drug in the form of research-and-development costs for both successful and unsuccessful products approval application fees and marketing expenditures ( Kennedy ) A reduction in approval time may result in lower costs associated with the approval process if the preapproval time frame has nonnegligible marginal costs over time. However to ensure that the result represents a true lower bound the CEA does not include any reduction of fixed costs in the total benefit estimate To arrive at an estimate of total social surplus the CEA conservatively assumes that consumer surplus is equal to producer surplus. It is well documented that consumers enjoy greater benefits from the development of new drugs than the profits made by their producers ( CBO ; Lichtenberg ; Philipson and Jena ; Philipson et al. ; Roebuck et al. ) In fact the Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System | literature suggests that consumers capture the vast majority of the social surplus generated by new drugs meaning that the CEA may substantially underestimate the total value to consumers of reducing drug approval times. Under these assumptions the CEA finds that once an average drug has reached maturity in the market it will generate about $ billion in social surplus annually Figure demonstrates how decreasing drug approval time by one two or three years would affect this annual social surplus. The figure also accounts for the time value of money by using an annual discount rate of percent. That is $ in year one is worth cents in year zero. Using a discount factor accounts for the fact that both the consumers and producers of a product would rather have it sooner rather than later. By allowing earlier entry into the market drugs reach maturity in the market and provide maximum social surplus earlier than in the status quo. The maximum social surplus is reached earlier and attains a higher value due to the discounting of future periods which represents the increased value for both consumers and producers Some critics of FDA reform suggest that decreased approval times would result in more unsafe products being brought to market and therefore an increase in approval withdrawals. However approval times decreased by over one year under PDUFA and Phillipson and others ( ) found no evidence of an increase in withdrawals after the reduction in approval times but did not account for potential adverse effects on safety that do not result in withdrawal Qureshi and others ( ) found that safety-related withdrawals accounted for less than a quarter of all withdrawals between and The CEA s analysis using an expanded data set of safety-related withdrawals also did not find an increase in withdrawals after the decreased approval times of PDUFA Given the absence of data on the distribution of withdrawals by drug revenue the CEA applies the overall drug withdrawal rate of percent as a reduction to the potential increase in social surplus. This likely overstates the extent to which withdrawals would decrease potential benefit due to the skewed distribution of revenue by different drugs. Although the FDA s approval is withdrawn for a small share of drugs for safety reasons almost percent are voluntarily withdrawn by their producers for commercial reasons. In reality the more successful drugs that generate larger surpluses for both producers and consumers are less likely to be withdrawn resulting in a conservative estimate of the overall benefit Using the estimate of the net present value of a drug s life cycle shown in figure the CEA calculates the marginal cumulative net present value of social surplus generated by reducing FDA approval times as shown in figure The model uses the five-year average from to of new drugs per year by the FDA. As noted above by increasing the returns on investment in research reducing FDA approval times would likely increase the number of new applicants and hence approvals. Therefore the static model that holds new drugs constant at a year results in a conservative estimate of the value | Chapter  $ "     "   ) )  '   *  $  '   0-+'0.     *  '   $ (        c   y   y   y  Dollars ( billions ) Year  *    # $ ' $ * )  /   '    * *   )    "    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $    ain/  * $     '   Bank        '  '  / $ * )  $ "    ( '  / $   " " "  /   /   ) /    '0  * ! )     *  $  '   ' !      *  '   $ (       Dollars ( billions )  y  Dollars ( billions )  y   *   # $ ' ' $ * ) * $    '   Year  *    # $ ' ' $ * )  /   '    * *   )    "    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $    Saint * $     '          '  '  / $ * ) Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System |    '    ./ $ (  /    *  $  '   0-+'0.         *  '   $ (  Reduction ( billions of real dollars )    /  p- ) /  v  '0     *  '   $ (     / $ * )        *    # $ ' $ * )  /   '    * *    )    "    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $     $ ) /  * $     '      ) &        '  '  / $ * ) of deregulation especially considering the fact that new approvals have been trending upward since The results given in figure represent the increase in social surplus for one year of drug approvals depending on whether the approval time for the drugs is reduced by one two or three years To calculate aggregate gain in social surplus it is necessary to sum the gains in social surplus associated with quicker drug approvals over time Because policies to reduce approval time may be difficult to implement immediately the CEA assumes that the reductions in approval time would begin applying to drugs that would otherwise be approved in Under these assumptions table displays the nondiscounted gain in social surplus from a one- two- or three-year reduction in approval times for each year from to as well as the net present value in of such a policy change. The CEA estimates that the net present value of the increase in social surplus from a permanent reduction in approval times by one two or three years for new drugs would be $ trillion $ trillion or $ trillion respectively Telemedicine Deregulation One of the most substantial deregulatory opportunities for long-term healthcare improvement that has been highlighted during the pandemic is telemedicine | Chapter Early during the pandemic HHS took four key deregulatory actions to increase the availability of telemedicine opportunities. First the Office for Civil Rights ( OCR ) announced that it would relax enforcement of HIPAA regulations to allow health professionals to communicate with patients and provide telehealth services via remote communication technologies that may not fully comply with HIPAA privacy rules. Though the laws remain unchanged OCR used its enforcement discretion to allow any covered health professionals to use a wide array of commercially available communication technology ( e.g. Zoom or Skype ) as part of a good faith effort to provide telehealth services during the pandemic regardless of whether the services are directly related to the diagnosis or treatment of COVID-19 Second President Trump s emergency declaration allows HHS to relax Federal licensing restrictions so many health professionals can provide care virtually to patients in other States. This has created a large pool of potential health professionals available to any given patient who is seeking telehealth services increasing access to medical services in the States with the greatest need. Finally CMS took two significant deregulatory actions to promote telehealth by temporarily expanding the scope of Medicare telehealth to allow Medicare beneficiaries across the country not just in rural areas to receive telehealth services from any location including their homes as well as adding over allowable services more than doubling the number of services that beneficiaries could receive via telehealth ( Verma ) The CMS temporarily waived statutory and regulatory provisions that restrict reimbursement for telemedicine services to those furnished in certain healthcare facilities allowing healthcare professionals to be paid for providing telehealth services regardless of location. CMS also allowed for a broader range of services to be provided via video or audio call including emergency department visits therapy services and initial nursing facility and discharge visits. These measures are designed to promote the use of telemedicine and ensure that patients have access to healthcare while remaining safely at home During the beginning stages of the pandemic quick deregulatory action mitigated disruptions in care for patients in hotspot areas and those in the greatest need. Mann and others ( ) found that telemedicine visits increased almost sevenfold during the period of maximal COVID-19 active cases in New York City. Many of these online visits were directly related to COVID-19 which advanced three key public health goals. First telemedicine allows for comparatively inexpensive and efficient screening for patients before they arrive in the emergency room. This lowers costs and prevents unnecessary healthcare visits which decrease the strain on already-overburdened healthcare providers and the potential transmission of COVID-19 to other patients and healthcare workers. Second expanding access to telemedicine provides useful data to public health officials who are trying to track the spread of the disease and predict future hotspots an approach that has been shown in the past to provide a Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System | useful picture of the spread of influenza ( Chauhan et al. ) Third provision of telehealth services that is not directly related to COVID-19 is particularly necessary for patients who are actively quarantining and require healthcare because in-person visits with such patients increase the risk of exposure for healthcare workers and their patients Telemedicine visits have also been useful in maintaining access to essential care services when physical access to medical services has been limited. For seniors who are at a heightened risk of serious illness from COVID19 telemedicine has offered an appealing substitute due to the deregulatory actions of CMS. Telehealth visits constituted percent of Medicare primary care visits in April compared with just percent of such visits before the pandemic in February. Urban areas that have had higher levels of COVID-19 hospitalizations have utilized telehealth services at a higher rate suggesting that this uptake has been at least partly driven by concerns over COVID-19 With uncertainty and unemployment rising during the pandemic telehealth services have also provided a safe and efficient method to meet rising demand for mental health services among patients of all ages. During the February-toApril period increases in Medicare telehealth utilization for primary care visits were dramatic in every State ; for example visits went from percent to percent in Texas and from percent to percent in Massachusetts According to survey data from McKinsey & Company percent of U.S consumers used telehealth services in ( Bestsennyy et al. ) As of April percent of U.S. consumers reported that they had already used telehealth to replace canceled in-person healthcare visits in Though telehealth has helped expand access to care at a time when COVID-19 has restricted patients ability to see their doctors there has been strong interest in making telehealth services a permanent option ; percent of U.S. consumers report being interested in using telehealth in the future. The enthusiasm for telehealth on the demand side is matched by favorable reviews of telehealth on the supply side ; percent of providers view telehealth more favorably than they did before COVID-19 and percent are more comfortable using it. The positive reaction to exercising telehealth options is likely to increase over time as awareness and experience with virtual healthcare services grow and existing challenges ( e.g. lower mobile and computer capabilities in lower-income communities and security concerns ) are resolved The immediate and pressing nature of the COVID-19 pandemic has demanded that the healthcare system embrace telemedicine on a greatly accelerated timeline. Though the availability of telehealth services has been increasing consistently over time the additional infrastructure built and deregulatory actions taken provide an opportunity to more strongly embrace telehealth as a key part of the future of healthcare. In the American Hospital Association identified Medicare reimbursement differentials and regulatory barriers as two key barriers to wider adoption of telemedicine in | Chapter the United States. Many of these regulatory burdens have been temporarily removed and healthcare systems have already implemented telemedicine programs in response to the pandemic so they can use them beyond COVID-19 without incurring additional setup costs if HHS s deregulatory actions become permanent. Although the benefits to individuals in quarantine and those at a high risk of contracting COVID-19 will decrease once the threat of the pandemic has passed other benefits will remain. Studies of telemedicine programs have found that they increase patient satisfaction decrease the loss of work time ( which decreases the opportunity costs for patients to seek care they need ) and decrease the unnecessary use of the emergency department due to prescreening arrivals which lowers costs and improves the quality of care for patients who need it most In addition though the greatest beneficiaries of increased availability of telemedicine during the pandemic have been patients in urban areas the long-term benefits of normalizing telemedicine will be highest among rural Americans who do not reside near major medical centers. The Department of Veterans Affairs found that percent of its telemedicine utilization came from rural veterans. Telemedicine would allow greater access to specialists with knowledge in a particular area of medicine even when doctors are not at the same hospital or region of the country. Furthermore rural populations are particularly subject to high opportunity costs for medical care including lost wages transportation costs and childcare expenses. On the basis of a study of this phenomenon by Bynum and others ( ) the CEA estimates that rural Americans would on average save $ per visit in opportunity costs such as fuel wages and other family expenses if their visits could be replaced by telemedicine. Rural patients who would otherwise make the national average physician s office visits a year would therefore save up to $ annually Though rural patients may empirically make fewer physician visits per year ( Spoont et al. ) the increased access provided by telemedicine may reduce the geographic disparity between rural and urban Americans Given both consumers and providers interest in continued access to telemedicine it is a potentially significant source of future economic value McKinsey & Company estimates that before the COVID-19 the total annual revenue of U.S. telehealth players was about $ billion with the largest vendors being focused on virtual urgent care ( Bestsennyy et al. ) They estimate that going beyond this segment of virtual healthcare may allow up to $ billion or $ in $ current healthcare dollars to be virtualized Scope-of-Practice Deregulation During the COVID pandemic relaxing stringent scope-of-practice ( SOP ) requirements allowed hospitals and other health providers to increase the amount of care that they could provide for their communities. Before the outbreak of COVID-19 States and territories allowed full practice for Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System | nurse practitioners ( NPs ) meaning that NPs in those States and territories are authorized by their boards of nursing to evaluate and diagnose patients order and interpret diagnostic tests and manage treatments ( including prescribing medication ) without a physician. Increased demand from virus patients combined with decreased supply due to practitioners being out sick threatened to overwhelm hospital systems across the country. In contrast States with more restrictive SOP guidelines place restrictions on NPs in one or more of these areas generally in the form of prohibitions or physician supervision requirements. In response State governments and Federal agencies relaxed SOP guidelines that prevented nurse practitioners from performing certain routine tasks without the supervision of a licensed physician. By April another States had temporarily relaxed their SOP requirements. In addition CMS temporarily relaxed its SOP guidelines in March Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement payments are critical for the survival of many hospitals and State regulations are always binding. Because of this hospitals tend to operate under the more rigid regulations when their State and CMS regulations are in conflict. This has enabled providers in areas that have been hit hardest by COVID-19 to respond with increased labor flexibility in meeting the needs of their communities Existing SOP restrictions on NPs display a strong geographic correlation ( figure ) This is likely due to the greater benefits associated with broadening SOP in rural areas relative to urban communities given that full practice was primarily allowed in New England the northern Great Plains the Mountain West and the Pacific Northwest. Rural areas rely more heavily on NPs and grant them greater autonomy than urban areas because they tend to have fewer physicians to oversee the NPs ( Rosenblatt and Hart ) This shortage of physicians can prevent the opening of community health centers ( CHCs ) The opening of new CHCs in rural areas was associated with relaxed SOP requirements. Furthermore CHCs in States with relaxed SOP guidelines have more NPs relative to physicians than CHCs in States with rigid SOP guidelines ( Shi and Samuels ) More CHCs mean better access to care in rural areas. And because relaxing SOP allows more CHCs to open and more CHCs mean better access to care deregulating SOP would improve the ability for rural populations to access healthcare In addition to expanding access relaxing SOP regulations drives down healthcare costs. Such restrictions increase the cost of healthcare because NPs are unable to perform certain tasks without the supervision of a physician and physicians time is expensive. Rigid regulations requiring physicians to perform some tasks increased the cost of well-child medical exams by percent ( Kleiner et al. ) Another analysis found that costs were lower in States with reduced and full SOP than in States with restrictive SOP ( Spetz et al. ) To estimate the economic benefit of relaxing SOP guidelines for NPs nationwide the CEA uses interstate cost comparisons from Poghosyan and | Chapter  $ "    /  /    * * !    / $    " '  / $ * )  *    ( $   )   *  $  / $ * )  * !       / $ / $ * )  $   o-   ( *   w  $  *  a  / $ * )  $ ./ $ ) "  f0' '  p-   / $  others ( ) who estimate the difference in outpatient and prescription drug costs for Medicaid patients between States that allow for full reduced and restricted practice for NPs. Using these figures along with data from BLS and the Kaiser Family Foundation the CEA estimates that allowing full practice nationwide would reduce outpatient costs by $ billion a year and prescription drug costs by $ billion a year across patients enrolled in employer health plans nongroup plans or Medicaid. This would lead to a reduction in national prescription drug spending of percent and combined represent a reduction in national healthcare expenditures of percent. Due to the limited supply of NPs this number represents the potential long-run benefit once the labor market for NPs has expanded to match the increased demand. However the supply of NPs has been flexible more than doubling the past years as States have removed SOP restrictions The CEA s estimate likely understates the total benefit in two ways. First Medicaid spending per capita is lower than the privately insured population so the savings for the general population in dollar terms may be larger than for Medicaid enrollees. Second the CEA s analysis only accounts for individuals who are members of employer health plans nongroup plans or Medicaid. It is likely that relaxing SOP for NPs would also reduce costs for other groups including those insured by military plans or Medicare as well as the uninsured population Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System | The impact of relaxing SOP on health outcomes could go one of three ways. If relaxing SOP restrictions causes NPs to provide lower-quality care in the absence of physician supervision then relaxing SOP would have a negative effect on health outcomes. If instead NPs performed just as well as doctors then there would be no effect on health outcomes. In addition if NPs could now perform more critical health actions which previously could not have been performed due to a shortage of physicians to provide supervision then one would expect health outcomes to improve when SOP restrictions are relaxed Empirical evidence suggests that allowing nurse practitioners full practice nationwide would not compromise the quality of patient care. State-level SOP restrictions had no effect on infant mortality or malpractice insurance premiums ( Kleiner et al. ) Taking a broader approach another study found that the considerable variation in the results for the measures included in each of the domains of primary care quality indicators we assessed chronic disease management cancer screening ambulatory care sensitive hospital admissions and adverse outcomes did not reveal a consistent pattern or relationship with state-level SOP. ( Perloff et al. ) In rural areas the results of one analysis suggested a positive relationship between health outcomes and relaxed SOP guidelines ( Ortiz et al. ) A wealth of literature analyzing the difference in patient outcomes between NPs and physicians has consistently found that for most patients NPs provide equivalent or better care at a lower cost ( Lenz et al. ; Martin-Misener et al. ; Mundinger et al. ; Oliver et al. ; Stanik-Hutt et al. ) The States and Federal agencies that have temporarily relaxed their SOP guidelines during the COVID-19 pandemic could seize this opportunity to improve the access and affordability of healthcare for their citizens Additional Changes to Promote Choice and Competition Beyond the response to the COVID-19 health crisis the Trump Administration has championed several healthcare reforms to promote additional choice and competition in the market. These policies will provide tangible reform to Americans and play a critical part in the swift comeback for the U.S. economy First CMS introduced site-neutral payment in for clinic services delivered by hospitals. Site-neutral payments were part of the Hospital Outpatient Prospective Payment System final rule and address unnecessary increases in utilization of clinic visits in off-campus hospital-based departments. Medicare and beneficiaries often pay more for the same type of clinic visit in the hospital outpatient setting than in the physician office setting. The rule was challenged by a coalition of hospitals led by the American Hospital | Chapter Association in Federal court. In September the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia ruled that CMS had overstepped its statutory authority in making the changes. However a July decision issued by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit overturned the lower court s ruling clearing the path for implementation. Site-neutral payments are estimated to generate healthcare savings that have a direct and positive impact on beneficiaries the Medicare program employers and American taxpayers. An evaluation by CMS that has been extrapolated by the CEA shows that site-neutral payments for evaluation and management services are projected to save the Medicare program an estimated $ million and lower patient copayments by $ million in Second prescription drugs saw their largest annual price decrease in nearly half a century in For three consecutive years the FDA has approved a record number of generic drugs. The CEA estimates that these approvals saved patients $ billion in and The Creating and Restoring Equal Access to Equivalent Samples Act will also create opportunities for greater savings from generic drugs by increasing access to samples for testing. The CEA estimates that the projected savings to American taxpayers will be $ billion from to Also in July the Trump Administration issued an Executive Order aimed at improving the care of patients with chronic kidney disease. In the Department of Health and Human Services published multiple rules that attempted to streamline the renal care system by removing regulatory barriers increasing oversight of Organ Procurement Organizations and encouraging living kidney donors. HHS estimates that its changes to the system of these organizations alone could generate up to additional kidney transplants by The CEA estimates that these initiatives could have substantial health and economic benefits. Because each kidney transplant reduces lifetime medical spending by an estimated $ and creates health benefits such as increased longevity that are worth an estimated $ million the net present value of these kidney transplants would be roughly $ billion a year Moreover efforts to promote peritoneal dialysis could result in savings of $ million to $ million annually. When combined with the value of health gains and savings from kidney transplants the CEA finds that the Administration s initiatives could provide societal benefits with a net present value of nearly $ billion Conclusion Although COVID-19 has imposed significant health and economic costs throughout the Trump Administration has been able to take decisive actions to mitigate its effects. Expediting the development of testing and treatment capabilities has played a key role in curbing the human cost of the Advancing the Quality and Efficiency of America s Healthcare System | virus while the removal of burdensome regulation and provision of financial support have helped the healthcare sector adjust to the adverse shock. The Nation s experience with COVID-19 provides opportunities for extending the suspension of harmful regulations which will further encourage economic recovery and provide long-term health and financial benefits. In particular the CEA finds that reforming the FDA drug approval process to reduce approval times encouraging the widespread continuation of telemedicine and removing harmful scope-of-practice regulations would generate significant savings and improve the health of Americans in the future | Chapter x Part II The Renaissance of American Greatness x Chapter Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of not only cut taxes for businesses and individuals broadly but also made targeted cuts to spur investment in economically distressed communities designated as Opportunity Zones ( OZs ) In this chapter the Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) compares the advantages of OZs with those of other Federal antipoverty programs and documents the characteristics of the nearly low-income communities designated as OZs It also quantifies the effect of OZs investment and finds that a large increase is already benefiting OZ residents while potentially having only a small effect on the Federal budget OZs chart a new course in Federal policy aimed at uplifting distressed communities. Antipoverty transfer programs subsidize the consumption of goods such as housing and healthcare but can lead to reduced economic activity by raising taxes and discouraging eligible working-age participants from seeking jobs Also under other existing place-based development programs the Federal government selects who receives grants or tax credits and narrowly prescribes their use. By comparison OZs cut taxes to increase economic activity by spurring private sector investment job creation and self-sufficiency. They also give greater scope for market forces to guide entrepreneurs and investors because they have no cap on participation and require no government approval The CEA finds that OZs which are census tracts nominated by State governors and certified by the U.S. Department of the Treasury to be eligible for the investment tax cuts are among the poorest communities in the United States. These communities have an average poverty rate more than double that of all other communities and are home to a higher share of African Americans Hispanics and high school dropouts. Even among all the communities eligible to be an OZ under Federal law every State selected communities that on average had a median household income less than that of communities that were not selected The CEA also finds that the OZ tax cuts have spurred a large investment response. This chapter estimates that Qualified Opportunity Funds raised $ billion in private capital by the end of most of which would not have entered OZs without the incentive. This new capital represents percent of total annual investment in OZs and helps explain why the CEA also finds that private equity investment in OZ businesses grew percent relative to the comparison group of businesses in eligible communities that were not selected as OZs The growth in investment has already made OZs more attractive to their residents as reflected in what buyers are willing to pay for homes located in OZs. The CEA estimates that Opportunity Zone designation alone has caused a percent increase in housing values. Greater amenities and economic opportunity behind the housing value increase will be broadly enjoyed and for the nearly half of OZ residents who own their homes the increase provides an estimated $ billion in new wealth With regard to effects on the Federal budget the CEA finds that each $ raised by Qualified Opportunity Funds through has a direct forgone Federal revenue effect of cents. By comparison each $ in investment spurred by the New Markets Tax Credit an existing Federal program with similar goals results in cents of forgone revenue. Including indirect effects the CEA estimates that the OZ incentive could be revenue neutral with economic growth in low-income communities reducing transfer payments and offsetting forgone revenues from taxes on capital gains. Thus the CEA projects that the capital already raised by Qualified Opportunity Funds could lift million people out of poverty and into self-sufficiency decreasing poverty in OZs by percent | Chapter The COVID-19 pandemic slowed investment everywhere in the second quarter of including in Opportunity Zones but the initial evidence suggests that the OZ model has power to mobilize investors ; engage State local and tribal stakeholders ; and improve the outlook for low-income communities all with limited prescription from the Federal Government. This chapter s findings highlight the potential for the Opportunity Zone model to help spur the postCOVID-19 recovery in thousands of distressed communities across the United States O ne of the main provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act which was signed in December reduced U.S. corporate income tax rates to bring them in line with international levels. Lowering the corporate tax rate decreases the cost of capital thereby stimulating investment and growth in gross domestic product and wages ( CEA ) The Opportunity Zones ( OZs ) provision of the act mirrored this effort to lower capital taxes but with a focus on distressed communities. By reducing taxes on the capital gains invested in such communities the provision lowers the cost of capital for businesses which is expected to lead to new investment jobs and economic opportunity that has been lacking for decades. This CEA chapter compares the advantages of OZs relative to other Federal antipoverty programs and it documents the characteristics of the nearly low-income communities designated as OZs. The CEA also quantifies the effect of OZs on investment finding a large increase that is already benefiting residents while potentially having only a small effect on the Federal budget To stimulate investment in OZs the provision provides three potential tax benefits to investors that invest capital gains in Qualified Opportunity Funds which are vehicles for investing in qualified OZ properties. The first benefit of investing in these funds is that the investor can defer paying taxes on capital gains rolled into OZs until potentially as late as Second when these taxes are paid the investor may omit percent ( percent ) of the original gain if the investment is held there for at least five ( seven ) years.1 Finally and most important any capital gains that accrue to investments in a Qualified Opportunity Fund are tax free if the investment is held for at least years Funds can make equity investments in partnerships or corporations that operate in OZs as determined by various tests such as where they generate 1Because an investor must pay capital gains taxes on the original gain by the original option to pay taxes on only percent of the original has expired and would not apply to investments made in This is because the investments could not be held for the original seven years before having to pay the tax Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | income or where their assets lie. A Qualified Opportunity Fund can also directly purchase tangible property for use in the fund s trade or business but the property must have its original use begin with the fund or the fund must substantially improve the property. For example a Qualified Opportunity Fund could purchase and install new solar panels in an OZ or it could buy an apartment building and substantially improve it Although the Federal tax incentive described here is at the core of OZs all levels of government have worked to complement this incentive. At the Federal level on December President Trump signed Executive Order which established the White House Opportunity and Revitalization Council.2 The order gave the council the mission of leading efforts across executive departments and agencies to engage with State local and tribal governments to find ways to better use public funds to revitalize urban and economically distressed communities. In its one-year report to the President the council made recommendations to this end and as of August has taken more than related actions Complementary efforts have also occurred at the State and local levels For example the Alabama Incentives Modernization Act provides additional State tax breaks for Qualified Opportunity Funds and the State of New Jersey has created an OZ website and data tool with resources for local governments investors and businesses. The city of Erie Pennsylvania along with local businesses and nonprofit leaders has created the Flagship Opportunity Zone Development Company to encourage investment in the city s OZs. And the city of Cleveland has taken a similar approach by creating the Opportunity CLE initiative to promote local OZ investments The CEA finds that OZs which are census tracts selected by governors to be eligible for the investment tax cuts are among the poorest communities in the United States. These communities have an average poverty rate that is more than double that of other communities and are home to a higher share of African Americans Hispanics and high school dropouts. Even among all the communities that were eligible to be an OZ under Federal law every State selected communities that on average had a lower median household income than did eligible communities that were not selected The CEA also finds that the OZ tax cuts have spurred a large investment response. The chapter estimates that Qualified Opportunity Funds raised $ billion in private capital by the end of most of which would not have entered OZs without this incentive. This new capital represents percent of total annual investment in OZs and helps explain why the CEA also finds that private equity investment in OZ businesses grew percent relative to eligible communities that were not selected as OZs and thus act as a control group The council s various efforts are highlighted on the interagency website OpportunityZones.gov | Chapter This growth in investment has already made OZs more attractive to their residents as reflected in the prices buyers are willing to pay for homes located in OZs. The CEA estimates that OZ designation alone has caused a percent increase in housing values. The greater amenities and economic opportunity behind this housing value increase will be broadly enjoyed and for the nearly half of OZ residents who own their homes the increase provides an estimated $ billion in new wealth With regard to effects on the Federal budget the CEA finds that each $ raised by Qualified Opportunity Funds through has had a direct forgone Federal revenue effect of cents. By comparison each $ in investment spurred by the New Markets Tax Credit an existing Federal program with similar goals results in cents in forgone revenue. Including indirect effects the CEA estimates that the Opportunity Zone incentive could be revenue neutral with economic growth in low-income communities reducing transfer payments and offsetting forgone revenues from taxes on capital gains. Also the CEA projects that the capital already raised by Qualified Opportunity Funds could lift million people out of poverty into self-sufficiency decreasing poverty in OZs by percent. These findings are complemented by recent research by Arefeva and others ( ) showing that in metropolitan areas the OZ designation boosted employment growth relative to comparable tracts by between and percentage points creating new jobs across a wide range of industries and education levels Comparing Opportunity Zones with Other Antipoverty or Place-Based Programs Unlike antipoverty transfer programs which raise taxes and reduce the incentive for program recipients to participate in productive economic activity OZs lower taxes to stimulate economic activity in distressed areas. Relative to other place-based policies the OZ incentives are more open-ended and less topdown in their design which makes OZs more effective at attracting investment to communities most in need Antipoverty Transfer Policies Antipoverty transfer programs provide cash grants or subsidies for the consumption of goods. Notable examples are housing vouchers food stamps cash assistance for needy families and Medicaid. Although these programs support many Americans in need they can also weaken the incentive for working-age adults to find employment. Because of eligibility requirements linked to income taking a job or working more hours can cause a participant to become ineligible if his or her income exceeds a program s threshold. Considerable evidence confirms that such programs typically discourage employment Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | ( e.g. Hoynes and Schanzenbach ; Jacob and Ludwig ; Bloom and Michalopoulos ) Antipoverty transfer programs also raise taxes to fund these transfers Even if the transfers and associated eligibility requirements did not discourage work they would still come at a cost. Each $ raised through taxes costs society more than $ because of the positive marginal cost of public funds. This cost captures the effect of a tax in driving a wedge between the market value of what an extra hour of labor produces and the worker s value of that hour ( i.e. his or her opportunity cost ) Given this tax wedge each $ in funds raised by taxes costs society an estimated cents in forgone value ( Dahlby ; CEA ) The rules governing OZs do not create a disincentive to work because eligibility is based on community-wide measures of poverty and income rather than those of any particular individual. Nor does the OZ incentive have the same marginal cost of public funds associated with transfers funded by tax revenues. The incentive cuts taxes on capital supplied to low-income communities which reduces the tax wedge associated with the supply and demand for capital. The forgone Federal revenue might be made up through higher taxes elsewhere or it could be offset by declines in government transfers because of rising incomes in poor neighborhoods which is considered in a later section OZs nonetheless are not a substitute for cash grants or subsidies. Not everyone can work and most people living in poverty do not live in OZs. To the extent that transfer programs have appropriate work requirements for those who are able to work OZs complement such programs by fostering job creation OZs also complement the Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) which is an antipoverty tax incentive. The EITC targets low-income workers especially those with children and is phased out as a family s income rises. Because the EITC is only provided to low-income families with earnings it encourages people to enter the workforce. Empirical research confirms that the EITC increases workforce participation for single mothers who benefit the most from the credit ( Nichols and Rothstein ) In this sense the EITC increases the supply of labor while OZs stimulate demand for it Federal Place-Based Policies : The New Markets Tax Credit Program The Federal program most comparable to Opportunity Zones is the New Markets Tax Credit ( NMTC ) though OZs offer improvements over the NMTC program. Both use tax incentives to encourage private investment in lowincome communities but the total tax benefit available through the NMTC | Chapter program is capped limiting how much investment it can spur.3 In most years since Congress has authorized the NMTC program to award tax credits to support about $ billion in place-based investments. On average these credits account for about half of total project costs so the program supports roughly $ billion in investment annually. As of nearly census tracts have received NMTC program credits since the program s inception in the early 2000s ( Tax Policy Center ) In addition to being smaller in scale than the OZ initiative the NMTC program has a top-down approach to distributing tax benefits. The U.S Department of the Treasury administers the NMTC program through its Community Development Financial Institutions Fund ( CDFI ) which ultimately selects what applicants can receive tax credits. Community development entities must first apply to the CDFI to be qualified for the program. Those that are qualified then identify investment opportunities and submit applications to compete for a limited pool of credits. In development entities requested $ billion in NMTC funds but only $ billion were available and only about a third of all applicants received funding ( Lowry and Marples ) Even for approved applicants the NMTC program places greater restrictions on investors. Funds must remain invested and compliant with program requirements for seven years or else forgo all their tax benefits ( with interest and penalties ) With OZs funds can liquidate one investment and roll the proceeds into a new one without penalty though standard taxes apply to any capital gains. OZs are also flexible in other ways ; investors can contribute funds up to any size and they can pool their funds with any number of other investors ( Vardell ; Bernstein and Hassett ) Many of the participants in the NMTC program are large financial intermediaries equipped to navigate the CDFI s application process and manage compliance risk ( Vardell ; Hula and Jordan ) To manage the risk most NMTC transactions use a complex leverage model that combines debt and equity. According to Hula and Jordan ( ) the model requires a team of accountants and attorneys with relevant expertise to structure the investment. By contrast any investor with eligible capital gains can invest in a Qualified Opportunity Fund. These funds in turn need only self-certify their investments on their tax returns and follow the broad guidelines provided by the Department of the Treasury s regulations.4 Although the NMTC program is more prescriptive than OZs it is more flexible than the economic development grants given by the CDFI Fund. Harger Ross and Stephens ( ) find that the tax credits but not the grants increased the number of new businesses in low-income communities. They attribute the difference in part to the greater flexibility of the tax credit relative NMTCs are a limited allotment of tax credits that reduce investors Federal tax obligations. Tax credits differ from tax deductions which decrease the amount of income subject to being taxed The final regulations are available at www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/td-9889.pdf Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | to the grants. At the same time the authors found that even the NMTC program may not have had much effect on local employment Other Federal Place-Based Development Programs Along with Opportunity Zones in recent decades three other Federal programs have also relied on tax policy to spur economic development in specific places : empowerment zones ( EZs ) enterprise communities ( ECs ) and renewal communities ( RCs ) EZs and ECs date to while RCs were authorized in These programs extended a mix of tax benefits and grants to businesses in designated census tracts. These programs had a smaller geographic reach with many States having little or no participation in them. A key tax benefit among these programs was an employment tax credit of up to $ on the wages paid to people who lived and worked in the designated tract. Other tax benefits included increased limits for expensed deductions tax-exempt bond financing and exemptions from certain capital gains taxes ( CRS ) The EC and RC programs have both ended and only the tax benefits associated with the EZ program continue. Early research on the effects of the programs showed little evidence of success but more recent studies have documented beneficial effects on unemployment wages and poverty ( CRS ; Ham et al. ; Busso Gregory and Kline ) The Federal Government also supports place-based economic development through grant programs with the largest being the Community Development Block Grant program. The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) administers the program and provides about $ billion a year in block grants. The program s structure makes rigorous evaluation difficult and few systematic evaluations have been done especially in recent years ( Theodos Stacy and Ho ) HUD allocates funds using a formula based on population poverty housing conditions and other factors. State and local government grantees have considerable discretion within broad guidelines on how to use the funding such as that at least percent of the funds must be used to benefit low- and moderate-income persons. The flexibility of the program is similar to OZs but its design is very different in that it relies solely on public funding and does not seek to incentivize private investment The Economic Development Administration ( EDA ) of the U.S. Department of Commerce also administers grants for economic development. EDA s appropriation was roughly $ million but the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security Act ( CARES Act ) appropriated an additional $ billion to administer grants to States and communities adversely affected by the COVID19 pandemic. As with the HUD grants few rigorous evaluations have been done of EDA s grants ( Markusen and Glasmeier ) | Chapter Characteristics of Opportunity Zones The census tracts designated as OZs have some of the most entrenched poverty in the United States. These communities had an average median income just over half of the U.S. average in and they fell further behind over the subsequent years The Opportunity Zone Selection Process As prescribed by law governors nominated which census tracts should be designated as Opportunity Zones by the U.S. Department of the Treasury. To be eligible for designation a census tract must : Have a poverty rate of at least percent ; or Have a median income below percent of that in the State or metropolitan area or for rural census tracts percent of that in the entire State ; or Be contiguous with a census tract meeting one of the above conditions and have a median income less than percent of the qualifying contiguous census tract Governors could designate up to percent of their qualifying census tracts or up to tracts for those States with fewer than eligible tracts Eligible contiguous tracts were restricted to make up no more than percent of designated OZs in any State Aside from these restrictions States could determine how and which census tracts would be designated as OZs thereby drawing on State and local Figure The Geography of Opportunity Zones Sources : U.S. Department of the Treasury ; U.S. Census Bureau Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | expertise. With this Federal design States took diverse approaches in nominating their OZs. Arizona for example tasked the Arizona Commerce Authority with meeting with city county and tribal governments to select tracts. Kansas took a different approach with its Department of Commerce requesting Letters of Interest from communities seeking OZ designation allowing communities to explain their need and their ability to attract investment All governors submitted tracts for consideration to the U.S. Department of the Treasury by the end of April The Treasury ultimately designated a total of tracts as OZs with nearly all designations occurring between April and June Almost all OZs ( tracts ) met one of the criteria for low-income communities ; the remaining or percent of all designated census tracts were eligible for selection based on contiguity with a low-income tract. Figure highlights the OZ tracts ( in green ) and the eligible tracts that were not selected ( in gray ) The Economic State of Opportunity Zones This subsection reports on the CEA s overall findings that census tracts selected as Opportunity Zones are among the poorest communities in the United States. The CEA finds that they have an average poverty rate more than double that of all other census tracts and are home to a higher share of African Americans Hispanics and high school dropouts ( figure ) The economic woes of OZs are not new. In census tracts that later became OZs had an average median household income that was percent of the average in other tracts $ compared with $ as given in the Decennial Census. In real terms median household income in the average OZ fell by percent from to compared with a percent drop in the average non-OZ census tract ( figure ) The poverty and income criteria for eligibility explain some of the lower income in selected census tracts ; but even among eligible tracts States consistently nominated low-income tracts. In each of the States and in the District of Columbia median household income in OZs was lower than in eligible-butnot-selected tracts and considerably lower than in ineligible tracts ( figure ) Figures through indicate that as a whole OZs encompass economically distressed areas. Although average values can mask diversity within the OZ group only percent of OZs experienced rapid socioeconomic change according to a metric developed by the Urban Institute ( ) This metric considers changes in income demographics educational attainment and housing affordability The patterns shown in figure suggest that States selected tracts that were both economically distressed and demonstrated a potential to attract fruitful investments. They selected tracts with varying levels of poverty not focusing solely on those with the least poverty ( among eligible tracts ) nor on those with the highest poverty rates. The strategy has an economic rationale : | Chapter Figure Demographics of Opportunity Zones ( OZs ) Percent Share of OZ population % % % Share of non-OZ population % % % % % People living in poverty Hispanics African Americans Adults without a high school diploma Sources : American Community Survey ( ACS ) five-year estimates ; CEA calculations Note : This analysis excludes census tracts in Puerto Rico American Samoa the U.S. Virgin Islands Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands. In addition the ACS is based on a five-year estimate from to Figure Average Median Household Income by Census Tract Designation Household income index ( = ) Non-OZ tracts ( % decrease ) OZ tracts ( % decrease ) Sources : Decennial Census ; American Community Survey five-year estimates ; U.S Department of the Treasury ; CEA calculations Note : This analysis excludes census tracts in Puerto Rico American Samoa the U.S. Virgin Islands Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands. The ACS is based on a five-year estimate from to Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | Figure Average Median Household Income by Tract Designation and State OZ tracts Eligible tracts but not selected Ineligible tracts United States Georgia Ohio Nevada Alabama Kentucky Illinois Tennessee Louisiana Pennsylvania Florida Missouri Arkansas Mississippi South Carolina Michigan Indiana North Carolina Wisconsin Oklahoma Arizona Nebraska Montana West Virginia Rhode Island California Texas Kansas Iowa New Mexico Washington D.C Connecticut Idaho Maine New York South Dakota Minnesota Oregon North Dakota Massachusetts Washington New Jersey Delaware Vermont Colorado Utah Virginia Wyoming New Hampshire Maryland Hawaii Alaska Median household income Sources : American Community Survey ( ACS ) five-year estimates ; U.S. Department of the Treasury ; CEA calculations Note : This analysis excludes census tracts in Puerto Rico American Samoa the U.S. Virgin Islands Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands. The ACS is based on a five-year estimate from to Eligible but not selected tracts include those eligible based on low-income status or on contiguity with low-income tracts | Chapter Figure Population by Poverty Rates and Census Tract Designation Opportunity Zones Eligible tracts but not selected Ineligible tracts Population ( in millions ) Poverty rate ( percent ) Sources : American Community Survey five-year estimates ; U.S. Department of the Treasury ; CEA calculations States would benefit little from OZs if they selected tracts where a designation was unlikely to spur investment Opportunity Zones Effect on Total Investment The CEA estimates that by the end of Qualified Opportunity Funds had raised $ billion in private capital. Although some of this capital may have occurred without the incentive the CEA estimates that $ billion or percent of the $ billion is new investment Capital Raised by Qualified Opportunity Funds The $ billion estimate for private capital raised is based on two different samples that track these funds over time. To extrapolate from sample values to population values we rely on the total number of these funds in existence as estimated by the Department of the Treasury based on tax filings ( funds in ) Both samples and estimation approaches give a roughly similar estimate for the capital raised by these funds with the average being $ billion The count of Qualified Opportunity Funds in the population ( ) is based on a Treasury Department s estimate based on preliminary counts of filings of Form The Treasury may adjust this count as more information becomes available Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | The first sample covers Qualified Opportunity Funds voluntarily reporting data to Novogradac a national professional services organization that has tracked funds since May As of January the sample had of these funds a small subset of all funds which had collectively raised $ billion in capital.6 Qualified Opportunity Funds voluntarily reporting data might not be representative of the general population of funds. However comparisons with a non-voluntary sample as discussed below suggests that it is reasonably representative The second sample is based on data from the Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) The SEC considers investment interests in Qualified Opportunity Funds as securities which means that funds must register with the SEC unless they file for an exemption. Qualified Opportunity Funds seeking an exemption can file Form D within days of the first sale of securities in an offering. In filing Form D these funds provide information such as the amount sold in the offering but they are not asked to identify themselves as funds. To create a sample of these funds from the Form D data we select all funds with Opportunity Zone or similar words ( e.g. OZ Fund or QOZF ) in their name This yields Qualified Opportunity Funds that had filed Form D by the close of of which had raised capital totaling about $ billion. If Qualified Opportunity Fund names are uncorrelated with other fund characteristics our sample should be reasonably representative of the broader population of funds seeking an exemption from SEC registration.7 The Novogradac and SEC samples show similar growth in the number of Qualified Opportunity Funds and capital raised. From May when Novogradac began tracking these funds until Novogradac s January report the number of funds increased by percent. The SEC data show a percent increase in the number of these funds from to based on information on when each fund was incorporated. Additionally the capital reported by Novogradac Qualified Opportunity Funds increased by percent over the reporting period while the capital raised by the SEC sample of funds increased by percent from to See figure The two samples of Qualified Opportunity Funds inform two different approaches for estimating the total capital raised by funds. The first approach based on the self-reported Novogradac data is to multiply the Novogradac total equity amount ( $ billion ) by an expansion factor defined as the number of Qualified Opportunity Funds in the population divided by the number of funds in the Novogradac database. This factor reflects how much of the fund Although our analysis is for the close of more recent data from Novogradac show a percent increase in capital raised from January to April and a roughly percent increase for April to August which represents a percent growth over the first eight months of Funds seeking to make public offerings of securities are generally not exempt from SEC registration and would not file a Form D. We expect such funds to be larger on average than those focused on private offerings | Chapter subset of all funds which had collectively raised $ billion in capital. Qualified Opportunity Funds voluntarily reporting data might not be representative of the general population of funds. However comparisons with a non-voluntary sample as discussed below suggests that it is reasonably representative The5-6 second sample is based Opportunity on data fromFunds the Securities and Exchange Figure Growth in Qualified Novogradac Commission ( SEC ) The SEC considers investment interests in Qualified Opportunity and SEC Data Funds as securities which means that funds must register with the SEC unless they file ( percent ) Qualified Opportunity Funds seeking an exemption can file Form D forGrowth an exemption within days of the first sale of1,523 securities in an offering. In filing Form D these funds provide information such as the amount sold in the offering but they are not asked to themselves as funds. To create a sample of these funds from the Form D data identify we1,200 select all funds with Opportunity Zone or similar words ( e.g. OZ Fund or QOZF ) in their name. This yields Qualified Opportunity Funds that had filed Form D by the close of of which had raised capital totaling about $ billion If Qualified Opportunity Fund names are uncorrelated with other fund characteristics our sample should be reasonably representative of the broader population of funds seeking an exemption from SEC registration.7 The Novogradac and SEC samples show similar growth in the number of Qualified when Novogradac Opportunity Funds and capital raised. From 277May began tracking these funds until Novogradac s January report the number increased by percent. The SEC data show a percent increase in the of funds number of these funds from to based on information on when each fund was incorporated. Additionally the capital reported by Novogradac Qualified Capital raised Number of funds Opportunity Funds increased by percent over the reporting period while the Novogradac data SEC data ( ) capital raised by the SEC sample of funds increased by percent from to ( May January ) See figure TheNovogradac ; two samples of Qualified Opportunity Funds inform two different Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) ; CEA calculations approaches for estimating the total capital raised by funds. The first approach based on the self-reported Novogradac data is to multiply the Novogradac total equity amount ( $ by an factor,database defined asThe the number Qualified population is billion ) captured by expansion Novogradac s estimateof of capital Opportunity Funds in the population divided by the number of funds in the raised is then : Novogradac database. This factor reflects how much of the fund population is captured by Novogradac s database. The estimate of capital raised is then : ( ) = ! " # " : = : = $ Theour number Opportunity ( ) in the Although analysis isofforQualified the close of more recentFunds data from Novogradac showpopulation a percent increasefrom in capital from January AprilTreasury and a and roughly percent increase for end April to comes theraised Department oftothe corresponds to the of August which represents a percent growth over the first eight months of and the number of funds in the Novogradac database ( ) is from May Funds seeking to make public offerings of securities are generally not exempt from SEC registration and would file a Form D. We expect such funds to be larger onThis average than those approach focused on the not earliest reporting of the Novogradac data estimation private offerings assumes that Qualified Opportunity Funds reporting to Novogradac are similar in size to funds not reporting to Novogradac. It also assumes that our expansion factor accurately reflects Novogradac s coverage of the Qualified Opportunity Fund population in January The second estimation approach which draws on the SEC sample multiplies an estimate of the number of Qualified Opportunity Funds in existence Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | Opportunity Funds reporting to Novogradac are similar in size to funds not reporting to Novogradac. It also assumes that our expansion factor accurately reflects Novogradac s coverage of the Qualified Opportunity Fund population in January The second estimation approach which draws on the SEC sample multiplies anatestimate of the number Fundsamount in existence at the close of per the close of by of anQualified estimateOpportunity of the average of capital raised by among an estimate of having the average amount of capital raised per fund fund those raised capital More specifically it is : among those having raised capital. More specifically it is : ( ) = " " ! " # $ " " ! " # $ % # & " " ! " # & " " ! " # & = = $ The population count of Qualified Opportunity Funds is again from the Department of the Treasury the growth in the fund count is based on the to The countincorporated of Qualified ( asOpportunity Funds is again growth in thepopulation number of funds reported in the SEC data ) ; the from share the of theis Treasury the2020 growth in the from fundthe count is baseddatabase ; on the ofDepartment funds with capital as of January and comes Novogradac and per fundin comes from the SEC data ( billion per ( as fund ) For the share to capital growth the number of funds incorporated reported in theofSEC Qualified Opportunity Funds with capital ( ) we use the Novogradac data data ) ; the share of funds with capital is as of January and comesinstead from the of the SEC data which primarily cover funds that have already raised capital since that Novogradac database ; and capital per fund comes from the SEC data ( bilis what triggers their filing of the SEC form that generates the data. As such funds that lion per fund ) For the share of Qualified Opportunity Funds with capital ( ) have raised at least some capital are likely to be overrepresented in the SEC data. In we use the Novogradac data instead the SECare data which cover summary the key assumptions of the secondofapproach that the SECprimarily data provide haveofalready raised capital since that is what triggersFunds theirinfiling a funds reliablethat estimate the growth in the number of Qualified Opportunity the of population and among those withthe capital their capitalthat raised In line withatthe the SEC form that generates data As average such funds have raised least Novogradac data the approach also assumes that percent of all funds raised some some capital are likely to be overrepresented in the SEC data. In summary the capital by the close ofof2019 key assumptions the second approach are that the SEC data provide a reliThe standard error of the average amount of capital raised per Qualified able estimate of the growth in the number of Qualified Opportunity Funds in Opportunity Fund permits providing a confidence interval around the SEC-based the population among those with capital theirconfidence average capital The resulting percent intervalraised is $ In estimate of the totaland capital raised line with Novogradac data the at approach also assumes thatincludes percent billion at thethe lower end and $ billion the higher end It therefore the of all funds raised some capital byaverage the close of Novogradac-based estimate and the of the two estimates which is about $ billion and our preferred estimate This is amount percent ofofbaseline Theis standard error of the average capitalannual raisedinvestment per Qualified inOpportunity OZs which is reported in the next subsection Fund permits providing a confidence interval around the SEC- based estimate of the total capital raised.8 The resulting percent confidence interval is $ billion at the lower end and $ billion at the higher end. It therefore includes the Novogradac-based estimate and the average of the two estimates which is about $ billion and is our preferred estimate. This is The resulting confidence interval reflects uncertainty over the population value of capital per fund. It percent of baseline in inOZs which isofreported thebynext does not capture uncertaintyannual over otherinvestment parameters used the calculation total capitalin raised funds in the population subsection Estimated Investment Growth Caused by the Opportunity Zone Incentive Not all the capital raised by Qualified Opportunity Funds is necessarily new to Opportunity Zones some of it may have occurred without the incentive and it is now occurring through a fund. In this subsection the CEA draws from the The resulting confidence interval reflects uncertainty over the population value of capital per fund. It does not capture uncertainty over other parameters used in the calculation of total capital raised by funds in the population | Chapter academic literature to estimate how much new investment is likely given the lower tax rates caused by the OZ incentive. We estimate that the incentives have brought $ billion in new investment in OZs through representing percent of the $ billion raised by Qualified Opportunity Funds To estimate new investment we calculate the reduction in the cost of capital caused by the cuts to capital gains tax rates. We then link the cost of capital to investment elasticities from the academic literature. This modeling of the OZ incentive illustrates how the incentive is similar to the corporate tax rate cuts resulting from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. These cuts were also projected to increase investment through a decline in the user cost of capital ( CEA ) The investment estimates come from first calculating the pretax rate of return needed to attract investors to supply funds in OZs. To achieve the same post-tax return inside OZs as outside them investors would be willing to accept a lower pretax return because of lower effective tax rates in OZs. The second step of the estimation then calculates the increased investment from OZ businesses that occurs as they have access to new funding at a lower capital cost. Figure illustrates the concepts behind the calculation showing how the reduction in taxes makes investors willing to accept a lower pretax rate of return and still invest in OZs The numerical estimates rely on three parameters : baseline investment in OZ census tracts that predates the incentives the post-tax rate of return that is required to attract funds and the effective tax rate that prevails in OZs with the incentive. For the first parameter we estimate baseline investment of $ billion by apportioning national investment to counties based on gross domestic product and then from counties to census tracts based on income and population. Second using data that show a pretax percent rate of return earned by investors outside OZs which then face a capital gains tax rate of percent the required post-tax rate of return is percent. We find that to receive the same post-tax percent rate of return in OZs which feature only a percent effective tax rate as described below in the Budgetary Effects of Opportunity Zones subsection investors only require a pretax rate of return equal to percent ( = 7.7/ ( ) ) in Finally we assume a semielasticity of investment to the cost of capital from Ohrn ( ) Over a one-and-a-half-year period the increase to investment is then calculated as : years x ( $ billion ) x ( % % ) x ( ) = $ billion The one-and-a-half-year period is used to reflect the time between the designation of Opportunity Zones ( mid-2018 ) and the end of Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | Figure Opportunity Zone ( OZ ) Investment Supply-and-Demand Model Rate of return Investment demand Pretax required rate of return ( without OZs ) Pretax required rate of return ( with OZs ) Normal tax wedge Posttax required rate of return OZ tax wedge Investment Investment The Industry Focus of Qualified Opportunity Funds Recent data from the Securities and Exchange Commission allow us to describe the sectoral focus of a sample of Qualified Opportunity Funds the same one described above. The SEC form completed by Qualified Opportunity Funds requires them to select one industry group. The selections shown in figure reveal the diverse focus of funds. Slightly less than half of them focus on real estate with the majority targeting commercial real estate.9 Another percent describe their industry as a Pooled Investment Fund which suggests that they have investments across various industries. Finally about percent are in the other category which includes funds that reported a focus on health care technology construction and investing and as well as those selecting the other option on the form The industry focus indicated by the SEC data are consistent with the types of projects seeking to attract Qualified Opportunity Fund investment as evidenced by data from the Opportunity Exchange which is a private organization that helps entities showcase OZ businesses and properties to stakeholders locally and nationally. As of February The Opportunity Exchange hosted $ billion in proposed projects across States. About percent of the projects on the Opportunity Exchange are businesses seeking equity investments Form D does not provide definitions for the industry categories that filers can select | Chapter Figure Percentage of Qualified Opportunity Funds by Industry Other Commercial % real estate % Residential real estate Pooled % investment fund Other real % estate % Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission ; CEA calculations Note : " Other real estate " includes real estate inestment trusts and finance. " Other " includes healthcare technology construction and investing percent are real estate projects with a development plan and the rest are properties for sale without a development plan Opportunity Zones Effects on Business Investment and Housing Values The CEA finds that receiving an OZ designation led to a percent relative increase in equity investment. Such communities have also benefited from larger house price appreciation which creates $ billion in additional housing wealth for homeowners and improved local amenities for renters Equity Investments in Opportunity Zone Businesses Qualified Opportunity Funds can invest in Opportunity Zones by directly purchasing property or by making equity investments in operating businesses In this subsection we present data regarding private equity investment in businesses located in OZs compared with those located elsewhere. Investment data from the Securities and Exchange Commission show that OZ designation led to a percent increase in equity investments in businesses whose principal place of business is in an OZ compared with businesses in eligible-but-notselected census tracts Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | Many businesses pursuing equity investments must file the same SEC Form D that Qualified Opportunity Funds file. We use address information from this form which gives the location of the principal place of business to determine whether the business is located in an OZ census tract an eligiblebut-not-selected tract or an ineligible tract. To capture nonfinancial operating businesses we exclude entities that identified themselves as banks or investment funds.10 To better measure systematic investment trends as opposed to variation in the behavior of a few large firms we focus on filings that raised less than $ million in any quarter which captures more than percent of filings.11 We then compile the total investment raised by businesses in each census tract type by quarter In figure we present the four-quarter moving average of the total equity investment in each group of tracts with values indexed to their value in the first quarter of The three groups had similar investment trends until the first half of when investment in OZ businesses spiked.12 All States nominated census tracts in March and April and the Department of the Treasury finalized its formal designation of OZs by the second quarter of Over the seven quarters : Q2 : Q4 equity investment in OZs was percent higher than it was in the prior seven quarters. By comparison investment was only percent higher in eligible-but-not-selected tracts. This suggests that OZ designation led to a percent increase in equity investment relative to comparable tracts ( percent ) Opportunity Zone Designation and Housing Values Evidence from real estate markets suggests that the Opportunity Zones incentive is making many OZs more attractive for both residents and investors. This increase in housing value has led to an estimated $ billion in additional wealth for the nearly half ( percent ) of OZ residents who own their housing Real Capital Analytics tracks commercial real estate properties and portfolios valued at $ million or more. Its data show that year-over-year growth Specifically we exclude all firms that identified their industry or their fund as pooled investment fund commercial banking investment banking other banking and financial services or investing. Bauguess Gullapalli and Ivanov ( ) report that more than percent of filings have an offering size of $ million or less. An even larger percentage would actually raise less than $ million Not every businesses in an OZ is necessarily a Qualified Opportunity Zone Business as defined by statute and regulation The location of a business in a particular OZ does not mean that the business s activities must be concentrated in that particular OZ. A business can achieve the status of a Qualified Opportunity Zone Business if percent of its gross income is derived from its business activities in any OZ. Thus a business could have multiple income-earning centers spread across various OZs. Alternatively the business can qualify if at least of the services purchased and used by the business ( measured by hours or dollars ) occur in OZs or if at least percent of its tangible property and management functions are in OZs | Chapter Figure Private Equity Investment by Tract Group Opportunity Zones Eligible tracts but not selected Ineligible tracts Index ( = : Q1 ) TCJA signed into law : Q4 Opportunity Zones nominated and designated : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission ; U.S. Department of the Treasury ; CEA calculations Note : TCJA = Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in development site acquisitions surged in OZs by more than percent late in after the Department of the Treasury had designated the OZs greatly exceeding growth in the rest of the United States. Similarly Sage Langen and Van de Minne ( ) use the same data and find that OZ designation led to a percent increase in the price of redevelopment properties and a percent increase in the price of vacant development sites as of early Sage Langen and Van de Minne ( ) find a price increase only for particular property types and conclude that the OZ incentive is having limited economic spillovers in communities. Their data however only include commercial properties valued at $ million or more. An analysis by Zillow which was based on transactions of varying property types and values suggests that the OZ incentive is having broader effects. After designation the year-over-year change in the average sales price for properties in OZs rose to more than percent while falling to below percent in eligible-but-not-selected census tracts The Zillow analysis is limited in that it is based on changes in sales prices over time without controlling for any changes in the composition of properties being sold. It is not based on price per square foot or more ideally on price changes for homes that are similar in many other dimensions. Chen Glaeser and Wessel ( ) provide a more rigorous assessment of effects on housing Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | prices though only through For a measure of housing prices they use the Federal Housing Finance Agency ( FHFA ) repeat sales index for single-family homes. Their analysis centers on comparing OZs with eligible but not selected low-income tracts ( thus excluding tracts whose eligibility was based solely on contiguity with low-income tracts ) Across the two groups they compare the growth in housing values in relative to that of prior years ( ) Their estimated effects are much smaller than those suggested by the Zillow analysis : their base model gives an estimate of percent higher appreciation with the estimates across models ranging from to We replicate and extend the analysis done by Chen Glaeser and Wessel First we replicate the results from their base model and find a similar result ( table first and second columns ) Then we reestimate the model with updated FHFA data released in May The update improves data from prior years and adds data.14 With the updated and expanded data we estimate that OZ designation led to a higher annual appreciation of percent. Over two years this implies a roughly percent ( = ^ ) increase in values. This is a notable finding because it is based on OZ designation not on whether a tract has actually received investment. Moreover much of the investment raised by Qualified Opportunity Funds was probably not invested by the end of By comparison Freedman ( ) looked at census tracts that had actually received investment through the New Markets Tax Credit and failed to find a statistically significant effect of investment on housing values over about five years with the point estimate implying an annual effect of at most percent The extra percent appreciation implies $ billion in additional wealth for the nearly half ( percent ) of OZ residents who own their housing. Homeowners can access newly found equity without selling their homes through cash-out refinancing which has been common in the last two years This does not mean that rising values only benefit homeowners. The causes of higher values more local amenities and anticipated economic opportunities will benefit many renters as well. The renovation of a blighted building for example benefits all who live nearby. Brummet and Reed ( ) draw a similar conclusion from a thorough analysis of Census microdata finding that less exposure to poverty and rising values tend to benefit original residents and led to better outcomes for their children. Using a different data source from Medicaid records Dragan Ellen and Glied ( ) draw a similar conclusion The data are available at www.fhfa.gov/DataTools/Downloads/Pages/House-Price-IndexDatasets.aspx ; see Census Tracts ( Development Index ; Not Seasonally Adjusted ) We also normalize the housing price index to make the base year ( = ) The renormalization ensures that that changes in the index are approximate percentage changes with a 1-point change in the index corresponding to a percent increase in values. If index values are about which is typical in the original index a 1-point increase represents a percent increase in values. The renormalized values are also much less skewed than the original index values | Chapter Table The Effect of Opportunity Zone Designation on Home Value Appreciation Characteristic Chen et al ( ) CEA Estimates Chen et al Updated Data Data Opportunity Zone effect on housing values ( percent ) Standard error Number of Opportunity Zones Number of eligible zones that were not selected Sources : Chen Glaeser and Wessel ( ) ; Census Bureau American Community Survey ; Federal Housing Finance Agency ; U.S. Department of the Treasury ; CEA calculations Note : The estimated effect is based on comparing Opportunity Zones with low-income tracts that were eligible but not selected about the effects of rising housing values and neighborhood improvement on residents and their children Within Opportunity Zones the distribution of the benefits from improved amenities is unclear. In some instances the benefits may go primarily to lowincome households. For example Gamper-Rabindran and Timmins ( ) find that cheaper homes benefit the most from the cleanup of hazardous waste sites because such homes tend to be closer to such sites. In the same vein the renovation of an abandoned warehouse would mostly benefit the residents in the immediate vicinity who may also be among the poorest in the neighborhood Residents who rent their housing will generally benefit from improved amenities as long as the full value of the amenities enjoyed by residents is not passed on in the form of higher rents. Improved neighborhood conditions do not always result in rent increases for all renters ( Brummet and Reed ) and sometimes improved amenities increase housing values more than they increase rents ( e.g. Granger ) Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | Opportunity Zones Effects on Poverty and the Budget The CEA s estimate of new investment suggests that Opportunity Zones may lift about million people out of poverty an percent decrease in the baseline population in poverty in OZs. This decline in poverty and with it a reduction in transfer payments may be sufficient to make the OZ incentive nearly revenue neutral Projected Effects of Opportunity Zones on Poverty Census-tract-level data on poverty for will not be available for several years. The CEA therefore projects the effects on poverty using a prior study linking investment to poverty. Freedman ( ) uses tract-level data to estimate the effects of investment subsidized by the New Markets Tax Credit on tract-level outcomes. His empirical approach exploits the program s eligibility cutoffs to address the potential that subsidized investment went to tracts that would have performed better even without the subsidy. His most conservative estimate indicates that each $ million in subsidized investment ( in dollars ) lifts people out of poverty in the tract receiving it. Applying this finding to our estimate of new investment in Opportunity Zones ( $ million ) suggests that million people will be lifted out of poverty ( = x ) This effect is arguably applicable to OZ investment. The NMTC program has similar eligibility requirements for census tracts and rules to ensure that the subsidized investment happens in qualified tracts. The main difference is that community development entities must apply to and be selected by the Treasury Department which only selects a portion of applicants. The Treasury scores applications using several criteria including the expected effect of the project on jobs and economic growth in the community. It is possible that applicant reporting and Treasury selections result in the investments having larger effects on poverty. Conversely the long-term net effects of a particular project on low-income populations is arguably hard to discern with consistency. In any case our poverty projections are arguably conservative ; we use the smallest estimated effect from Freedman ( ) which is about half the main estimate reported and apply it to new investment as opposed to all subsidized investment which is the basis of Freedman s estimate Budgetary Effects of Opportunity Zones The CEA estimates that the Federal Government forgoes $ for every $ in capital gains invested in a Qualified Opportunity Fund before or about $ billion for the $ billion raised through the end of The forgone revenues stem from the deferment on the capital gains tax on the original gain the reduction in taxes on the original gains when paid and the lack of taxes on the gains earned while invested in the Qualified Opportunity Fund. In our | Chapter calculation we assume that taxpayers maximize their tax savings by waiting until to pay taxes on the original gains the latest date allowed by law and that they keep their money in the Qualified Opportunity Fund for at least years Our calculations assume that capital gains would normally be taxed at a percent rate as opposed to an effective rate of percent in This lower effective rate arises from the tax deferral and step-up in basis on funds that are invested in OZs to begin with as well as the exclusion of capital gains taxes on the returns that accrue to those investments after they are held for at least years. For funds invested in the present values of taxes paid on investments in an OZ are less than one-third what they would be if invested outside an OZ. These calculations are then repeated for each year to incorporate the dynamic nature of the OZ tax incentives as discussed in a Congressional Research Service report ( Lowry and Marples ) When estimating overall revenue effects any static calculation that uses only the difference in rates while assuming a fixed tax base gives an inflated measure of tax revenue losses. Therefore in our approach we incorporate the response of investment and hence the tax base to the incentive. Specifically we estimate how much of the observed $ billion would have occurred anyway whether in an OZ or elsewhere in the country versus how much is new investment. Investment that would have occurred anyway and been taxed at a percent rate but that is now taxed at a lower rate because of the incentive unambiguously lowers revenues. However new investment creates offsetting revenue gains even when taxed at the lower OZ rate We employ a similar elasticity-based approach as in the investment section of this chapter. The approach suggests that of the $ billion in Qualified Opportunity Fund capital $ billion would have occurred anyway in OZs even without the incentive. Of the $ billion balance another $ billion is new to OZs but was shifted from elsewhere in the country based on calculations using the elasticity-of-investment movement done by Koby and Wolf ( ) Thus the incentive results in revenue losses from this $ billion ( $ billion $ billion ) but creates revenue gains from the entirely new $ billion ( $ billion $ billion ) in investment. On net we estimate the present value of tax revenue losses on capital invested through to be $ billion which is percent of the $ billion in Qualified Opportunity Fund capital By comparison the CEA estimates that for each $ in investment associated with the New Markets Tax Credit the Federal government forgoes $ more than the amount for OZs. Based on estimates from the Joint Committee on Taxation the lost tax revenue for each $ in tax credit authority is $ In December the Joint Committee on Taxation estimated the dynamic revenue effects from a $ billion allocation for the NMTC ( see the relevant line at www.jct.gov/publications.html ? func = startdown&id = ) Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | However credit authority typically represents only percent of total private investment associated with projects ( Abravanel et al. ) This implies about $ in forgone revenue for each $ in associated investment ( = x ) The previous calculations only consider the effect of the Opportunity Zone incentive on capital gains tax revenues. However the incentive will have an offsetting effect on the Federal budget by stimulating the economies of lowincome areas that receive a large share of transfer payments from the Federal Government. Using county-level data on transfer payments and poverty rates the CEA estimates that an additional person living in poverty in a county is associated with about $ additional Federal transfer payments to the county including transfers related to income maintenance unemployment insurance and medical assistance ( mainly Medicaid ) At this rate economic growth that lifts million people out of poverty for a little more than one year would save the Federal Government enough to offset the revenues forgone from the capital gains tax cuts ( savings of $ billion = a million person reduction in poverty x years x $ per person ) Conclusion Much remains to study regarding the effects of Opportunity Zones on real estate markets entrepreneurship poverty and income. In coming years researchers will have ample data to assess the effects of OZs on diverse community outcomes. As of the tax year the Internal Revenue Service s revised Form will collect detailed information on Qualified Opportunity Fund activity. This information will enable researchers to learn how much Qualified Opportunity Fund investment is occurring in particular census tracts and economic sectors. These data will permit the same rigorous empirical studies that have been done for the New Markets Tax Credit ( Freedman ; Harger and Ross ) and they will add to the rigorous work already being done by Arefeva and others ( ) using other data sets to evaluate the impact of OZs This is based on footnote in a paper by Abravanel et al. ( ) which reports that qualified equity investments represent percent of total project costs while public funds represent percent of project cost. This implies that qualified equity investment represents percent of private project cost ( = / ( ) This estimate is based on Bureau of Economic Analysis county-level data on Federal Government transfers and county-level population and poverty data from the Census Bureau. The average transfer per person in poverty defined as total transfers in the county divided by the county population in poverty over a seven-year period was about $ However regressing countylevel transfers per capita on the poverty rate suggests that at the margin an extra person living in poverty is associated with $ in greater transfers to residents of the county Of course this calculation should be viewed as illustrative because we lack an estimate of the causal impact of poverty reduction ( via investment incentives ) on total Federal spending | Chapter The available evidence shows that Qualified Opportunity Funds are well positioned to invest in communities in : they have raised considerable capital and the final regulations from the Department of the Treasury which were published in December have given further clarity on how the incentive and associated investments will function. However numerous State-mandated restrictions and preventive behavior to slow the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic have prevented business as usual and have slowed investment everywhere including in OZs A sizable amount of capital will enter Qualified Opportunity Funds in As noted above the capital raised by these funds in the Novogradac sample grew by about percent in the first eight months of Late in the first quarter the pandemic prompted a massive selloff that likely generated capital gains for many investors exiting what had been a long bull market. And the rapid rebound in stock values has created the potential for more gains Pre-COVID-19 evidence suggests that the OZ model can help spur economic recovery in thousands of distressed communities across the United States. It has the power to mobilize investors engage State and local stakeholders and improve the outlook for low-income communities all with limited prescription from the Federal Government. In other words the OZ provision of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of is working as intended In nominating communities as Opportunity Zones States selected places in need that had the potential to attract investment. The provision s incentives have helped mobilize the investment of $ billion in private capital in Qualified Opportunity Funds and some of this capital has already spurred growth in direct equity investments in businesses and real estate. Finally OZ designation and the associated investment ( both anticipated and realized ) have made people more optimistic about these communities as places to live and to work in with designation causing a percent increase in housing values as of the close of Such initial benefits underscore the potential of the Opportunity Zone model which rests on private initiative ; on engaged State local and tribal governments ; and on limited Federal prescription all to further prosperity and self-sufficiency in those areas that most lack it. This dynamic process will be important for helping the relatively poorer part of the population that has been most affected by the economic slowdown from the COVID-19 pandemic Assessing the Early Impact of Opportunity Zones | x Chapter Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens Throughout the Trump Administration Federal agencies have demonstrated a sustained commitment to regulatory reform. As a result the Administration s regulatory efforts have reduced red tape for small businesses and the middle class. Although the Administration set the goal of eliminating two existing regulations for every one new regulation it has far exceeded it. Between fiscal years and the executive branch agencies have issued roughly seven deregulations for every one significant regulatory action. The Administration s actions have served to lower costs for businesses and households while increasing competition and productivity in the American economy leading to real gains particularly at the middle and lower ends of the income distribution One of the most important deregulatory actions that the Trump Administration finalized in is the Safer Affordable Fuel Efficient ( SAFE ) Vehicles Rule. This joint rule from the Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of Transportation establishes tough but reasonable light vehicle carbon dioxide ( CO ) and fuel economy requirements for the model years This regulatory approach continues to improve fuel economy year over year while balancing efficiency economic and safety goals in a manner that gives the automobile industry greater flexibility to produce products that meet consumer demand and also creates meaningful savings for both manufacturers and customers. The Council of Economic Advisers ( CEA ) estimates that the SAFE Vehicles Rule will lead to $ billion a year in savings for producers and consumers and will deliver roughly more new vehicles annually than the previous standards at a similar total cost. Taking market distortions into account the CEA finds that the broader benefit of the SAFE Vehicles Rule is $ billion a year leading to an increase in real incomes and gross domestic product of $ billion a year or about percent The CEA finds that the benefits of deregulation tend to skew toward the lower-income quintiles suggesting that lower-income households may have benefited most relative to household income from the Administration s deregulatory actions. This finding is driven by the fact that deregulation often reduces the prices of economic necessities such as groceries electricity prescription drugs health insurance and telecommunications thereby making deregulatory actions progressive because lower-income quintiles spend a disproportionately larger fraction of their income relative to higher-income quintiles on necessities. Specifically the gains from the deregulatory actions discussed in this chapter amount to percent of the average income of the poorest fifth of households compared with only percent of the richest fifth suggesting that they benefited the poorest households four times as much as the richest ones When the CEA examined the effect of a subset of the Trump Administration s deregulatory agenda for the Economic Report of the President it estimated that after to years these deregulations would lead to an increase in real incomes of $ per household a year. These previous findings combined with our distributional analysis suggest that the prioritization of sensible regulatory reform has particularly benefited the lowest-income households and allowed the U.S. economy to reach record-setting levels before the COVID-19 pandemic. A persistent focus on regulatory reform will play a critical role in the U.S. economy s return to the levels of economic prosperity it achieved before the COVID-19 pandemic | Chapter I n this chapter we briefly review the Administration s regulatory reform progress and find that the Administration has slowed the pace of significant regulations issued compared with previous Administrations.1 While executive agencies added an average of significant regulations a year between presidential years ( PYs ) and President Trump added an average of only per year excluding deregulatory actions.2 We also find that in fiscal year ( FY ) the Trump Administration is likely to achieve additional cost savings for a fourth consecutive year. We also discuss Executive Order ( EO ) which directs executive branch agencies to publish their guidance documents on easily searchable public websites marking an important step toward increasing the transparency and accessibility of the documentation that regulates all sectors of the U.S. economy In the next section the CEA estimates the benefits associated with the SAFE Vehicles Rule one of the Trump Administration s most significant deregulatory actions. This rule right-sizes CO emissions standards for automobile manufacturers and establishes a slower rate of stringency increase through The CEA finds that compared with the rule the SAFE Vehicles Rule will lead to $ billion in savings a year for car manufacturers and consumers and will deliver roughly more new vehicles annually than the previous rule at a similar total cost. In addition accounting for the effects of the rule on factor markets the CEA estimates that the SAFE Vehicles Rule will increase the real incomes of Americans by $ billion a year or $ per household a year over the period Finally the CEA examines how the gains from regulatory reform are distributed across income quintiles. Federal agencies must analyze whether a proposed deregulatory action reduces regulatory costs and whether the cost savings are larger than the benefits forgone from removing the regulation. Earlier the CEA ( ) analyzed deregulatory actions that yield cost savings that are larger than the benefits forgone. In this chapter the CEA finds that the cost savings from those regulations were distributed progressively Specifically we find that though regulatory reform benefits all households those in the lowest income quintile likely benefit the most as a proportion of their income. The cost savings from the deregulatory actions we study amount to percent of the average income of the lowest income quintile of households compared with only percent for the highest income quintile of households. Our findings reaffirm that the Administration s regulatory reform efforts are helping consumers in low-income households in part because low-income The Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs deems a regulation significant when it may have an impact on the economy of at least $ million adversely affect the economy in a material way raise novel legal or policy issues or otherwise meet the criteria set forth in Section ( f ) of Executive Order from Among regulations deemed significant those that are expected to have an impact on the economy of at least $ million or adversely affect the economy in a material way are deemed economically significant Presidential years begin on February and end January of the following year Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens | households spend a relatively large share of their budgets on necessities like groceries and medical care that are produced by heavily regulated sectors of the economy Regulation in Review The Trump Administration s regulatory reform agenda has reduced unnecessary regulatory burdens while continuing to protect workers public health safety and the environment. This section discusses three major executive orders that implement this agenda. As directed by Executive Order ( EO ) and EO executive branch agencies have sharply cut the rate at which they introduce new regulations and have adhered to regulatory budgets Under EO executive branch agencies have improved public access to their regulatory guidance documents EO which was signed on January requires executive branch agencies to remove two regulations for each new regulatory action.3 EO which was signed on February further requires agencies to evaluate their regulations on a periodic basis and to make recommendations to repeal replace or modify them to alleviate unnecessary regulatory burdens The Administration surpassed its obligations under these EOs in FY with executive agencies issuing deregulatory actions while issuing only new significant regulatory actions. Between FYs and the Trump Administration achieved roughly a : ratio of deregulatory to significant regulatory actions. Focusing on significant regulations the Administration has achieved a ratio of significant deregulatory actions to significant regulatory action between FYs and Figure shows the total numbers of significant rules which include economically significant rules and other significant rules that meet part of the definition for economic significance or are important for other reasons described in EO ( see note ) During the Trump Administration the average number of economically significant regulations excluding deregulatory actions was only per PY. The Trump Administration s average number of economically significant regulations remains below the average of economically significant regulatory actions per year between PYs and Including both economically significant and other significant rules executive branch agencies added an average of significant regulatory actions per year between PYs and Between PYs and the average number of significant regulations each year was only excluding deregulatory The Office of Management and Budget defines an EO regulatory action as ( ) a significant regulatory action as defined in Section ( f ) of EO that has been finalized and that imposes total costs greater than zero ; or ( ) a significant guidance document ( e.g. significant interpretive guidance ) reviewed by the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs under the procedures of EO that have been finalized and that impose total costs greater than zero | Chapter  $ "    $ " ) $ ! $   ) /   $ )  '   '    '0  $ ) "   " '  / *    / $ * )     $  ) / $  '    -s    * ) * ( $   ''4  $ " ) $ ! $   ) /  / #  $ " ) $ ! $   ) / Final rules  *    * "    # $ ) " / * )   ) $ $ /4   " '  / *   /0  $   ) /   ! ! $   * !  ) ! * (  / $ * )   )    " '  / *   ! !  $        '  '  / $ * )  * /   $  ) / $  '     " $ )  $ )       )   )   $ )   )   * !  / #  ! * ' ' * $ ) "     '   * ) /.  ! *     )     '0   '  that were  * ) $   $ " ) $ ! $   ) /   " '  / *    / $ * ) ; before   the CEA  ./ $ (  / s  that there was about * )  such   / $ * )  a   actions. This illustrates that the Trump Administration has slowed the pace of significant regulations more than any administration since In addition to the two-for-one requirement EO required executive branch agencies to adhere to annual regulatory budgets with cost savings targets set by the Office of Management and Budget. In FY the Trump Administration reached its cost savings targets for the third year in a row with executive branch agencies eliminating $ billion of regulatory costs Between FYs and these agencies eliminated nearly $ billion in regulatory costs. In FY the Administration is likely to achieve additional regulatory cost savings for a fourth year. This four-year stretch of regulatory reform significantly reduced the regulatory burdens that these agencies impose In President Trump issued EO to address the accumulation of regulatory guidance documents that Federal agencies use to clarify their regulations. EO requires executive branch agencies to make guidance documents more accessible to the public by building a single searchable indexed website that contains or links to all of the agencies respective guidance documents. To comply agencies were given until June after which they needed to submit any existing guidance documents that they had failed to publicly post as if they were new guidance. Crews ( ) estimates Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens | that agencies posted more than documents as of July Though many Federal agencies have asked for waivers on compliance deadlines EO is a significant step toward bringing transparency and oversight to Federal guidance documents The Administration s regulatory agenda has differed from that of previous administrations due to its emphasis on limiting the burden of Federal government regulation. After four years of regulatory reform there has been an observable change in the cost of and rate of regulation. The establishment of a regulatory budget and the commitment to removing two regulations for every one new significant regulatory action have led to significant cost savings for American firms and consumers. Supported by the improved public access to agency guidance these changes are enhancing the Nation s economic efficiency and competitiveness. The CEA discussed the impact of many deregulatory actions on real income growth in an earlier report ( CEA ) The next section examines one of the largest deregulatory actions finalized in : the SAFE Vehicles Rule The Safer Affordable Fuel Efficient ( SAFE ) Vehicles Rule The largest deregulatory action finalized under the Trump Administration has been the SAFE Vehicles Rule. This rule which amended CO emission standards for light vehicles and appropriately increased stringency now gives automakers greater freedom to build and sell vehicles as demanded by consumers. It accomplishes this goal by reducing the CO emission requirements for light vehicles produced by a manufacturer. Given the inherent relationship between CO emissions and fuel economy this has also had the effect of reducing the required minimum fuel economy standards ( in miles per gallon mpg ) Though the SAFE Vehicles Rule promotes fuel efficiency the fuel economy standards grow in stringency through at a lower rate than was prescribed by prior policy to appropriately balance policy considerations. This section estimates the potential cost savings associated with the SAFE Vehicles Rule as well as its distributional effects The corporate average fuel economy ( CAFE ) and greenhouse gas ( GHG ) regulations are written jointly by the U.S. Department of Transportation ( DOT ) and the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) to ensure harmonization between the two standards given the direct relationship between fuel used and GHG emissions.4 More stringent GHG standards increase quality-adjusted automobile prices. In a supply-and-demand diagram such as figure the gold line represents the marginal cost of producing another vehicle and the red line represents consumers willingness to pay for vehicles. The GHG standard Given the harmonization of the standards we refer to these standards as GHG standards for brevity | Chapter  $ "    # $  '    -& /   $ ' $  $ (  $ / #      /  )    Price of new vehicles ( quality adjusted )  $   $ / #   ./- $  /er ./  )     $   $ / #  ' ./- $  /  ./  )    A B C   " $ )  '   * ./   '0  $ ) "   * ( ' $  )   (  )  Qhigh Qlow Quantity of new vehicles ( quality adjusted ) Note : GHG = greenhouse gas drives a wedge between the marginal cost of producing a vehicle ( excluding regulatory compliance costs ) and the marginal willingness of consumers to purchase one raising the price of the vehicle above the marginal cost of production. The rule would have increased the wedge by about $ per vehicle by model year relative to the SAFE Vehicles rule as represented by p in figure The EPA and DOT rules generally allow firms to comply by purchasing credits from other firms that have overcomplied thus leading to the lowest overall cost of compliance for the industry. The approach to this analysis assumes that the price at which automakers buy and sell compliance credits reveals the private cost of meeting the standards because it should incorporate both the cost of building marginally more efficient vehicles and the willingness of consumers to buy them. To estimate prices of compliance credits the CEA draws from public records on nearly $ million in credit transactions that occurred over seven years ( ) which provide a simple and transparent basis for our cost estimates Inferring costs and benefits based on actual firm behavior in this case the price at which automakers buy and sell GHG compliance credits eliminates a great deal of guesswork. Credit prices incorporate a wealth of information that is otherwise hard to observe such as the extra cost of building a more Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens | efficient vehicle and the willingness of consumers to pay for such vehicles. This approach also known as the revealed preference approach differs from much of the existing literature on the costs of CAFE and GHG standards which examines volumes of automotive engineering data and assesses consumer s driving habits fuel-purchasing routines ( including attempts to value consumers time spent pumping fuel ) and decisions about when to scrap a vehicle.5 In the revealed preference approach we replace engineering assumptions with economic assumptions such as cost-minimization and pass-through of costs in which case credit prices convey the information needed to estimate the private costs and benefits of complying with the standards.6 To the extent that manufacturers minimize the cost of producing a given model and can freely trade credits the observed credit price is equal to the marginal cost of reducing the manufacturer s fleet-wide emissions.7 To the extent that the cost of GHG credits is reflected in the prices consumers pay for vehicles ( i.e. pass-through ) the cost also reflects consumers willingness to have vehicles with more weight or other attributes that produce additional emissions as measured by the GHG program. This includes many dimensions of consumer preferences including the value that consumers place on fuel savings over the life of a vehicle The costs and valuations permit quantifying the private net costs of changing the standards because the market complies with a stricter standard through some combination of changing vehicle attributes and adjusting prices to shift sales to lower-emission vehicles. These private net costs are pivotal for understanding the effects of the SAFE Vehicles Rule. Prior analyses of the standards show that private costs and benefits dwarf environmental costs and benefits ( Bento et al. ) The value of compliance credits equals the private net costs of changing the standards which arise through some combination of changing vehicle attributes and skewing sales to lower-emission vehicles. These private net costs are pivotal for understanding the effects of the SAFE Vehicles Rule : prior analyses of the standards show that private costs and benefits dwarf environmental costs and benefits ( Bento et al. ) GHG Credit Transaction Data The price at which automakers buy or sell GHG compliance credits is not publicly available. However because credit revenue is significant for Tesla it reports the revenues in its financial reports to the Securities and Exchange See e.g. regulatory impact analyses ( EPA/DOT ) EPA/DOT ( ) assume a one-for-one pass-through of compliance costs to consumer prices as we do Note that trading was quite limited in the initial years of the program that these data are not widely available for every trade and that some companies announced intentions to not trade even when it represented a lower-cost way to comply | Chapter Commission. The reports indicate that Tesla earned $ million in revenues ( in dollars ) from the sale of GHG credits over the years For the same period EPA data show that Tesla was the second largest seller of GHG credits after Honda since GHG credit trading began in Tesla s sales have accounted for nearly a quarter of all sales in the U.S. credit market ( EPA ) These revenue and sales numbers suggest that roughly $ billion in credit transactions have occurred across the industry since the GHG credit trading program began Using Tesla s credit sales and revenues we calculate the average credit price over the period.9 We associate this price with the standards of the period because GHG credits earned during model years are used through model year Because credits are banked and traded across automakers and fleets all model years through are effectively a single fleet for GHG compliance purposes.10 Focusing on the price also has the advantage of the period being before President Trump s election which would have changed expectations about the value of the credits later in the period When calculating the credit price we adjust Tesla s credit revenues to incorporate their timing using a percent interest rate to standardize all revenues as if they were earned in which is when the industry s fleet shifted from performing above the standard and accumulating credits to performing below the standard and drawing down credits. Dividing total revenues by the quantity of credits sold over the period gives an average price of $ per ton of CO2 emissions or $ per mpg per vehicle ( in dollars ) The $ credit price is a lower-bound estimate of the actual average price at which Tesla sold its credits. Automakers are not required to report the timing of transactions which complicates efforts to identify credit sales in individual years. However automakers can not sell credits that they do not have. Over the period at most Tesla could have sold all the credits For several years Tesla s annual filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission did not report revenues separately for zero emissions vehicle credits and GHG credits but this breakout is available from the company s quarterly filings with the commission and was reported by Forbes ( ) This allows us to ensure that we are not including zero emissions vehicle revenues in our GHG revenues We note that Leard and McConnell ( ) were the first to match Tesla credit revenue with trade volumes to infer credit prices Because the GHG standard increased in each of the years we expect manufacturers to accumulate GHG credits in the early years and spend them in the later years. EPA records show this to be the case with most manufacturers having a credit shortfall in model year ; see EPA ( figure ) In Kia and Hyundai forfeited credits in a settlement with the EPA which were valued at $ per ton ( in dollars and with interest until ) Because the price is not based on a market transaction we do not include it in our estimation of the price When calculating the credit price we take into account the small number of GHG credits that Tesla sold in the Canadian GHG market and whose revenues would presumably be included in the credit revenues reported to the Securities and Exchange Commission Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens | that it earned through model year which is the quantity that we used to estimate the price. If Tesla sold any less the estimated price would be higher because the same revenue would be divided by a smaller number of credits Estimating the Curve for the Marginal Cost of Compliance Our credit price data and a prior study provide two relevant points that allows us to project what the market equilibrium price of compliance credits would be for any given standard.13 The Tesla credit data described above provide one observation on compliance costs : credits cost $ per mpg per vehicle when the standard was about mpg the average over the period.14 The second data point is for model year for which Anderson and Sallee ( ) estimate the average marginal cost of tightening CAFE standards by mpg to be $ per vehicle. The CAFE standard during that year was mpg.15 With two observations on compliance costs at different standards we can project the relationship between the standard measured in mpg and the marginal effect of the standard on the marginal ( production and opportunity ) cost of manufacturing a vehicle ( figure ) The horizontal axis measures the standard while the vertical axis measures additions to the marginal cost of each vehicle. The area under the curve measures the additional cost of the standard per vehicle. The SAFE Vehicles Rule will raise standards for at a rate of percent a year. Using fleet data from the rule rather than the SAFE Vehicles final rule the standards reach in while the rule prescribed a standard of for model year which we assume will also apply to model year If going from to mpg increased the marginal cost of tightening the standard from $ to $ then the marginal cost of further increasing the standard must be greater than $ From the linear credit-supply assumption the CEA projects that the credit price would be $ per mpg for model year under the standards established in the SAFE Vehicles Rule ( a standard of mpg ) as compared with about $ per mpg for model year under The CEA s theoretical analysis of models with constant elasticity of substitution between types of vehicles has shown a linear credit-supply schedule ( with respect to mpg ) to be a good approximation of the actual schedule except when the standard is especially tight in which case linear supply underestimates compliance costs. This suggests that our estimate of the marginal cost of complying with the rule is likely conservative Some manufacturers let credits expire in which may suggest that the standard may not have been binding at that time. However credits could not be traded among automakers. In addition the credits that expired were credits that could only be banked for five years unlike credits earned in model years which could be banked and used through model year Although this estimate of the marginal cost of compliance is for CAFE standards it remains our best estimate of the cost of compliance of a GHG standard of mpg given that there was not a GHG standard at the time Figure is labeled with fuel economy standards rather than emissions standards because mpg are more familiar to readers than tons of GHG | Chapter  $ "       $ /    -& /   $ ' $  $ (  ! *    $ *   /  )    $ /mpg/vehicle   s           "      ' $ *  '  * %  /   )   $ *  '   " $ )  '   * ./  * !  / $ " # / ) $ ) "  / #  ./  )     * %  /   )        '  (    ! * (     /-   Area = (   /  * )  ) $ /   * ./  F (      )  * )  and   ' '  E D Mpg-equivalent of GHG standard Sources : National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ; Environmental Protection Agency ; Leard and McConnell ( ) ; CEA calculations Note : GHG = greenhouse gas ; MY = model year the tighter standard originally put in place by the rule ( a standard of about mpg ) For each year of the period we use the average of the two marginal costs which can then be multiplied by the mpg difference in the standards to give the savings per vehicle from the SAFE Rule. The resulting value is equivalent to the green area in figure The CEA estimates that areas A B and C of figure represent $ billion a year in costs to new automobile consumers and producers. Relative to the SAFE Vehicles Rule the rule results in roughly fewer new vehicles delivered to consumers every year at a similar total cost including fuel costs and the opportunity costs of vehicle features The rectangular area A of figure accounts for the largest portion and is the product of the number of vehicles sold and the effect of changing the standards on costs per vehicle. The marginal cost of compliance curve shown in figure allows us to calculate the cost of the rule per vehicle ( for model year ) compared with the cost of the SAFE Vehicles Rule. Doing so indicates that phasing in the higher standard would eventually increase Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens | average quality-adjusted prices by about $ For the years the average annualized quality-adjusted price increase would be about $ This amount corresponds to in figure Applying the $ average annual savings to the more than million new vehicles sold annually in the United States gives an annualized average increase in consumer benefits of $ billion each year for model years equivalent to area A in figure Areas B and C of figure are also part of the cost of increasing the standards. Estimating them requires an estimate of the impact of increasing the standards on vehicle sales. To identify the new quantity of vehicles sold annually the CEA uses a price elasticity of demand for new vehicles of ( Berry Levinsohn and Pakes ) model-year-specific increments to vehicle costs ( derived as above ) relative to the average vehicle sales price and model-year-specific projections of vehicle sales.20 The sales impact is roughly vehicles a year which makes area B about $ billion a year. Area C requires an estimate of the effect of the SAFE Vehicle Rule standards relative to no standards costs per vehicle. This baseline private cost per vehicle is shown in figure as areas D E and F. Applying it to the change in vehicle sales gives an estimate of figure s area C of roughly $ billion a year Because the emissions and fuel-efficiency requirements are imposed on the supply chain rather than on the final consumer it follows from the passthrough assumption that costs of the regulation are reflected in consumer prices. The $ billion in annual private costs in the market for vehicles is therefore measured as a productivity loss in the sense that the economy produces less private value when assessed at market prices using the same factors of production capital and labor The productivity loss is experienced by market participants that supply less capital in the long run and less labor in the short run.21 This means even less real income and to the extent that factor markets are distorted by taxes additional private costs. Using a marginal cost of public funds of the decline in labor and capital supplied adds $ billion in private costs ( x $ To the extent that compliance with tighter standards is achieved entirely by adding or changing model designs in ways that reduce emissions and increase fuel economy without other perceptible effects on consumers valuation of the vehicles the average price increase is the same as the average quality-adjusted price increase If we assume a flat $ per mpg per vehicle in compliance costs the SAFE rule saves consumers $ per car which is similar to the EPA/DOT ( ) regulatory impact analysis estimate We use a percent real discount rate for the purposes of annualizing 0-year cost profiles. All amounts are in dollars The average vehicle price is from the Kelley Blue Book. Model year sales forecasts are from EPA/DOT ( table VI-189 ) We adopt the balanced growth assumption that productivity has income and substitution effects on labor supply that offset in the long run. As people earn more they demand more leisure ( the income effect ) ; but rising wages has the opposite effect of increasing the value of work relative to leisure which encourages more work and less leisure ( the substitution effect ) | Chapter  $ "    * ) (    $ ) "  ! * (  / #        # $  '   '        ) /age  * !  )  * (  b4  )  * (   $ ) / $ ' Reduction in new car expenditures as a percentage of income  $ -./   * )   # $   * 0-/ #  $ ! / # Quintile  *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $        '  '  / $ * ) billion ) If the full market value of the factors supplied is considered assuming a marginal tax rate of ( CEA ) the total gross domestic product loss in factor markets is about $ billion ( $ billion / ) In total the higher standards reduce real income and gross domestic product by $ billion a year ( $ billion in the regulated market and $ billion in factor markets ) which is about percent.22 This makes the SAFE Vehicles Rule one of the single most effective deregulatory actions that the Trump Administration has finalized thus far ( CEA ) The estimated $ billion in consumer savings from the SAFE Vehicles Rule can be distributed among different household income groups. We allocate the savings across income quintiles based on each quintile s share of aggregate spending on new vehicles as reported in the Consumer Expenditure Survey. Figure depicts the savings as a percentage of the posttax income of each group. The savings from the SAFE Vehicles Rule disproportionately benefit lower-income consumers with the savings in the lowest income quintile exceeding those of the highest quintile As with many of the other regulations that the CEA has analyzed previously ( CEA ) the SAFE Vehicles Rule has an effect on real income whose dollar amount significantly exceeds the dollars of net ( private and social ) benefits. This is primarily because net benefits account for opportunity costs for example the value of leisure if not working while real income does not Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens | by percent. This is because a larger share of the posttax income of lowerincome consumers goes toward the purchase of new vehicles The Potentially Regressive Nature of Regulation Our analysis of the SAFE Vehicles Rule illustrates that the burden of regulatory costs can fall disproportionately on low-income households. And though a standard question in public finance is who bears the burden of the taxes needed to fund government expenditures much less is known about who bears the burden of the costs of regulations. We find that deregulation can help consumers in low-income households by easing restrictions that disproportionately increase the prices of the goods and services they purchase. Because high-income households spend proportionately less on economic necessities than low-income households the deregulation of such goods and services has progressive benefits.23 In the CEA studied deregulatory actions of the Trump Administration and estimated that after to years they will together raise real incomes by percent. In this section we revisit of these regulations to assess their distributional effect. We find that many of them will lower the prices of necessities such as groceries electricity prescription drugs health insurance telecommunications and other consumer goods and services and will likely benefit lower-income households more than higher-income households. Specifically we find that the cost savings from this subset of deregulatory actions together with the SAFE Vehicles Rule amount to percent of the average income of the lowest income quintile of households compared with only percent for the highest-income quintile of households ( figure ) This suggests that these deregulations benefited relative to their income the lowest-income quintile households four times as much as those in the highest-income quintile Progressive and Regressive Tax Structures To evaluate how a tax burden is shared public finance economists examine whether the burden increases with an individuals capacity to pay ( Duclos ) When the burden of a tax relative to income is higher for high-income individuals the tax is described as progressive. In the United States for example Congress designed the Federal income tax to impose progressively higher marginal rates on earners with higher incomes. In tax year the lowest half of filers accounted for percent of the adjusted gross income share while the highest quintile accounted for percent. However due to the progressive structure of the Federal income tax the lowest half of filers represented less than percent of total Federal income taxes while filers with an adjusted gross The concept of economic necessities defined this way is broader than the way the word necessity is commonly used outside economics | Chapter  $ "   ''0./-  / $  (   /  * !  a    ) /   *        )  * (   $ ) / $ ' Percentage of income  $ -./   * )   # $   * 0-/ #  $ ! / # Quintile  *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * ) income in the highest quintile accounted for over percent. Conversely when the burden of a tax relative to income is lower for high-income individuals the tax is considered regressive Sales taxes and other consumption-based taxes such as the value-added tax tend to be regressive. According to the technical economic definition a good or service is a necessity when the income-elasticity of demand is less than for example when a percent increase in income leads to an increase in consumption of less than percent. Because low-income households spend a higher proportion of their incomes on necessities like groceries and medical care sales taxes on these goods are regressive. Figure illustrates the regressivity of a percent sales tax on groceries. Households in the lowest fifth of the income distribution would pay percent of their income in grocery sales taxes while households in the top fifth would pay percent. The grocery tax would have an impact on consumers in the lowest income quintile which relative to their income is over five times larger than the impact on the highestincome quintile. To reduce the regressivity of sales taxes most States exempt groceries and some other necessities from the sales tax ( Figueroa and Waxman ) Other States offer credits or rebates to low-income households to help offset some of the regressivity of their sales taxes Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens | The Harm Regressive Regulation Systems Pose Many regulations may be regressive because they increase the costs of producing goods and services that are necessities ( e.g. groceries and medical care ) When complying with regulations increases the costs of production firms increase the prices charged to consumers. Because low-income households spend proportionately more of their income on necessities these regulationinduced price hikes on necessities are similar to regressive sales taxes However the magnitude of the effect of a regulation on consumer prices depends on how firms respond to production cost increases which in turn depends on market conditions. After a regulation the market reaches a new equilibrium where consumers pay a higher price for the good ( figure ) In the case shown in figure firms are able to pass their regulatory costs fully through to consumers through higher consumer prices. In other cases with different market structures ( not shown ) a full pass-through of regulatory costs does not always occur. For example in response to a $ increase in the cost of production a firm might only raise prices by cents due to competitive constraints. Figure can also be reinterpreted to show another possible effect of regulation where the regulation acts as a barrier to entry that limits new competition resulting in a higher equilibrium price with above-normal profits or economic rents for established firms. In general regulations will have effects on consumers and firms conventionally measured by changes in consumer and producer surpluses. Tracing through the producer surplus effects to the distribution of the incomes of factors of production can be complex. ( See box ) Low-income households spend more of their income on goods and services in general because they have lower savings rates making regulations that increase the price of these goods and services more regressive ( Dynan Skinner and Zeldes ) Households in the lower-income quintiles spend larger fractions of their incomes for almost all the categories of goods and services tracked by the Consumer Expenditure Surveys ( CEX ) Thus deregulation is often progressive because it removes regressive regulatory cost burdens that inflate the prices of necessities. Figure shows spending patterns for some important categories of goods and services. Even when regulations do not intentionally target necessities they can have the unintended consequence of imposing a regressive cost burden. Chambers Collins and Krause ( ) find that regulatory compliance costs increase the prices of necessities including energy food healthcare and health insurance housing and transportation Unlike sales taxes however policymakers typically do not exempt the production of necessities from regulations Other regulations can be regressive because they intentionally target consumer choices that vary with income. Product standards are a common example because they mandate that products must have certain features or | Chapter  $ "   The (   / * !   " '  / $ * )  $ )     * ( / $ / $    -& / Price   " $ )  '   * ./   $ / #  " '  / $ * )   " $ )  '  * ./    $ / # * 0/  " '  / $ * ) P2 P1  (  )  Q2 Q1 Quantity  $ "     ) /age  * !  )  * (   ) /  * )   0/ '     / " *   )  * (   $ ) / $ '  * *    /  # * (  / $ ' $ / $  '/ #  $ )  )   # $  '   #  Percentage of income  $ -./   * )   # $   * 0-/ #  $ ! / # Quintile  *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $        '  '  / $ * )  * /   / $ ' $ / $ $ )  '0   0/ $ ' $ / $  ! '   )    ' $   $  Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens | Box Effects of Regulation on Small Businesses Regulations can have regressive effects on small business because of economies of scale. For example if a regulation requires that firms establish retirement accounts larger firms average costs will be lower because they can spread the fixed costs over a larger pool of employees. Given that the cost of retirement accounts are already lower for larger firms than for small firms large firms all else being equal will be more likely to already have retirement accounts established before the regulation thereby causing the regulation to have more of an impact on small than large firms Policymakers often attempt to offset regulatory burdens for small businesses by exempting businesses with a certain level of revenue or number of employees. However the threshold exemptions distort the market and can cause businesses to cluster near the threshold limit. In France where many regulations apply after a firm reaches employees Garicano LeLarge and Reene ( ) find that firms cluster below the employee threshold to enjoy regulatory exemptions. Though clustering reduces firm s regulatory burden it also reduces total welfare and the productivity of the economy. In the United States the Affordable Care Act used a similar approach by reducing the requirements imposed on businesses with fewer than full-time employees Congress has passed several pieces of legislation that attempt to reduce the regulatory burden placed on small entities. The Regulatory Flexibility  $ "  i    * ) * ( $   ''4   $ " ) $ ! $   ) /   $ )  '   '  $ / #   " '  / *  ' $  $ ' $ /4   )  '4. $  ! *   (  ' '   $ )     $  ) / $  '    -s   )  '4. $  ) * /  $   )  '4. $  $  Economically significant final rules  *    * "    # $ ) " / * )   ) $ $ /4   " '  / *   /0  $   ) /   ! ! $   * !  ) ! * (  / $ * )   )    " '  / *   ! !  $         '  '  / $ * )  * /   $  ) / $  '     " $ )  $ )       )   )   $ )   )   * !  / #  ! * ' ' * $ ) "    | Chapter Act of requires that agencies perform regulatory flexibility analyses for regulations that may have an effect on small entities with specific attention to competitiveness and fairness ; see figure 6-i. In Congress passed the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act creating panels that enable small entities and regulatory agencies to interact with regulators during the regulatory process. In the Trump Administration issued EO and EO which required Federal agencies to make their guidance easily accessible and make sure that all enforcement actions are transparent and fair. These EOs are especially important for small businesses that may otherwise lack the capability to understand regulations relevant to their business attributes whose desirability can depend on one s income. To the extent that the mandated features are normal goods ( i.e. demand for the feature increases as income increases ) high-income consumers would purchase more of the mandated feature even without the product standard. If their demand for the regulated feature is strong enough the products purchased by high-income consumers will likely already meet the product standard. Although product standards are less binding or even nonbinding on high-income consumers these standards impose costs on low-income households which are required to pay higher prices for features they do not highly value Energy efficiency standards are another example of regulations that can be regressive due to the consumer choices they target. For instance consumers who use their air conditioners on most days of the summer might find that energy savings pay back the higher price of a more efficient appliance within a few years. Low-income consumers who can only afford to use their air conditioners infrequently face a longer payback period and might be better off purchasing a lower-price and less-efficient appliance. Therefore energyefficient appliances and vehicles are more valuable to consumers who use their appliances and vehicles regularly. The CAFE standards discussed above have a similar effect. Levinson ( ) finds that high-income households purchase more fuel-efficient cars. Levison estimates that the CAFE standards disproportionately burden low-income households which are less likely to prioritize fuel efficiency absent CAFE. In other words the CAFE standards may have less impact on high-income households because they already prefer to purchase more fuel-efficient cars Some health insurance regulations include product standards that can also be regressive. Health insurance regulations related to the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) are notable examples. The ACA s individual mandate requires nonexempt consumers to have one of several enumerated forms of health insurance coverage. Through tax year the Internal Revenue Service enforced the individual mandate with a monetary penalty ; the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens |  $ "   )  $ $   '    )   /   )  '/ $        ) /age  * ! )  * (     )  * (   $ ) / $ ' Percentage of income  $ -./   * )   # $   * 0-/ #  $ ! / # Quintile Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Internal Revenue Service ; CEA calculations of set the mandate penalty to zero becoming effective in the tax year. Because most high-income households already had coverage through ACA-compliant insurance plans the mandate penalty fell disproportionately on lower- and middle-income households ( figure ) Households in the lowest income quintile bore a proportionately smaller burden than households in the second-lowest quintile because households in the lowest income quintile were more likely to be covered by Medicaid or receive subsidies to purchase ACA-compliant insurance. After the second lowest income quintile the burden of the individual mandate penalty was steeply regressive. Other regulations including the short-term limited duration insurance rule banned a number of insurance options that were popular among low-income households that made choices based on what was best for them Academic research provides several explanations for why the regulatory process leads to product standards and other forms of regulations that intentionally target certain consumer choices. Instead of always serving the general public interest the regulatory apparatus may be prone to capture by special interests ( Stigler ) Regulatory capture could cause policymakers to enact legislation and regulators to issue regulations that privilege certain groups to the detriment of other groups such as the public or their competitors. Mulligan and Philipson ( ) argue that wealthier portions of society may advocate for | Chapter regulations that impose their preferences on the general population and offset some of those costs through a progressive tax system. Similarly Thomas ( ) suggests that regulators may focus on prioritizing regulations that reduce risks for wealthier households at the cost of low-income households Lower-Income Households Often Gain the Most from Regulatory Reform In an earlier report the CEA estimated that the effect on real incomes associated with deregulatory actions under the Trump Administration will total $ billion a year ( CEA ) which we also discussed in chapter of the Economic Report of the President. We estimated that these deregulatory actions will raise real incomes by reducing the prices of consumer goods and by increasing competition productivity and wages. An important part of our earlier analysis was to account for the excess burden that regulatory actions impose on factor markets for labor and capital. In this section we focus on the distributional implications of the reductions in the prices of consumer goods. The narrower scope of the analysis means that some of the deregulatory actions considered in the earlier CEA report are not part of this study ( table ) Though the CEA has not studied all the deregulatory actions taken since our analysis in this section builds upon our previous work which used a sampling procedure to identify the largest deregulatory actions in terms of economic impact ( CEA ) We combine our estimates of the cost savings from deregulatory actions with data from the CEX. We attribute the reduction in industry costs to an expenditure category listed in the CEX shares of annual expenditures by income quintile. For example we estimated that the Federal Communication Commission s ( FCC ) repeal of the Protecting and Promoting the Open Internet and issuance of Restoring Internet Freedom Order would provide $ billion in cost savings to Internet users.24 The expenditure category of the CEX for consumers most affected by Internet prices is the computer information services ( Internet access ) category. We used the expenditure shares by income quintile to calculate the reduction in Internet access expenditures as a fraction of total income ( after tax ) for each quintile. The results shown in figure show that relative to their incomes the FCC s deregulation of internet access has an effect on consumers in the lowest income quintile that is five times larger than the effect on the highest income quintile The CEA s distributional analysis focuses on regulatory cost savings that we predict are passed through to consumers who pay lower prices for the goods and services produced by the deregulated industries. Our earlier study finds substantial additional cost-savings in the markets for factors of production i.e. in the labor and capital markets as reported by the CEA ( table ) Tracing through the factor market effects to their effects on the distribution of household incomes is a complex and challenging task that is beyond the scope of this Report. This narrower focus is only a portion of the total cost savings than we estimated in the earlier CEA report Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens |  $ "    * ) (    $ ) "  * )  ) / ) /      ! * (  / #   ./ * $ ) "  ) / ) /    * (   '    )  * (   $ ) / $ ' Percentage of income  $ -./   * )   # $   * 0-/ #  $ ! / # Quintile  *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /    '0  ) /  the     ./ $ (  /  * !   * ) (   $ ) "      #   * !  / # $  $ )  * (  # $  #   ' $   the  * ) (   )  $ /0-    $ ) / $ '   )   )  $ /0-    /   / *  )  / $ * )  '  $ )  * (    /   We performed similar calculations for the set of deregulatory actions enacted since that reduced consumer prices ( table ) For some deregulatory actions the distribution of the cost savings across income quintiles exactly follows the distribution of consumer expenditures in the relevant CEX category. Examples include deregulatory actions that we estimate will reduce the prices of electricity prescription drugs and Internet access. For other deregulatory actions the distribution of cost savings across income quintiles reflects the fact that the original regulation targeted consumer choices that were more common among low-income households. Examples include health insurance deregulations and the deregulation of the short-term loan industry We used additional information about consumer behavior in those markets to refine our estimates of the distribution of the cost savings across income quintiles When we total the results for the complete set of regulations we analyze we find that the deregulatory actions are strongly progressive and reduce the disproportionate burden regulations impose on low-income households We find that the gains from the deregulatory actions we study amount to percent of the average income of the poorest fifth of households compared with only percent for the richest fifth ( figure ) The deregulatory actions have an effect on consumers in the lowest income quintile which relative to | Chapter Table Selected Deregulatory Actions Annual Impact on   '  )  * (  (   /  * )    '  )  * (  $ )   $ ' ' $ * ) dollar.  a    * /  / $ ) "  / #   $    * !   0./ * (  * !   *     )    )    / #   '  * ( ( ) $   / $ * )   $    +/ )   (   $ +/ $ * )  /-  (   * /  / $ * )   '  Definition of Employer Under Section ( ) of ERISA  *  $  / $ * )   '/ #   '  )      '  # * -/  (  $ ( $ /    / $ * )  )  )            # $  '   $ / '   )    -/  $ )  $ " #  * ./  ) ./  ' ' ( ) /  *  )   *  * !    / $ * )     )     * !     &   )    / *  &4      /   ./   ) / $ * )   *   / $ * )    %  /  / *   *  '/ $   )    *    * )  / $ * )    $ $ * )  *   $ $ * )   '  * !   * /  / $ ) "   )    * ( * / $ ) "  / #   )  ) / ) /   )    )   * !   ./ * $ ) "  ) / ) /    * (      )      *  ) $  / $ * )   ! ! * -/  #      0/.   )   *     /       / #  )  $ $   '    )   /   )  '/4  / *   *   !   ! ! *    '   '   ! ! $  $ ) /        # $  '   '  * /  '  *         '  '  / $ * ) Note : An asterisk ( * ) signifies the use of a shortened name for the regulation. All annual effects on real income are rounded to the nearest billion dollars. The impact on real incomes is estimated based on the full impact of the regulation which may be realized in the future their income is over four times larger than the effect on the highest one. Above we noted that we find that with a hypothetical percent tax on groceries households in the lowest fifth of the income distribution would pay percent of their income in grocery sales taxes over five times larger than the effect on the highest-income quintile. The deregulatory actions we study removed cost burdens that were similar to a regressive tax on groceries Our analysis focuses on the distribution of the gains from regulatory reform that reduced the burdens costly regulations impose on consumers Regulatory and deregulatory actions have both benefits and costs. The net effect of the actions on consumer welfare depends on the difference between benefits and costs or the net benefits. The distribution of the net benefits of an action depends on the relative sizes of the benefits and costs and on the relative progressivity of how the benefits and costs are distributed ( Bento Freedman and Lang ) Under Executive Order and Executive Order Federal agencies must analyze whether a proposed deregulatory action reduces regulatory costs and whether the cost savings are larger than the benefits forgone from removing the regulation. The CEA ( ) analyzed Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens |  $ "    * ) (    $ ) "  ! * (   '  /   " '  / *    / $ * )   )   / #        # $  '   '    )  * (   $ ) / $ ' Percentage of income  $ -./   * )   # $   * 0-/ #  $ ! / # Quintile  *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  deregulatory actions that yield cost savings that are larger than the benefits forgone and we find that the cost savings are distributed progressively. Unless the forgone benefits of these rules were distributed more progressively than the costs the distribution of the net benefits from these deregulations were progressive The Regressivity of Federal Regulation Offsets the Progressivity of Federal Taxes Despite the deregulatory actions taken by the Trump Administration a large amassed body of Federal regulations remains. The total cost of Federal regulations is difficult to estimate with precision. As of September Federal agencies estimate that their regulations require that the U.S. public complete roughly billion hours of paperwork at a cost of $ billion each year Between and the Federal Government issued an average of regulations each year not including guidance and other documents that some observers describe as regulatory dark matter which is another form of regulation that does not always include public participation ( Crews ) Recent estimates of the total annual costs of Federal regulations range from | Chapter  $ "    * ) (    $ ) "  ! * (   " '  / *   / $ * )  * (    with the     '       /    )  * (   $ ) / $ ' Consumer savings from deregulatory actions ( percentage of income ) Federal tax rate ( rate )  $ -./   * )   # $   * 0-/ #  $ ! / # Quintile  *    * ) " $ * )  '    " /   ! ! $        '  '  / $ * )  * /  The     ./ $ (  / * !    #  $ )  * (  $ ) / $ '   "     ' /    /  $ )  '0   $ )  $ $   '  $ )  * (   * ' '   * *  /  $ )  * (   )    $  /     * !  almost half a trillion dollars into the trillions of dollars ( CEA ) Crain and Crain ( ) use a proxy measure of regulation to conclude that Federal regulations imposed a burden of roughly $ trillion in Coffey McLaughlin and Peretto ( ) estimate the effect of regulations on industries between and and find that if regulations were held at levels then the economy would have been $ trillion larger in The magnitude of regulatory burdens in combination with their potential regressivity implies that regulatory costs could largely offset the progressivity of Federal taxes. Regulatory cost estimates that range into the trillions of dollars are substantial compared with the $ trillion in Federal tax revenues in fiscal year In fact the distribution of the gains from the subset of deregulations we examined is almost the mirror image of the distribution of the burden of Federal taxation ( figure ) Thus we find that continued regulatory reform has the potential to shift more of the total burden the Federal government imposes on businesses and consumers away from low-income households with less capacity to pay No Federal agency attempts to estimate the cumulative cost of all Federal regulation ; however the Regulatory Right-to-Know act tasked the Office of Management and Budget to estimate the total cost and benefits of a subset of Federal rules that have been designated major rules. Federal regulatory agencies only monetize the costs and benefits of less than percent of all the rules they issue Empowering Economic Freedom by Reducing Regulatory Burdens | Conclusion This chapter has highlighted the Trump Administration s commitment to reducing the regulatory burden on households and businesses. The CEA finds that the benefits associated with one of fiscal year s biggest deregulatory actions ( the SAFE Vehicles Rule ) will reduce prices for consumers by almost $ per vehicle by Moreover we find that the Administration s regulatory reform efforts may have benefited those in the lowest income quintile the most as a proportion of their income. Specifically we conclude that the costs savings from the SAFE Vehicles Rule and other deregulatory actions we have studied amount to percent of the average income of the lowest income quintile of households compared with percent for the highest income quintile of households. Our findings provide evidence of the benefits of regulatory reform and reaffirm that deregulation can help consumers in low-income households who spend a relatively large share of their budgets on necessities that are often in heavily regulated sectors of the economy the most The regulatory reforms we have reviewed in this chapter were enacted before the COVID-19 pandemic and its effects on health and the U.S. economy Although the longer-term consequences are hard to predict evidence on the scope and nature of COVID-19 s near-term effects are beginning to emerge Unfortunately the COVID-19 pandemic has hit low-income households particularly hard in their health outcomes and in economic consequences including lost jobs and wages. The cost savings and distributional effects from the deregulations we discuss may have somewhat cushioned the blow to low-income households. Moreover regulatory reform may help position the United States for a robust economic recovery and be a powerful tool to help lift up middle- and low-income Americans as the economy recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic | Chapter x Chapter Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition During the last years school choice programs have undergone dramatic expansion in the United States. These programs organized at the Federal State or local level share a common goal of expanding access to education options that exist alongside and ultimately improve public school options for primary and secondary education. Under a district public school ( DPS ) system students are assigned to schools based on where they live and the only form of school choice requires physically moving to an area with better schools for those families that can afford to do so. School choice programs have altered this landscape in fundamental ways by increasing competition in the school system and enhancing educational opportunities for all students especially those from disadvantaged groups One rapidly growing school choice option is charter schools. Charter schools are public schools that educate millions of students using public funding but with operational autonomy from the local public school system. Additionally scholarship programs funded both publicly and privately assist hundreds of thousands of students with tuition at private schools and can provide access to courses work-based learning opportunities concurrent and dual enrollment for college credit home education special education services and therapies tutoring and more. These and other choice programs are providing opportunities for families that lack them thereby ensuring that all schools have an incentive to deliver a high-quality education This chapter documents the development and expansion of school choice programs since when the first major school choice program was introduced in this country. We provide an overview of school choice programs describing the main types of programs with examples from around the country. We also discuss the role of Federal policy including recent actions of the Trump Administration to further expand school choice We next explain the key benefit of expanding school choice policies : more educational competition that empowers families and pressures schools to deliver more value. School choice programs can extend competition to all areas including those where families with lower incomes have little ability to move to more affluent areas in search of better schools. The programs enable families to hold accountable what in some cases is a failing local education monopoly This can benefit the children who use school choice programs as well as the children who remain in a DPS because all schools must compete for student enrollment by providing a higher-quality educational experience. We discuss the growing empirical evidence that carefully crafted school choice programs do improve educational outcomes for all students. In other words competition can be the tide that lifts all boats S chool choice refers to policies legislation and organizations that foster alternatives to residentially assigned district public school ( DPS ) education. This chapter provides an overview of school choice programs in the United States and the role of Federal policy in helping to foster them. It also discusses the economic theory of competition that motivates these programs And finally it reviews the empirical research on the programs impact The first major school choice programs were introduced in the early 1990s. The programs originated from concerns that students from low-income families had no alternatives to residentially assigned DPSs especially in places where the local DPS had a poor performance record. In the State of Wisconsin enacted the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program the first major voucher program in the Nation. This program which continues to operate today offers publicly funded vouchers to eligible students in Milwaukee who choose to attend private schools. In the State of Minnesota enacted the first charter school law with the first public charter school opening in Saint Paul in Over time demand for alternatives to residentially assigned DPSs has increased and school choice programs have been introduced in many school districts throughout the country | Chapter Chart Title  $ "    (   * !       *  #   )       $ /    # * '  # $       / $ * )   $ ) "     * ) /  *  #     $ /   # * '  # $ Number ( thousands ) Education savings accounts Vouchers Tax-credit scholarships  *      # * $  Today private choice programs provide financial support that enables hundreds of thousands of students to attend private schools. As we discuss in more detail below these programs include vouchers tax-credit scholarships and State-funded education savings accounts ( ESAs ) ( figure ) which together now number about ( EdChoice 2020a ) Public choice programs further allow millions of students to attend schools other than the DPS they would attend based on geographic residency In addition to establishing public charter schools States and local governments have introduced other public choice programs such as magnet schools which are public schools with specialized programs of study. Enrollment in public charter schools and magnet schools has grown over time ( figure ) In charter schools and magnet schools enrolled million and million students respectively ( NCES 2019a ) Many public school systems have also introduced open enrollment programs that permit students to attend public schools other than a residentially assigned DPS Although Federal funding plays a relatively minor role in K-12 school funding Federal policy does support State and local governments seeking to expand school choice. Below we discuss the main Federal programs that support school choice including the Magnet Schools Assistance Program and the Charter Schools Program. We also report on recent policies implemented under the Trump Administration to enhance this support including the expansion of ESAs to primary and secondary education under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) Although school choice programs have grown dramatically the majority of students in K-12 school continue to attend a residentially assigned DPS As shown in figure the proportion of students attending a residentially assigned DPS fell by about percentage points between and Over Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition |  $ "    ) * ' ' ( ) /  $ )    ' $    # * $    * "  (  o1   $ (  #  -/   # * * '   " ) /  s  # * * ' Students enrolled ( millions )  *    / $ * )  '   ) /  ! *      / $ * )   /  / $ ./ $  the same period the proportion of students attending a public school of their choosing rose by about percentage points After providing an overview we next discuss the economic theory of competition that motivates school choice. School choice programs are founded on the idea that when schools are exposed to increased competition educational outcomes will improve. The intellectual foundation is often credited to the Nobel laureate Milton Friedman ( ) who argued that when public schools face competition they have stronger incentives to provide a high-quality cost-effective education. As described by Hoxby ( ) the beneficial effects of competition come into force through the power of choice. Because charter schools are not guaranteed any enrollment they are spurred to provide a better education than competing DPSs in order to attract students. Private schools face similar incentives but because they charge tuition they are not financially accessible to some families. Private choice programs seek to expand access to private schools and make them more competitive with DPSs by subsidizing the cost. Far from acting as a one-way street however competition may also induce a response by DPSs. When faced with the threat of losing students to a competitive charter or private school a DPS may work to improve its performance in order to retain students and the funding that comes with them As we explain in this chapter the design of school choice programs can help ensure that competition leads to benefits for all students. In theory choice programs could disproportionately entice away more advanced or more motivated students from the DPS system leaving behind struggling students who lose the benefits of interacting with their high-performing peers. Similar to the default method of school choice the ability to move to a more affluent area with better schools this might create segmentation by family background that harms some students who remain in the DPS system. However as we discuss these theoretical concerns are not borne out by empirical research in | Chapter  $ "     ) /  "   $ ./- $  0/ $ * )  * !   /0  ) /.   "   Years  // )  $ ) "  $ )  "  -/ )  / # * " #  / #          # * * '     )  Percent   ' $    # * * '   $ " )    ' $    # * * '   # * )  $  /   # * * ' * (  # * * '   *     / $ * )  '   ) /  ! *      / $ * )   /  / $ ./ $  part because most school choice programs include design features that avoid such outcomes by targeting eligibility or providing more generous resources to relatively disadvantaged students In the last section of the chapter we review the empirical evidence on the impact of school choice programs. For students participating in these programs achievement results as measured by test scores are mixed although several studies find large positive results for minority and low-income students. We explain that some positive outcomes of school choice emerge later in a child s development through higher educational attainment and studies of these longer-term outcomes are generally more positive. Thus policymakers should consider a broad range of outcomes when evaluating efforts to promote higher education quality through school choice. We also discuss studies of school choice relating to racial and ethnic integration longer-term nonacademic outcomes and fiscal effects. Finally in terms of the impact on students who remain in their residentially assigned DPS we discuss emerging empirical research suggesting that all students can benefit from the expansion of school choice programs in their local district regardless of whether they participate themselves in the programs or decide to remain in their DPS. Thus choice can be a tide that lifts all boats not because of the inherent superiority of any one school type over another but rather because competition pressures all schools to improve quality and deliver value Overview of School Choice Programs and Federal Policy In this section we describe the main types of private and public choice programs. Each type has unique advantages which are highlighted in their Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition | respective subsections. We then provide examples of school choice in five regions of the country. Finally we discuss Federal actions including actions taken by the Trump Administration to support school choice Private Choice Programs There are three basic types of private choice programs : vouchers tax-credit scholarships and education savings accounts. Together these programs enroll hundreds of thousands of students ( figure ) ( EdChoice 2020a ) Eight States also offer an individual tax deduction or tax credit for certain educational expenses which are typically expended on one s own child Voucher programs provide a subsidy to parents to enroll their child in a private school. The voucher subsidy is typically set at a specific share of the public funding intended for that child s education. Though vouchers may not necessarily cover the full cost of tuition they make private education more affordable for parents. During the school year voucher programs operated in States the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. Together these programs served more than students ( EdChoice ) Many programs are targeted at low-income students or students with disabilities : seven States and the District of Columbia provide vouchers to low-income students and eleven States provide vouchers for students with disabilities Tax-credit scholarships allow students to receive private funding from nonprofit organizations to attend private schools or may pay for other educational expenses including tutoring online learning concurrent and dual enrollment for college credit and homeschooling expenses. Individuals and businesses may donate to these nonprofit organizations and receive a State income tax credit in return. States limit the total amount of tax credits that will be offered for the year and/or the amount that each business or individual can claim. Tax-credit scholarships often target low-income students students with disabilities or students assigned to a low-performing DPS. During the school year programs operated in States and served nearly students ( EdChoice ; Kaplan and Owings ) One of these programs the Montana tax-credit scholarship program became inoperable in late when the Montana Supreme Court ruled that the program violated the State s constitution. However that decision was reversed by the Supreme Court of the United States in June ( see box ) Education savings accounts ( ESAs ) are multiuse scholarships that allow participating parents to pay for current educational expenses such as private school tuition homeschool expenses contracted services provided by a public school or school district courses concurrent and dual enrollment for college credit special education services and therapies and tutoring as well as for future educational expenses such as college. During the school year five programs operated in five States supporting more than students Most States restrict eligibility to students with disabilities. Arizona s program | Chapter Box The Supreme Court s Espinoza v Montana Department of Revenue Decision In June the Supreme Court of the United States ( SCOTUS ) reversed the decision of the Montana Supreme Court in Espinoza v. Montana Department of Revenue ( Supreme Court of the United States ) The central judgment taken from Chief Justice Roberts s majority opinion is that a State need not subsidize private education. But once a State decides to do so it can not disqualify some private schools solely because they are religious. The decision automatically reinstated a Montana tax credit scholarship program that the State court had ended because it violated a no-aid provision also referred to as a Blaine amendment in the State s constitution SCOTUS found this particular application of the no-aid provision discriminatory against religious schools and their prospective pupils families and thus the application violated the U.S. Constitution s free exercise clause The original Blaine amendment was a proposed amendment to the U.S. Constitution that narrowly failed Senate approval in The Blaine amendment founded in anti-Catholic immigrant sentiment with the purpose of keeping schools Protestant would have expanded the reach of the Establishment Clause in the First Amendment to explicitly prohibit public spending on religious schools or organizations. Subsequently a majority of States added Blaine language to their State constitutions ; Montana became a State in and included a Blaine clause in its original constitution Montana s scholarship program passed in provided for tax credits worth a maximum of $ for gifts made to organizations that provide private school scholarships. All Montana students are eligible for the program However due to the litigation and the $ maximum gift only students in Montana received funds from the program in the school year also includes other groups of students including low-income students students assigned to a low-performing DPS students who are adopted or in foster care students who live on a tribal land and children of active-duty military or who were killed in the line of duty. The funding amount varies by State with some States setting a flat amount per pupil such as $ in Mississippi and others giving a portion of the State s education funds per pupil to the parents In some States higher scholarship amounts are provided to low-income students or students with disabilities. For example in Arizona students from households with income up to percent of the Federal poverty line receive percent of State per-pupil funding whereas other eligible students receive percent ( EdChoice 2020a ) Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition | Public Choice Programs Public choice programs include charter schools magnet schools and open enrollment policies. Charter schools are tuition-free public schools that operate independently from district public schools and thus have more autonomy over their educational programs hiring operations and budget in exchange for greater accountability. Although the programs differ by State many charter schools receive per-pupil funding that follows students from their residentially assigned DPS to the charter school. In addition to providing funding for charter schools State governments grant entities the role of charter authorizers Charter authorizers come in a variety of types including independent chartering boards nonprofit organizations institutions of higher education and State and local education agencies. The charter authorizers can then approve charter operators to run schools Most charter school operators are independent entities ( e.g. a group of teachers or parents or a local nonprofit or community organization ) but about percent of charter schools are operated by nonprofit or for-profit management organizations as part of larger networks of schools. Examples of such networks include the Knowledge Is Power Program ( KIPP ) and Charter Schools USA. Charter school operators are accountable to the organization that grants their charter and the schools are subject to periodic reviews ( Kaplan and Owings ; David ) Because public charter schools operate outside the restraints that bind a DPS system they can be more innovative than DPSs. Grube and Anderson ( ) discuss innovations such as Montessori schools and dual-language immersion schools. Charter schools based on the no-excuse approach have proved popular in urban settings. These schools include features such as uniforms strong discipline extended classroom hours and intensive tutoring ( Angrist et al. ) The KIPP Foundation is known for these schools In terms of enrollment charter schools typically have a mandate to accept all eligible applicants and to use a lottery to select students if they are oversubscribed. The charter school segment has grown rapidly. Between the and school years the number of charter schools increased by about percent with student enrollment increasing about percent. As of the fall of more than percent of students enrolled in public elementary and secondary schools attended these institutions. Enrollment in charter schools is generally higher in urban areas where minority and low-income student populations are higher ( NCES 2019a ) Magnet schools are public schools that offer specialized programs meant to bring together students with common interests or skillsets. These schools specialize in specific areas such as mathematics science and the performing arts. Some magnet schools also include niche subjects such as the culinary arts or aerospace engineering. Originally magnet schools were created to | Chapter foster desegregation by intentionally enrolling students from diverse populations ( OII ) Many magnet schools continue to serve this mission Enrollment in magnet schools is handled through various application frameworks. Some magnet schools have attendance zones where part of the student population is enrolled based on geographic location while the remaining slots are filled by applicants from throughout the rest of the district. Other magnet schools do not have attendance zones and instead grant all seats through an application process. Admission may also be handled through a lottery system ; some magnets use random lottery systems while others use weighted lottery systems that prioritize students with certain qualifications ( OII ; Ayscue et al. ) As of the academic year there were magnet schools in operation enrolling million students ( NCES 2019a ) Open enrollment school districts facilitate interdistrict or intradistrict public school choice which allows students to select the school they wish to attend instead of taking a DPS assignment. Intradistrict policies allow choice among schools within a student s designated district while interdistrict policies give students the option to attend schools within a State or larger defined region ( EdChoice 2020b ) Open enrollment programs help households by giving students access to higher-quality public schools while also providing competition between public schools. Still not all States and school districts cover the costs of traveling to nonneighborhood schools and this may pose a barrier to some families limiting their ability to exercise choice. As of most States had enacted policies related to open enrollment. In States school districts choose whether to participate while States mandate open enrollment in some cases ( ECS ) Other types of competition with DPSs include homeschooling and virtual school. The Department of Education defines homeschooling to include students who attend less than hours of public/private school weekly. As of million students were homeschooled representing percent of all students up from percent in ( figure ; NCES 2019b ) Virtual school may include a hybrid of in-person and online instruction or be a fully online curriculum run by either private or public schools. In about students were enrolled in virtual school ( NCES 2019a ) However during the coronavirus pandemic many more students are experiencing some form of virtual learning ( EdSurge ) Examples of School Choice Although school choice has grown in communities throughout the United States it is instructive to compare how school choice developed in specific places. Here we consider several examples where school choice has come to play a particularly prominent role in the education environment : Milwaukee Florida New Orleans Massachusetts and the District of Columbia Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition | Milwaukee. The Milwaukee Parental Choice Program was established in as a voucher program targeted at low-income students. Initially the program was restricted to families with incomes below percent of the Federal poverty line. Enrollment was also limited to percent of students in the Milwaukee public school district ( MPS ) with a randomized selection process for most students. The program did not initially include religious private schools which made up about percent of private school student enrollment in the area ( Witte ) After when the Wisconsin Supreme Court ruled that the inclusion of religious schools in the voucher program did not violate the Wisconsin Constitution the voucher program grew more quickly. Today the program has expanded to allow families with incomes up to percent of the poverty level has no enrollment cap and uses a lottery system for selection when particular schools are oversubscribed. As of there were schools participating and more than students enrolled ( EdChoice 2020c ) Milwaukee introduced charter schools in Today Milwaukee has charter schools with an enrollment of more than students ( Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction ) Some of the schools are authorized by the MPS while others are independent of it and are authorized by the University of Wisconsin Milwaukee and the City of Milwaukee. The independent charter schools have more autonomy than those run by the MPS and make up almost half of all charter schools in Milwaukee. Milwaukee s choice schools have spurred new educational approaches. In the MPS began to introduce changes such as opening new Montessori schools in response to the competitive pressure ( Grube and Anderson ) Florida. In the Florida legislature established the Florida Tax Credit Scholarship program. The program offers State tax credits to corporations that donate to nonprofit scholarship-funding organizations. The scholarships can be used for tuition and fees at private schools or for transportation to a public school outside a student s residential school district. When the program was initially passed only students with household incomes below percent of the Federal poverty line were eligible and the program expenditures were capped at $ million annually. The program has since been expanded so that students with household incomes between and percent of the Federal poverty line are eligible for partial scholarships while students from lowerincome families are eligible for full scholarships. In the school year nearly $ million in scholarships was awarded to students attending participating private schools ( Florida Department of Education 2019c ) Florida has also established other State-funded school choice programs The McKay Scholarship Program was established in as the Nation s first school voucher program for students with special needs. The program provides scholarships for students to attend a private school or to transfer to a different public school. In the program awarded about $ million in scholarships to students. The Gardiner Scholarship Program established in | Chapter is an ESA program that provides funds for special needs students to purchase products and services to support their learning. In the program awarded about $ million in scholarships to about students. The Family Empowerment Scholarship program which was established this past year provides scholarships for up to students from disadvantaged families to attend private schools with priority for students from households with incomes less than percent of the Federal poverty line. Florida also operates the Statewide virtual school known as the Florida Virtual School. This is the largest virtual school in the country with students enrolled during the school year. Finally Florida has a large public charter school sector that enrolled students in the school year ( Florida Department of Education 2019a 2019b ) New Orleans. Before Hurricane Katrina the New Orleans public schools had one of the worst performance records in the country. In the school year only percent of students in the New Orleans schools achieved proficient scores on State exams and high school graduation rates were about percent ( Teach New Orleans ) In the New Orleans Recovery School District ( RSD ) was created as a way to reform the public schools. In in response to the devastation left by Katrina the RSD assumed control of low-performing schools. With the help of $ million in funding from the Department of Education New Orleans began to open new charter schools Over time the RSD eliminated some of the low-performing schools and converted others to charters. By all the RSD schools were charter schools and nearly all educators had been replaced. Furthermore district public school attendance zones were eliminated making New Orleans the only all-choice school system in the country. The reforms led to dramatic gains among New Orleans schoolchildren. By the school year student proficiency on State exams had increased to percent. High school graduation rates college entry rates and college graduation rates all rose substantially ( Harris and Larsen ) In Louisiana also launched a voucher program for students in New Orleans known today as the Louisiana Scholarship Program. The program was targeted to children in failing schools with family incomes at or below percent of the poverty line. Over the first four years it grew slowly reaching about in annual vouchers in the school year. In the program was expanded to the rest of the State and by more than vouchers were awarded Massachusetts. In the Massachusetts legislature passed the Education Reform Act increasing the State s role in education. The act allowed for the creation of charter schools reserving the right to authorize them for the Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. In the school year charter schools operated in Massachusetts educating just under students. The schools have proved popular and spots are Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition | typically allocated by lottery. In the school year charter schools had waiting lists and there were nearly students on one or more of the lists ( Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education ) In Massachusetts passed legislation allowing charter schools with a successful track record to expand. In Boston the number of charter schools doubled as a result. Despite the large expansion a recent study finds that the new schools generated achievement gains on par with the original charter schools ( Cohodes Setren and Walters ) For grades through Boston s public school system also facilitates school choice through an assignment system known as the Home-Based School Assignment Policy ( Boston School Finder ) The policy seeks to find a balance between allowing students to attend a neighborhood school and giving more students a chance to attend high-quality schools. Families choose from a list of schools and are allowed to express preferences. A lottery mechanism is used to assign students to schools taking these preferences into account. Over time the mechanism has been adjusted in response to concerns about student travel times and persistent racial inequities ( Abdulkadiro lu et al. ) District of Columbia. The voucher program in the District of Columbia is the only private school choice program run by the Federal Government. Signed into law by President George W. Bush in the D.C. School Choice Incentive Act created the D.C. Opportunity Scholarship Program which is intended to improve education in the District of Columbia especially for disadvantaged students. Although Congress has continuously funded the program the Obama Administration sought to phase it out and prevented new students from enrolling in the and school years. However the Trump Administration has strongly supported the program and helped increase participation by more than percent between the and school years to more than students ( CRS ) In the school year vouchers are worth up to $ for K-8 students and up to $ for high school students. In addition to the voucher program Washington has a large public charter school sector that dates back to In the school year these schools enrolled more than students in grades pre K-12 and adult learning programs ( DCPCSB ) The Role of Federal Policy in School Choice In this subsection we discuss the role of Federal policy in school choice. We first provide an overview of the organization of K-12 education its funding and the Federal contribution. We then describe the main Federal policies that are related to school choice. Finally we highlight recent actions of the Trump Administration to further support and expand school choice State and local governments have the primary responsibility for K-12 education in the United States. Along with public and private organizations | Chapter  $ "      '   )  $ ) "    /0  ) /  ! *    ' $    $ (    )     * )      # * * '.     /  /   *  '  / *   / *   / *   / *   *  ( *  *     / $ * )  '   ) /  ! *      / $ * )   /  / $ ./ $  they establish new schools determine graduation standards and develop curricula ( U.S. Department of Education ) State and local governments also provide the primary financing for K-12 education. Of the $ billion allocated for public elementary and secondary education for the school year the majority was allocated from State and local governments percent and percent respectively. Only $ billion ( percent ) was from Federal sources ( NCES 2020a ) More than half of Federal funding from the Department of Education supports students with low family incomes or disabilities. A large share of Federal funds about percent is spent on Title I grants which supplement State and local funding in school districts with a high share of low-income students. An additional percent of Federal funding focuses on children with disabilities ( NCES 2020b ) Because States have different demographics Federal funding per student varies by State. Figure shows the Federal funding per student for public primary and secondary schools by State ( NCES 2019c ) The Federal Government also provides resources to support school choice programs. The Department of Education oversees the key Federal programs that promote choice. These include the Magnet Schools Assistance Program and the Charter Schools Program as well as the District of Columbia Opportunity Scholarship Program discussed above ( U.S. Department of Education 2019a 2019b 2020a ) The Magnet Schools Assistance Program provides funding for magnet schools that are part of an approved plan to desegregate schools. These magnet schools are designed to bring students from different backgrounds Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition |  $ "    (   * !   #  -/    # * * '.   )   / *  Number of charter schools opened  * /  ! )      / #     Not funded by the CSP Funded by the CSP  )      / #      *   U.S.   -/ ( ) /  * !      / $ * )  * /        #  -/    # * * '.   * "  (  Number of schools together to reduce minority group isolation in schools with many minority students. As discussed magnet schools are typically focused on specific academic areas such as science technology engineering and mathematics known as STEM ; the arts ; language immersion or implement alternative teaching philosophies such as international baccalaureate programs or Montessori methods ( U.S. Department of Education 2020a ) The Charter Schools Program ( CSP ) was established in to encourage the formation of new charter schools. Its initial budget of $ million had grown to to $ million as of In percent of CSP funding went toward the creation of new charter schools although the program also supports the expansion of existing charter schools. Between the and school years the majority of new charter schools were started using funding from the CSP ( figure ) Charter schools funded by the CSP serve a higher percentage of Hispanic and Black students than residentially assigned district public schools ( table ) ( U.S. Department of Education 2019b ) Some Federal programs interact with other Federal initiatives to enhance the total impact of Federal Government action. For example earlier in the Department of Education provided an additional $ million through the CSP targeting charter schools in Opportunity Zones. These distressed areas have high poverty rates and low incomes. Currently less than percent of Opportunity Zones have at least one charter school. Additional funding for charter schools will complement tax incentives in Opportunity Zones to spur much-needed economic opportunity in these areas ( U.S. Department of Education 2020b ) A recent CEA report provides an initial assessment of the Opportunity Zone program ( CEA ) The Trump Administration has sought to further aid the expansion of State-based school choice. President Trump supports the proposed Education Freedom Scholarships and Opportunity Act which would give Federal tax-credits | Chapter Table Demographics of CSP-Funded Schools and District Public Schools     )    S  # * * '.  n    /0  ) /   ) / $  ) $   '   &  # $ /  $  )  *  *  ( *     ( $   )  )  $  )  '  .&     / $   $ $  )    / $    $ ! $   '  )   * /  '  ) (   * !  ./0  ) /  ( * "  # $   $  ) / $  ''4  A.. $ " )       n    /0  ) /   ) /  *   U.S.   -/ ( ) /  * !      / $ * )  * /        #  -/    # * * '.   * "  (  to individuals and businesses that contribute to organizations that grant scholarships to students. States would designate qualified expenses which can be for primary secondary career and technical education. Expenses that might be recognized include advanced remedial and elective course fees ; tuition at private schools ; apprenticeships and industry certifications ; concurrent and dual enrollment for college credit ; private and home education ; special education services and therapies ; transportation to education providers outside of a family s zoned school ; tutoring especially for students in low-performing schools ; and summer and after-school education programs ( U.S. Department of Education 2019c ) Individual taxpayers would be allowed to redeem a credit of up to percent of their adjusted gross income and corporations would be allowed to redeem a credit of up to percent of their taxable income. States would have the responsibility to recognize scholarship-granting organizations and to decide the nature of the scholarships and eligibility criteria. For States with existing tax-credit scholarship programs the program would incentivize additional private donations. State participation would be voluntary ( Office of Senator Ted Cruz ) For a discussion of related legislation see box The Trump Administration has also supported school choice as part of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) The TCJA expanded the purview of the Qualified Tuition Program known as a program. Dating back to the 1990s these programs have long allowed an individual to contribute money to an investment account from which a student s expenses for higher education ( college or vocational school ) can be paid without the earnings on the contributions being taxed. The TCJA allows plans to be used to pay for primary and secondary education as well. Funds can be withdrawn tax-free to pay for up to $ in tuition per beneficiary per year at any public private or parochial school ( CRS ) The program offers an alternative to Coverdell Education Savings Accounts. Coverdell ESAs similarly allow individuals to contribute money to an account that grows tax-free for use on qualified educational expenses for a student. However there is a limit on how much can Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition | Box The School Choice Now Act As part of ongoing COVID-relief legislative efforts Senator Tim Scott and Senator Lamar Alexander introduced the School Choice Now Act on July If passed the bill would authorize the Department of Education to allocate percent of its emergency CARES funding to States in the form of emergency education grants. The bill would also encourage donations to certain scholarship-granting organizations by establishing Federal tax credits Bill proponents point out that more than mostly Catholic private schools which enrolled more than total students have permanently closed because of the coronavirus. Adding all or even a significant portion of these students to the public school population could strain alreadydelicate local government budgets at a critical time ( McShane ) be contributed per year ( currently $ ) and a phase-out by annual income of the contributor ( CRS ) School Choice and Competition As we have seen school choice programs have expanded significantly in the United States over the last three decades. In this section we explain how school choice promotes competition among schools for students which can ultimately lead to improved educational experiences for all children. We begin by explaining how mobility-based school choice has long existed in the DPS system for affluent families that can afford to move to higher-quality school districts. We next discuss how school choice programs introduce a different form of competition that can raise the educational quality received by all students including those in less affluent neighborhoods whether they participate in a choice program or remain in a DPS Competition between School Districts Even before the school choice movement parents exercised substantial discretion over where their children attend school as families with the means to do so can move to higher-quality school districts. Tiebout ( ) describes how local governments compete with one another by adjusting levels of public good provision to meet the demand of potential residents. The model implies that families with the financial means to do so will live in certain kinds of communities based on their preferences for various public goods including education. Localities will generally face pressure to increase quality subject to a given level of cost in order to increase their number of taxpaying residents In the United States school quality is an important factor for many parents in determining where to live. According to a survey more than half ( percent ) of recent homebuyers with children considered the quality of schools | Chapter when making their decision on the neighborhood in which to live ( National Association of Realtors ) Studies of parental choices find that preferences for school quality are multidimensional with parents placing different weights on factors such as academic performance teaching quality class size safety and discipline ( Chakrabarti and Roy ) Although this form of competition allows more affluent families to seek out a higher-quality education the benefits may be financially out of reach for many less-affluent families. In fact a Senate committee report finds that the median home price in neighborhoods with the highest-quality schools is about $ which is four times larger than the median price of $ in neighborhoods with the lowest-quality schools ( JEC ) In addition this form of competition can potentially have negative consequences for lower-income and minority students when it leads to increased segregation along racial and income lines ( Urquiola ; Rothstein ) Two important lessons emerge from the research on traditional mobilitybased competition. First because of the financial barriers that lower-income students families face to moving competition between districts for residents is likely insufficient on its own to substantially improve school quality for such students. Thus additional school choice within a district may be needed to foster the procompetitive effects that hold schools accountable for delivering better outcomes. Second to avoid negative consequences for students who remain in a residentially assigned DPS school choice programs should be designed so that schools compete on their value added and not on their ability to siphon off students with more advantaged backgrounds from DPSs Nonetheless even when some selective sorting occurs school choice programs may still outperform the traditional mobility-based system that relies on sorting across neighborhoods based in part on family affluence Designing School Choice Systems We next explain why carefully designed school choice programs can improve the quality of education for all students within a district. In early research on school choice Hoxby ( ) developed models to explain why exposing DPSs to competition can lead to better schools. The models characterize decisionmaking for different types of schools but all of them rest on the basic assumption that for a given out-of-pocket cost parents choose the school they value the most. This power of choice is the mechanism by which the beneficial effects of competition come in to play To illustrate consider the case of a charter school that can receive a government payment for each student it attracts away from a DPS although it is prevented from charging additional fees. Because the school can not compete on price it must compete on quality. By increasing its quality the school can attract more students from DPSs and thus earn more revenue. Because quality is expensive to produce the school faces a trade-off between attracting more Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition | students and keeping costs down. Where the school falls on this trade-off will depend on the structure of both demand ( how much parents and students value quality ) and supply ( how expensive quality is to supply ) At a minimum however a charter school must provide parents and students with at least as much value as the DPS This direct effect of school choice on program participants is distinguished from the indirect competitive effect that arises when a DPS responds to the competitive pressure from a charter or other choice school. As discussed by Hoxby ( ) if a DPS loses funding when students enroll in a different school it should have an incentive to retain students. The strength of the effect will depend both on how much funding is lost and how many students are threatening to leave. If the competitive pressure is not robust a DPS may not react to it. For example choice programs that cap enrollment at low levels may not place much pressure on DPSs that are to a large extent guaranteed enrollment. This is quite different from the direct effect of school choice : any charter school no matter how small must compete with DPSs in order to enroll students When DPSs respond to competitive pressure from choice programs by increasing their value added their students will benefit. However it is not axiomatic that school choice will inevitably improve educational quality through competition in the same way that is often true in other markets. This is because of the important role that peer effects play in education provision. In most markets the quality of a service that one person receives is not directly affected by the characteristics of the other people that consume that service. However in education students are both consumers and producers of education quality not merely passive consumers because of how peers have a direct impact on the education quality received by their classmates. As a result school choice reforms that induce shifts in student sorting across schools could have large effects both on the students who leave and on those who remain in residentially assigned DPSs because of changes in peer composition. If a school choice program attracts highly motivated or affluent students it might have negative effects on students who remain in DPSs surrounded by less-motivated lessaffluent peers However as actually implemented school choice programs often incorporate features designed to prevent such an outcome from occurring and the empirical evidence finds little support for these theoretical concerns For example voucher programs often restrict participation to students from low-income families or provide resources that are more generous to relatively disadvantaged students which directly limits the potential for income-related sorting. Designs that require oversubscribed schools to use lotteries to allocate slots also limit the potential for selective sorting. The result is that schools will compete based on value added rather than on their ability to select students In the United States many school choice programs incorporate these design | Chapter features ( Epple Romano and Urquiola ) Expanding school choice to more students while providing more generous assistance to disadvantaged families could further build upon these benefits ( Epple and Romano ) Evidence on the Impact of School Competition Finally we turn to the important question of whether the theoretical procompetitive benefits of school choice are borne out empirically. This evidence can help determine whether school choice program designs in different contexts have in fact promoted positive student outcomes and it can help inform better school choice policies in the future. We first discuss the literature that examines the direct effects of school choice programs on the students who participate in them. We then discuss the literature that examines the indirect competitive effects of school choice programs on DPS students Direct Value-Added Effects That charter schools must compete with DPSs is so basic that there is a sense in which we should not be surprised by evidence that they do. Simply put if a charter school or voucher program does not offer parents and students additional value relative to the DPS then it is unlikely to thrive ( Hoxby ) Consistent with this a recent survey finds that a larger share of children in private schools ( percent ) or in chosen public schools ( percent ) have parents who report being very satisfied with their schools compared with children in assigned public schools ( percent ) ( NCES 2019b ) That said there is value for policymakers in understanding which types of school choice programs have worked best and for whom as they test new approaches and encourage expansion of the most promising programs. Accordingly a large body of literature has arisen to study the direct effects of school choice programs on their students. In our discussion we divide the literature into studies of academic achievement as measured by test scores studies of academic attainment such as graduation rates or college enrollment studies of racial and ethnic integration and studies of longer-term nonacademic outcomes. We also discuss studies of the fiscal impact of choice programs Much of the literature on academic achievement focuses on student performance on national or Statewide tests. This may be surprising in light of the small role such tests play in the educational experiences of students. However these test scores are more amenable to empirical study than measures that vary widely across schools such as grades or pass rates for courses. Tests that are taken by most students are also more amenable for study than scores on national tests such as the Scholastic Aptitude Test that are taken by only a subset of high-performing students ( Hoxby ) National accountability systems also emphasize performance on national and Statewide tests. However Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition | test scores have been criticized as being a poor measure of the educational experience ( Hitt McShane and Wolf ) For private school choice programs although results vary by individual study Epple Romano and Urquiola ( ) conclude that most studies of voucher programs in the United States have not revealed large or statistically significant test score improvements for students in general. However multiple studies uncover substantial test score improvements among Black students For example Mayer and others ( ) find that the School Choice Scholarship Foundation voucher program in New York City did not yield higher test scores on average for all students ; but for Black students test scores increased by about percentage points. One notable exception to the positive findings for Black students is the Louisiana Scholarship Program ( LSP ) Abdulkadiro lu Pathak and Walters ( ) find that the LSP led to a large decrease in math test scores among participants. They link this to the selection of low-quality low-tuition schools into the program pointing to the importance of program design for the success of private school choice For charter school programs Epple Romano and Zimmer ( ) conclude that researchers have not reached a consensus on their effectiveness for academic achievement. Broad studies including those by the Stanford Center for Research on Education Outcomes ( CREDO ) do not reveal large or statistically significant test score improvements for charter school students on average ( these studies compare test scores of students in charter schools with those of students that have similar observable attributes virtual twins in the fallback DPS ) However numerous studies of programs in urban areas find large statistically significant gains. In particular most studies of oversubscribed charter schools find positive effects on test scores. These studies are noted for the strength of their research design ( they compare students who win the lottery with students that have similar observable attributes who lose the lottery ; Epple Romano and Zimmer ) A recent study of a Massachusetts law allowing charter schools with a successful track record to expand finds that the new schools generate gains on par with the original schools ( Cohodes Setren and Walters ) A study of Texas charter schools suggests that the effectiveness of charter schools is increasing over time as successful charter schools expand and poorly performing schools exit ( Baude et al. ) In both Massachusetts and Texas many of the successful charter schools that have expanded use the no excuses approach which features strong discipline extended classroom instruction and intensive tutoring. Of note in a Boston study Walters ( ) finds evidence that charter expansion programs are particularly effective when they target students who are unlikely to apply including low achievers as these students have the most to gain In comparison with test score studies studies of educational attainment on the whole find more encouraging results. This is true for both voucher programs and charter programs ( Epple Romano and Urquiola ; Epple | Chapter Romano and Zimmer ) For example in a study of the Washington Opportunity Scholarship Program Wolf and others ( ) estimate that vouchers raise high school graduation rates by percentage points. As with test scores vouchers appear to have an even more beneficial impact on the graduation rates of Black students. Shifting attention to college Chingos and Peterson ( ) identify a 6-percentage-point boost to enrollment rates among Black students offered vouchers in New York City although they find less evidence of an effect among a broader group of students. Sass and others ( ) find that students in Florida s charter schools stay in college longer than students in DPSs reinforcing related findings by Booker Sass and Zimmer ( ) Dobbie and Fryer ( ) find that students admitted to a high-performing charter school in the Harlem neighborhood of New York City are more likely to graduate from high school on time and enroll in college immediately after graduation although they ultimately attain about the same amount of college education as DPS students The divergence between the results on test scores and the results on educational attainment leads some researchers to question whether test scores are a useful yardstick for evaluating school performance. Hitt McShane and Wolf ( ) review studies of a wide variety of school choice programs that measure test scores and educational attainment as part of the same study They find little within-study correlation between results on test scores and educational attainment. Epple Romano and Zimmer ( ) also comment on this divergence pointing to Wolf and others ( ) as an example of a study that finds no significant effects on test scores but strong positive effects on high school graduation rates Some studies address the impact of school choice on racial and ethnic integration. By separating the decision about where to attend school from the decision about where to live school choice has the potential to reduce the role of income and race disparities in providing educational opportunity. Many school choice programs began in areas with high concentrations of minority and low-income students specifically to serve the needs of underserved communities with often poorly performing DPSs. As a result charter schools educate a disproportionate number of such students relative to the national average. In the school year Black and Hispanic students accounted for percent and percent of charter school enrollment respectively while accounting for only and percent respectively of enrollment across all public schools ( NCES 2019d ) Regarding the impact of school choice on racial and ethnic stratification Epple Romano and Zimmer ( ) discuss a large body of research and conclude that charter schools and public schools exhibit similar degrees of racial and ethnic segregation with charter schools more likely to have a disproportionately nonwhite student population and DPSs more likely to have a disproportionately White student population. Moreover Zimmer and others Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition | ( ) conclude that charter schools have only modest effects on the racial mix of schools. Butler and others ( ) analyze the decision to attend charter schools and find a role for socioeconomic characteristics but not race as a driving factor. In terms of voucher programs a recent study by Egalite Mills and Wolf ( ) assessing the Louisiana Scholarship Program finds that most students using the vouchers reduce racial stratification in the public schools that they leave and have only small effects on racial stratification in the schools to which they transfer. In addition in school districts under Federal desegregation orders voucher transfers cause a large drop in DPSs racial stratification levels but have no impact on private schools Another body of literature focuses on the long-run benefit of school choice programs on outcomes such as civic engagement and criminal behavior. These studies are relatively rare because they require data from a period of many years. Two studies of the Milwaukee Parental Choice voucher program are worthy of note. DeAngelis and Wolf ( ) use data from the Milwaukee program to compare young adult voting behavior between program participants and similar students in DPS. They find no evidence of statistically different voting patterns helping to allay potential concerns that private choice programs might provide less instruction in citizenship skills. DeAngelis and Wolf ( ) use the data from the Milwaukee program to analyze the prevalence of criminal activity. They find some evidence that voucher program participants are less likely to be involved in criminal activity relative to DPS students including a large and statistically significant reduction in property damage convictions Dobbie and Fryer ( ) find that for students admitted by lottery to a highperforming charter school in Harlem New York City female students are less likely to be pregnant as teenagers and male students are less likely to be incarcerated in comparison with similar students who are not admitted The discussion so far has focused on student outcomes in school choice programs. However another relevant question is how much money is spent to achieve these outcomes. Several studies find that charter schools and voucher programs educate program participants at a lower cost per-pupil than DPSs DeAngelis and others ( ) find that across metropolitan areas public charter schools received on average $ less revenue per pupil than DPSs in the fiscal year. In a study of voucher programs Leuken ( ) finds that the voucher programs generated average savings of almost $ per voucher recipient for State and local budgets in fiscal year Indirect Procompetitive Effects Finally we turn to studies of the indirect procompetitive effects of school choice programs on DPSs. Such studies face several challenges. First the penetration of choice programs in many areas of the United States is simply too small for robust procompetitive effects to have a reasonable chance of emerging. A DPS is little affected if it is only at risk of losing a handful of students | Chapter to a choice program in which case it does not face much market pressure to improve. Where school choice programs have reached sufficient penetration to enable study researchers must try to distinguish competitive efforts by a DPS to improve its quality from effects related to changes in the DPS student composition and effects related to changes in DPS funding. However the recent growth of school choice programs is enabling a growing number of welldesigned empirical evaluations Figlio and Hart ( ) and Figlio Hart and Karbownik ( ) study the impact on DPS students of the Tax Credit Scholarship program in Florida. The latter study focuses on the scaling up of the program in recent years. They exploit the fact that some students are more exposed to this expansion due to the differing availability of nearby private schools before the policy is implemented. Public school students who are more heavily exposed to competition experience improved test scores as well as fewer suspensions and absences Positive effects of increased competition from private schools are largest for students from low-income families whose parents have lower educational attainment. In addition procompetitive effects on public schools increase over time as the program scales up. Similarly Chakrabarti ( ) finds that the expansion of the private voucher program to religious schools in Milwaukee leads to larger increases in public school test scores. In a review of the literature Epple Romano and Urquiola ( ) conclude that studies generally find that private school vouchers improve the performance of students in DPSs They also find little evidence that school choice gives rise to adverse sorting There are examples where the students who leave DPSs for a voucher program are of higher lower or equal ability relative to the peers they leave behind Moreover because voucher programs are often targeted to lower-income families voucher students tend to come from families with lower or equal income to their peers in the DPSs that they leave behind. The empirical evidence on the positive returns from scaling up voucher programs and the absence of adverse sorting effects suggests that many more students could benefit from an expansion of voucher programs Positive competitive effects also arise for charter schools. Gilraine Petronijevic and Singleton ( ) find that when North Carolina lifted caps on new charter schools students who lived closer to new charter schools experienced larger gains in test scores. Ridley and Terrier ( ) find that the Massachusetts reform that raised the cap on charter schools led to increased spending per pupil in DPSs and a shift in DPS spending from support services to instruction and they similarly find small positive effects of charter schools on the test scores of DPS students. Dispelling concerns related to sorting and peer effects Epple Romano and Zimmer ( ) synthesize the findings from several studies showing that students who transfer to charter schools have a similar or slightly lower ability relative to the DPS from which they are drawn In a survey of further research on this topic vis- -vis charter schools Anderson Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition | ( ) finds that charter schools often serve lower- or similarly performing students than DPSs Thus the evidence from voucher and charter school studies alike suggest that there is little evidence to warrant fears about DPS students being left behind. Instead such students tend to benefit from the improvement in their own schools that comes about from choice-induced educational competition As a final note we return to the question of the fiscal effect of school choice programs on DPSs. As discussed several studies find that public charter schools and voucher programs educate students with less per-pupil public funding than DPSs. This implies that when a student switches from the DPS to a choice program the school district realizes savings that could be used to improve DPS education although there may be an adjustment period before a district can realize those savings ( Epple Romano and Zimmer ) To date there has been relatively little research on this topic ; but see Bifulco and Reback ( ) and Ladd and Singleton ( ) for case studies of New York and North Carolina. Buerger and Bifulco ( ) find that New York State school districts with larger charter school enrollments experience decreases in the cost of providing DPS education both in the short run and the long run though districts with only a small charter school presence can experience short-run increases in costs that are subsequently offset by efficiency gains. Some States provide temporary funding increases to DPSs to help them adjust to charter school expansion including Massachusetts as documented by Ridley and Terrier ( ) Conclusion School choice programs have grown dramatically over the past years as evidence has accumulated about the benefits they provide. Parents are increasingly choosing alternatives to their assigned DPS as they seek out a higher-quality educational experience for their children. Federal policy has long supported school choice both in the Trump Administration and in earlier administrations on both sides of the political aisle School choice can level the playing field and provide enhanced educational opportunity to all families particularly when implemented to maximize competition and facilitate participation by disadvantaged students. The alternative to this modern form of school choice for everyone is the traditional system of school choice for the affluent and mobile whereby those with financial means relocate to districts with better schools. In the traditional system lower-income and minority students are disproportionately left behind in lower-performing schools while other families may move away from neighborhoods that they enjoy solely to gain access to better schools. School choice programs that provide students with choices of public charter magnet private or home school can improve quality for all students including those | Chapter who remain in DPSs that are forced to adapt because of competitive pressure Emerging empirical evidence has identified these positive effects at work in the United States As school choice continues to expand lessons from existing programs can inform ways to maximize the benefits for children from all backgrounds Research suggests that low-income and minority students tend to enjoy the greatest benefits and the evidence on procompetitive effects suggests that substantial gains are possible from scaling up school choice. As a result continuing to grow school choice programs is a promising way to reduce opportunity gaps and create a level playing field for all children. Research also suggests that a broader set of metrics should be used to assess school choice programs beyond standardized test scores in light of evidence that such choice programs can improve outcomes later in life. Parents themselves are also a source of wisdom in that they can incorporate other aspects of quality into their decisionmaking than the criteria that are officially measured. Ultimately a focus on expanding opportunity for all students combined with a commitment to innovation that is grounded in evidence can help improve educational quality for all children Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition | x Chapter Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights The United States has been on the cutting edge of space exploration since the dawn of the space age and has become the world leader in commercial activity in space. In the 20th century the United States became the first and only nation to send individuals to the Moon. After the end of the Apollo Program the United States pioneered the Space Shuttle the world s first reusable spacecraft. Now American engineers have become the first to demonstrate and operationalize the capabilities of commercial spacecraft for orbital cargo delivery first-stage reusability and human spaceflight In the 21st century the United States has ushered in a new era of space exploration based on public-private partnerships and the success of private sector investment in space technologies. The Trump Administration recognizes the opportunities and benefits afforded by this new era and has advanced policies that encourage private sector innovation collaboration with commercial companies and a regulatory environment more conducive to investment in space. In doing so this Administration is not only accelerating the development of the today s space industry ; it is also laying the foundation for a viable space economy that can continue to develop and expand in the coming decades This past year has seen historic advances in spaceflight and space policy even in the midst of the global COVID-19 pandemic. After the reestablishment of USSPACECOM as a combatant command for the space domain on August President Trump established the U.S. Space Force ( USSF ) the sixth branch of the U.S. military on December The mission of USSF is to organize train and equip space forces to protect U.S. and allied interests in space and to provide space capabilities to the joint force ( USSF n.d. ) In addition on May and November in major milestones for the partnership between the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) and the private sector SpaceX launched a total of six astronauts from Cape Canaveral to the International Space Station ( ISS ) These missions which represent the first commercial human spaceflights in history are an important step for the private sector s role in the space economy In support of these achievements the Trump Administration has advanced policies that strengthen investor confidence in the space economy to enable the private space sector to flourish. These new policies are creating an environment that spurs investment in innovation and encourages the responsible and sustainable use of space resources. In this spirit the Administration has released the Artemis Accords a practical set of principles that will create a safe peaceful prosperous and open future in space. The initial tranche of signatories to these accords was announced on October and included several other major spacefaring nations and international partners with more to follow With regard to the economic theory of property rights and the large and diverse empirical literature on property rights the Council of Economic Advisers finds substantial evidence that improving investors expectations in a novel economic sector like space increases investment in that sector leading to more innovation and greater benefits. The CEA estimates that private space investment could potentially double in the next eight years due to President Trump s executive actions and other enhancements of property rights in space M uch of the economic growth over the last five hundred years has occurred because economic actors have forgone present consumption to invest in the future. In support of this a core tenet of the common law tradition is to ensure that future gains from investment accrue to the entities or individuals that make the investment and take on the subsequent risk. A fundamental role of government in this process is to set rules that create expectations about what the future holds for investors. Property rights form a legal and economic basis to support investment and provide a structure for the | Chapter allocation and management of resources. Although new norms and systems will evolve with the growth of space exploration the institution of property rights will be critical to encourage investment for the long-term development of the space economy This chapter highlights the Trump Administration s actions to enhance space property rights and maintain the United States position on the frontier of innovation and economic development in space. A cornerstone of the Administration s policy is to encourage private investment in partnership with the Federal Government. The venture capital firm Space Capital estimated that companies invested $ billion in space activities in The CEA projects that private investment in the space sector will reach $ billion a year by as a result of the policies undertaken to clarify and improve the enforcement of property rights in space Property rights can be thought of as a bundle of sticks with each stick providing an aspect of the underlying rights that the owner can expect to receive ( Barzel ) Sticks in this case could refer to the ability to transfer ownership of an asset the right to earn income from the asset or the right to restrict others from performing certain acts near the asset. As more sticks are added to the bundle property rights are further specified so that the owner can form more precise expectations of the value of a given investment. As activity has developed in space resources new questions have arisen about property rights in space. The current system of international agreements does not require major changes but it does need carefully drafted additions and amendments for clarification ( Hertzfeld and von der Dunk ) Recent actions by the Trump Administration seek to provide this clarification This chapter illustrates how recent U.S. space policy focuses on ensuring certainty and predictability for private investments in opportunities beyond Earth. The first section discusses current issues in space policy and the second one addresses recent policy efforts and explains how they provide enhanced security and enforcement of property rights. The subsequent sections explain the economics of property rights theory and review the economic literature on how improving property rights affects investment. The chapter then projects future investment into space activities accounting for the effect of Federal Government policies on investment behavior. The chapter concludes by discussing the benefits of selecting the United States as the flag of choice that is the country whose frameworks a business finds most desirable for space activity and how regulatory reform makes the market more competitive and innovative Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | Current Issues in Space Policy and the Space Economy Today most economic activity in space consists of satellites transmitting telecommunications and remote-sensing data to devices on Earth and the rockets launching these satellites into orbit. This orbital network of satellites has facilitated a variety of civil and economic activity on Earth including weather forecasting climate modeling city planning emergency response precision agriculture satellite television satellite radio global broadband Internet and even app-based ridesharing services At this point in time predicting some future industries in space is possible but history suggests that anticipating all the emerging industries within the space economy is impossible. However we can use recent developments in current technologies such as in the satellite and rocket launch industries to hypothesize what the future of the space economy could look like. For example the process of mineral extraction on the Moon and other celestial bodies may become profitable as the costs of extraction fall and innovations in space manufacturing habitation and propulsion create a demand for resource availability in space. Space-based solar power is also a possibility because orbiting solar panels can harness the sun s rays before they dissipate in Earth s atmosphere and can generate more electricity than terrestrially based solar panels. Finally private companies are hoping to create a market for space tourism through partnerships with the Federal Government and innovations that lower costs providing an experience quite literally like none other on Earth The beginnings of the space economy date to the mid 20th century when the Soviet Union sent Sputnik into orbit in spurring a flurry of investment into the space race from national governments. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) began operations in sent the first American into space by and landed the first human on the Moon in These accomplishments occurred in parallel with a number of new United Nations treaties as countries around the globe contemplated the prospect of widespread activity in space. Because there were few profitable opportunities for the private sector at the time the U.S. Government laid the groundwork for a space economy and the industry developed based on projects funded by taxpayers ( Weinzierl ) Most space activity in the 1970s and 1980s involved the launch and operation of satellites for commercial telecommunications reconnaissance and surveillance purposes. In the first satellite of the forthcoming Global Positioning System ( GPS ) was launched into orbit ( Pace et al. ) The Department of Defense initially utilized the GPS constellation purely for military purposes. However in the United States announced that it would make GPS s standard positioning service available to the general public at no cost. This event initiated private civilian uses of GPS that have since led to the | Chapter Figure NASA Outlays and U.S. Private Investment Dollars ( billions ) NASA outlays U.S. private investment Sources : Office of Management and Budget ; Space Capital ; CEA calculations Note : NASA = National Aeronautics and Space Administration creation of countless new firms technologies and applications. O Connor and others ( ) estimate that GPS has generated about $ trillion in economic benefits since being made available for civilian and commercial use Although governments initially funded all space activities the private satellite industry grew throughout the second half of the 20th century as companies realized the market opportunity for satellite services such as telecommunications broadcasting and data transmission. More recently private industry has begun to offer other products and services that had been primarily owned and operated by the Federal Government such as space launches crew transportation and remote sensing. For example since the Space Shuttle was retired in private companies such as SpaceX and United Launch Alliance have provided launch services for civil commercial and national security space systems. Figure shows that nongovernmental equity investment in U.S. space companies is rising in relation to the level of NASA outlays This shift from government launch vehicles toward commercial space launch services accelerated in when NASA began the $ million Commercial Orbital Transportation Services ( COTS ) program. The COTS program operated on fixed-price payments rather than cost-plus procurement which is intended to incentivize innovation and shift NASA s role from being Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | Table Composition of Global Space Economy Percentage of Spending Space ( billions of dollars ) Economy Industry Good or Service Satellite Total Satellite ground equipment Television Fixed satellite services Satellite manufacturing Satellite radio Launch services Broadband Commercial remote sensing MSS Total U.S. Government s space budget European space budget China s space budget Russia s space budget Rest of world s space budget Japan s space budget Commercial space flight India s space budget Nonsatellite Sources : Bryce Space and Technology ; CEA calculations an owner and operator to being a customer for resupply services to the International Space Station. This method of procurement and the use of other contracting mechanisms have been gaining traction elsewhere in the space industry in an effort to decrease costs and benefit from private innovation ( box ) Market competition has since provided stronger incentives for innovation than the existing government monopoly on launches. NASA estimates that the use of commercial services for ISS resupply services alone has saved taxpayers between $ billion and $ billion since Annual estimates of the size of the space economy incorporating both public and private activities range from $ billion to $ billion. The current state of commercial activities still consists primarily of satellites and satellite services with industry revenues of nearly $ billion as of making up percent of the space economy ( table ) NASA s activities and procurements still drive a large amount of economic activities across the Nation however | Chapter Figure Nongovernmental Equity Investment in Commercial Space Companies Dollars ( billions ) U.S China France India Indonesia U.K Singapore Sources : Space Capital ; CEA calculations with NASA s overall economic impact estimated at over $ billion for financial year based on IMPLAN analysis. Recent technological developments will allow new industries to mature. For example dramatic reductions in the cost of space launches are increasing the economic viability of private space activities such as tourism and mining. Technologies enabling the Moon Mars and asteroid surface operations will mark critical milestones for the next generation of space exploration. The reduced cost of access to space will broaden the set of countries that are able to take advantage of the opportunities in outer space and ensure benefit to people around the globe. Furthermore in situ resource utilization of space resources derived from celestial bodies themselves for potable water breathable air and spacecraft propellant will allow longer-term survival away from Earth s surface. Once long-term survival in cislunar space is viable further explorations deeper into space will be possible. And once technologies advance to make long-term survival viable government policies clarifying property rights will provide the needed framework for a flourishing space economy Figure shows nongovernmental equity investment in space companies from through Most private investment in space companies has occurred in the United States and China with smaller levels of investment occurring in European and Asian economies. Investment in commercial space companies is only a small percentage of the total space economy but it reflects Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | Box Public-Private Partnerships for Human Spaceflight The year has been historic for NASA as the SpaceX Crew Dragon Demo-2 mission marked the first commercially developed crewed mission to the International Space Station as part of NASA s Commercial Crew Program NASA has emphasized the implementation of public-private partnerships to advance space exploration through collaborations with the developing commercial space sector. After NASA s Space Shuttle program ended in the United States relied on the Russian-designed and operated Soyuz spacecraft to send American astronauts into space. However the development of domestic commercial alternatives has allowed the U.S. government to regain its domestic human launch capability while supporting U.S. commercial companies The Commercial Crew Program which supported the Crew Dragon mission by providing SpaceX with development funds also used fixed-price contracts with NASA working as a partner rather than supervisor. Cost reimbursement or cost-plus contracts had been more commonly used by NASA in the past because technically complex and novel projects prevented it from receiving accurate advance estimates of risk and cost. However these types of contracts provide weak incentives for innovation given that any cost savings innovation undertaken by the firm leads to lower revenues and often incentivizes companies to increase the costs and lengths of their contracts Fixed-price contracts conversely provide strong incentives for innovation and delivery of products or services on time and under budget. Per NASA s fiscal year budget request fixed-price contracting is now considered the first choice whenever possible due to the incentives produced by placing increased responsibility on contractors Public-private partnerships have been shown to lower the costs of space products and services for taxpayers and to speed the growth of the space economy. The Commercial Crew Program s investment in the private sector has driven innovation efficiency and effective manufacturing and business techniques and NASA has projected that it will save between $ billion and $ billion relative to the cost to develop its own crewed spacecraft After the Space Shuttle program ended the cost to fly an American astronaut on a Russian Soyuz rocket rose from $ million in to about $ million in given that the Russians held a monopoly on crewed launch vehicles. A SpaceX launch by comparison costs about $ million per astronaut. SpaceX is able to reduce costs through new approaches to recover and reuse its spacecraft and launch vehicles In there were zero commercial launches in the United States because the market was dominated by international competitors that were largely subsidized by their governments. Today as a direct result of U.S Government investments in the U.S. commercial space sector most commercial space launches are conducted in the United States by companies such as SpaceX which employs over people throughout the country | Chapter Looking to the future of public-private partnerships NASA has been increasingly making the ISS available to commercial research and manufacturing activities as supported by the ISS National Laboratory. In addition NASA is allowing visits to the ISS by commercial astronauts aboard SpaceX s Dragon and Boeing s Starliner. Companies are expected to purchase seats on private sector rockets for missions in low-Earth orbit and to the ISS in early These missions include opportunities for space tourism and commercial enterprise and represent the next step in the space economy In addition NASA will rely heavily on the private sector for the Artemis program in its mission to accomplish the next chapter in U.S. exploration of deep space : returning humans to the lunar surface by These include contracts for the Human Landing System to take astronauts to and from the Moon with stays lasting as long as two weeks the growing excitement about space companies and optimism for future returns on investment Although there has been large growth in economic activity in the space sector as a whole a significant portion of space industry revenue is still made up of satellite services. As illustrated in table over percent of global spending in space is for the satellite industry and the majority of the remainder is government spending. The only other category that is large enough to break out is the commercial human spaceflight industry Space Policy Developments As investment and innovation grow in the space economy and we surpass new milestones in space exploration the United States will continue to work to ensure the international and domestic framework for property rights in outer space resources develops in a manner that provides certainty and predictability for industry. Doing so will reinforce the progress the United States has made in the space sector that based on CEA estimates could double investment in space and accelerate new space technologies. Here we first describe the main international treaties and domestic laws that have developed since the 1950s and provide a legal framework that supports the space economy. We then describe the efforts of the Trump Administration to advance and execute these agreements The United States is a party to four United Nations treaties on space The United Nations Outer Space Treaty of laid the foundation for international space law establishing outer space as a peaceful territory designating astronauts as envoys of humankind and declaring that each State bears responsibility for activities in space whether such activities are carried on by governmental agencies or by non-governmental entities. Whereas private Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | entities are usually responsible for damages they impose the Outer Space Treaty explicitly states that the country from which the object launches or the country that procures the launch bears responsibility for damages on Earth or in space The United States also approved the Rescue Agreement which outlined the rescue provisions in the Outer Space Treaty requiring countries to assist personnel when landing within national borders or in places not under any jurisdiction such as space. The Liability Convention which entered into force in clarified the meaning of launching State to be the country which launches or procures the launching of a space object or from whose territory or facility a space object is launched. The convention also defined what damage consists of and outlined a diplomatic process for resolving claims for compensation Finally the United States agreed to be a party to the Registration Convention that instructs nations to register space objects launched into orbit or space. While the United States was a party to these four early United Nations treaties and resolutions establishing international space law it did not ratify the United Nations Moon Agreement in which effectively banned private ownership of extraterrestrial property. Many other major spacefaring nations including Russia and the People s Republic of China are not parties to the Moon Agreement Domestically the United States has gradually developed a framework of private property rights in space through legislative and executive action. U.S space law was first codified in the National Aeronautics and Space Act which created NASA although military space activities were already under way within the Department of Defense. The Commercial Space Launch Act of created the process for licensing U.S. commercial space launches. The subsequent Commercial Space Launch Amendments of encouraged commercial space launches by providing Federal Government indemnification for damages exceeding $ million to more than $ billion Moving into the 21st century three concrete policy achievements helped further codify property rights in space. First the U.S. Commercial Space Launch Competitiveness Act of established the statutory framework for the Federal Government to permit domestic private entities to extract and use resources in space : A United States citizen engaged in commercial recovery of an asteroid resource or a space resource shall be entitled to any asteroid resource or space resource obtained including to possess own transport use and sell the asteroid resource or space resource obtained in accordance with applicable law including the international obligations of the United States | Chapter The U.S. Commercial Space Launch Competitiveness Act designates how the United States licenses and approves attempts to utilize space resources in line with authority granted to national governments in the Outer Space Treaty Article VI of the Outer Space Treaty states that activities of non-governmental entities in outer space shall require authorization and continuing supervision by the appropriate State Party to the Treaty. In the Trump Administration further clarified expectations and responsibilities for commercial activities in space by enumerating the U.S position on property rights and laying out principles for international bilateral agreements. In April the Trump Administration announced Executive Order Encouraging International Support for the Recovery and Use of Space Resources. This executive order announced the United States intention to work with international partners to ensure that commercial exploration and the use of space resources is consistent with applicable laws. It also explicitly rejected the Moon Agreement which the United States had not signed because it was perceived to have prevented the application of private property rights to resources in space On October the United States and seven partner spacefaring nations signed the Artemis Accords a set of principles grounded in the Outer Space Treaty to ensure safety and avoid conflict. The principles of the Artemis Accords are peaceful exploration transparency interoperability emergency assistance registration of space objects release of scientific data preserving heritage space resources deconfliction of activities and orbital debris. The Artemis Accords uphold that resource extraction and utilization must comply with the Outer Space Treaty while also affirming that extraction of space resources does not inherently constitute national appropriation under Article II of the Outer Space Treaty. The accords provide investors with more certainty when considering other countries positions on resource extraction. Eight founding member nations signed the Artemis Accords : Australia Canada Italy Japan Luxembourg the United Arab Emirates the United Kingdom and the United States. NASA anticipates that additional countries will join the Artemis Accords in the months and years ahead Taken together these three policy developments built on past treaties and laws to further clarify outer space property rights. The increased security of property rights should lead to increased investment and economic activity as individuals are able to form expectations and plan for future returns on that investment. As is discussed further below the ability to make long-term plans has many direct and indirect positive effects The Economics of Property Rights A large body of economic literature demonstrates the positive effects on investment from the initiation of policies that are similar to the space policy Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | developments discussed above. The examples come from a wide range of geographies natural resources and time periods. This section provides an overview of the economic theory of property rights as well as several examples of the theory in practice including how it applies to the space economy North ( ) considers the importance of institutions for shaping and constraining political economic and social interactions. Institutions guide economic change toward more growth decline or stagnation depending on the incentive structure they enforce. Tangibly government institutions determine and enforce property rights as rules governing the economy that shape the competitiveness and efficiency of markets. As rules for property rights are further specified market participants interact with more certainty about the benefits and costs of potential activities The seminal work of Demsetz ( ) outlines the economics behind the evolution of property rights. Property rights bring clarity to people when they are weighing potential decisions. Accordingly the benefits to setting and further clarifying property rights allow individuals to form more accurate expectations of how the rest of society will interact and respond to their actions Property rights encourage an individual to undertake investments with the understanding of which benefits will accrue to that individual Establishing and enforcing property rights impose costs on society as resources are devoted to monitoring and ensuring compliance. An individual s expectations are based on the understanding that the rest of society will comply with the rights specified but if other parties are allowed to violate an individual s property right without recourse then it will be difficult to set expectations As figure shows the optimal specification of property rights changes as the benefits and costs change. The figure depicts the optimal specification of property rights at two different points in time. In when the Outer Space Treaty was signed there were only two entities engaged in outer space activity : the United States and Soviet Union. As access to space and other space technologies have increased the benefits that companies can expect from engaging in economic activity in space have grown. These increase the benefits of property right specification as ensuring investors have clear expectations about how benefits accrue across society will lead to higher gains from investment Advances in technology that improve monitoring and enforcement will lower the cost of further specifying property rights or adding more sticks to the bundle. This decrease in the cost of enforcement along with the increase in the benefits from setting investment expectations implies that the optimal level of property rights specification should increase ( as shown in figure ) The Artemis Accords for example are giving investors clearer guidance for how civil space activities will be conducted and the principles that will guide government decisionmaking. Although the Artemis Accords do not apply directly | Chapter Figure Marginal Cost and Benefit of Property Rights Specification Cost of enforcement Demand for property rights Marginal cost of enforcement Greater benefits from internalizing payoffs Lower cost of enforcement Marginal cost of enforcement Demand for property rights Xold 1-Jan Xnew Level of property right specification 2-Jan 3-Jan 4-Jan 5-Jan 6-Jan 7-Jan to the private sector the United States is responsible via Article VI of the Outer Space Treaty for all individuals subject to its jurisdiction or control. In this regard the principles of the Artemis Accords provide clarification to companies about the role of governments in space and eliminate uncertainty about public-private interactions Historical Examples of Property Rights Evolution Historical examples of the development of property rights establish that without these extra sticks in the property rights bundle we should expect to see higher costs and lower benefits from investments in the space economy potentially hindering future developments in outer space The early history of oil drilling provides an example of how resources are likely to be wasted if property rights are not established in a timely manner. Until the early 20th century oil was not considered property until it was extracted. This led to what Libecap and Smith ( ) call extractive anarchy Companies drilled wells without concern for maximizing the amount of oil produced from a well but instead sought to be the first to extract and claim ownership of the oil. Oil flows from a well because of the pressure inside the reservoir ; if too many wells are drilled into one reservoir then the pressure escapes too quickly to push the oil in the reservoir up the well. As a result less oil is extracted. By the director of the Federal Bureau of Mines estimated that Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | a quarter of the value of all petroleum production was being wasted due to the race to extract oil. Further due to oil and natural gas being found together in a reservoir the lower-valued natural gas was often vented into the atmosphere to ensure that the oil was extracted and thus ownership was secured. As time went on the structure of property rights for oil and gas has changed to allow for increased value to be created from investments in resource extraction Without clear in situ property rights for subsurface resources space could see a repeat of this behavior for its natural resources. Many elements that are common in space are frequently used in important technologies Iron aluminum and titanium are elements critical to the production of electrical components. Silicon is a raw material for solar panels and computers Extracted water can be broken down into hydrogen and oxygen to meet a variety of needs oxygen is breathable recombining hydrogen and oxygen generates electrical power and liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen can serve as propellants ( Butow et al. ) Though it may sound futuristic we can imagine a situation where mining expeditions recklessly extract resources from various celestial bodies severely depleting the deposit of resources and diminishing the returns on future investment in mining. Therefore defining property rights now to ensure the responsible use of resources in space could lead to future higher levels of demand and investment in exploration and a more sustainable space economy A similar story emerges for mineral rights in Nevada during the 19th century ( Libecap ) As new deposits of minerals were found especially those deposits further underground requiring increased investment for extraction the specification and enforcement of property rights increased. One of the largest deposits in Nevada the Comstock Lode was discovered while Nevada was still a Federal territory. Property rights for discoveries on Federal lands were lacking at the time so citizens created a series of local laws and eventually founded the State of Nevada to ensure these property rights. Libecap ( ) shows that as deposits increased in value local property rights specification also increased. It may seem difficult to imagine how local property rights would be formed in space as in territorial Nevada given the lack of settlements in space. However this history implies that it is important to set these rules as economic actors spend extended time in space in order to maximize the future investment in the space economy Investment Responses to Property Right Enhancement All the space policy developments discussed above have improved the ability of investors to set expectations for the manner in which benefits flow from investments in space. The historical examples given argue that further specifying property rights will bolster investment in the space economy. Increased investments in the space economy will lead to advances in space technology In this subsection we discuss the economics literature that addresses the | Chapter effects of setting and strengthening property rights on both investment and economic growth. The research presented here aims to convey that the benefits for economic activity from improved setting of expectations that clarifies property rights is universal and not just due to specific circumstances of time and/or place Losses from short-term decisionmaking. A growing concern for future space exploration activities arises from a lack of property rights security leading to short-term decisionmaking which may inhibit long-term human activity Many empirical studies show that insecure property rights lead to investment decisions with lower values. Many of these studies have come from analyses of water rights in the western United States. In what is known as the Prior Appropriation Doctrine water rights are handed out based on a first in time first in right principle. Given that the amount of water available changes each year due to precipitation patterns water rights holders that were earlier in time known as senior rights holders are more likely to receive their water allocation each year than those that were later in time known as junior rights holders Leonard and Libecap ( ) argue that the Prior Appropriation Doctrine with its clear rights for senior rights holders allowed for investment in irrigation technologies. Given the climate of the western United States large-scale investment in irrigation is required to maximize the productivity of large swaths of land. Leonard and Libecap estimate that percent of western States income in is attributable to investments made in irrigation that would not have occurred without secure property rights Another concern with insecure property rights is that owners of natural resources rush to extract them to ensure that they accrue the benefits of their investments. This rush to extract resources has a detrimental effect on the value obtained from those resources and other negative spillover effects on society. One example is the increase in the rate of deforestation that occurs when property rights for the land are insecure ( Bohn and Deacon ) Ferreira ( ) finds that those countries with clearly defined property rights experience less deforestation than those with weaker protections. Kemal and Lange ( ) find that a reduced chance of oil well expropriation in Indonesia lowered the rate of extraction by up to percent If short-term decisionmaking prevails in the initial incursions into space the future of the space economy could be seriously harmed. Depleting the resources necessary to sustain life in space would mean having to transport these resources from Earth at a prohibitive cost and complexity. Therefore protecting and responsibly using the resources available in space is more efficient in the long term. If done prudently establishing property rights in space could diminish the risk of short-term decisionmaking and strengthen the ability of humans to receive benefits from space Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | Enhanced investment and asset value. Frameworks such as the U.S Commercial Space Launch Competitiveness Act and the Artemis Accords enhance property rights by providing clear expectations of the benefits one can receive from their investment and providing a list of principles that partner nations will follow as a way to encourage economic activity in space. One branch of the economics literature uses legal or legislative decisions that enhance or diminish property rights to determine how investment and asset values respond to a change in property rights specification. We discuss this literature here. Later in the chapter we apply the conclusions of these studies to estimate the value of enhancing property rights in space Alston and Smith ( ) measure the effect of uncertain property rights resulting from the manner in which Northern Pacific Railroad s land grants were structured. The Federal Government provided generous land grants to railroad companies in hopes of ensuring the quick buildout of rail infrastructure. Northern Pacific was granted almost percent of the land area in Montana a State that requires coordination among its farmers and ranchers to irrigate any tract of land for productive use. Delays in the completion of the rail line in the 1870s led to uncertainty as to whether Northern Pacific owned ( and could sell ) land in its land grant or whether the land was the property of the Federal Government As a result of this uncertainty completed irrigation projects averaged delays of four years while investment in irrigation projects decreased by percent. Insecure property rights affected the landowners whose rights were secure because irrigation projects often require coordination among many parcels due to their high capital costs. The delay in undertaking irrigation investments led to these landowners being more junior water rights holders and subsequently holding less secure water rights. In total Montana s economic activity was percent lower in as a result of these insecure property rights Grainger and Costello ( ) compare the value of more secure property rights for fisheries in the United States Canada and New Zealand. New Zealand s regulations on quotas to operate in a given fishery explicitly state that these quotas are a property right yet similar quota systems in the United States and Canada have regulations that explicitly state that the quotas are not property rights. The fact that the United States and Canada s fishery quotas are not as secure as New Zealand s quotas leads to a lower perpetuity value of the quotas relative to their current annual value. Because U.S. and Canadian firms have the potential for their quotas to be taken away without recourse their assets have lower values relative to New Zealand s firms. In an additional analysis Grainger and Costello ( ) show that the increased security of property rights with the settling of an ownership dispute between native New Zealanders known as the Maori and New Zealanders of European descent improved the perpetuity value of fishing quotas by percent. Ensuring that | Chapter property rights will be honored is very important for market participants in understanding the value of their asset Galiani and Schargodsky ( ) use a court case in Argentina to estimate the effect of secure property rights for one s home on household decisions. Their results show that households that gained secure property rights increased their investments in the home structure. Investment in walls and roofs increased by percent and percent respectively as a result of households being granted title to the home. Though not directly related to space assets the available evidence demonstrates that more secure property rights lead to other spillover benefits that are not directly related to the assets on which a property rights are granted. Galiani and Schargodsky ( ) find that when households had increased property rights security they increased investment in their children s education. Children in households who obtained the secure property rights on their land achieved an extra year of schooling on average. This is an important spillover effect given the large individual and societal benefits of extra years of education ( see chapter of this Report ) Telecommunications satellites orbiting Earth provide an example of positive spillovers from ensuring secure property rights in space. The International Telecommunication Union ( ITU ) is an organization that standardizes rules and regulations for a wide range of communications. Through the ITU the United States was able to operate satellites that used specific frequencies to transmit information to Earth thereby allowing companies to invest in utilizing those signals for commercial purposes. Communications satellites in geosynchronous orbit rely on the ITU to secure access to specific orbital slots as well as specific frequencies Protection against expropriation. A number of nongovernmental organizations produce indices that measure property rights protections or general institutional quality. The indices attempt to quantify the relative level of property rights characteristics such as the rule of law or protection against expropriation risk that are consistent across countries and time. A large body of economics literature uses these country-level indices of institutional quality to determine the extent to which improvements in property rights enforcement affect economic outcomes. Policies initiated under the Trump Administration would likely alter these indices in a measurable way if there were a property rights index for space Seminal work by Acemoglu Johnson and Robinson ( ) shows that improving the enforcement of property rights in this case property rights that protect against expropriation risk has large effects on gross domestic product ( GDP ) In their analysis the authors show that a one-unit improvement in the protection against expropriation risk would lead to more than doubling GDP per capita years later Similar results are found when researchers examine specific industries For example Cust and Harding ( ) show that firms drill for oil twice as Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | often in countries with stronger property rights enforcement relative to their neighbors with weaker property rights. They also show that the effect of the enforcement of rights is most important for private international oil companies relative to national oil companies highlighting the important role of stronger rights for harnessing private investment. Bohn and Deacon ( ) find a similar pattern for the effect on oil drilling as property rights security improves with a percent increase in security leading to a percent increase in drilling per year Some changes in property rights enforcement come through improvements in technology. Hornbeck ( ) uses the invention and widespread use of barbed wire as a technology advancement that reduced the costs of enforcing property rights in agriculture. Importantly Hornbeck compares areas that had access to timber for wooden fences with those that did not and finds a percent relative improvement in crop productivity when barbed wire came into use as barbed wire lowered the relative cost of fencing. Most of the gain came from farmers altering the type of crop that they planted once they were confident that livestock would not destroy the crop. This increased ability to effectively enforce property rights led to investments that increased the total area of farmland that had been improved by percentage points while also increasing land values. In many ways this example of marking off territory is similar to the Artemis Accords Deconfliction of Activities Principle. This principle prescribes setting safety zones to limit harmful interference and keep the probability of accidental loss to a minimum The Effects of Policies on Investment in Space Industries The previous section detailed the expansive literature showing that more secure property rights increase both investment and economic activity. The examples discussed varied across time and space leaving little doubt that the results are not driven by random chance ; the studies as a whole reveal that the findings hold outside specific examples. Because the examples are numerous and varied determining an average effect of more secure property rights on investment is difficult. Each study concerns a particular improvement in the security of property rights that is difficult to quantify. However it is still a goal of this chapter to estimate the effect of the last year s space policy developments on future investment given the available evidence Table summarizes the effects of most of the studies discussed in the previous section. All these effects are large in magnitude. Another data point is the increase of investment in the space economy in the United States with the passage of the U.S. Commercial Space Launch Competitiveness Act in relative to investments in other countries. Using the Space Capital data discussed in the second section and the historical examples given above the CEA | Chapter Table Summary of Effects of Property Rights Improvement Study Acemoglu Johnson and Robinson ( ) Alston and Smith ( ) Bohn and Deacon ( ) Cust and Harding ( ) Galiani and Schargodsky ( ) Grainger and Costello ( ) Hornbeck ( ) Leonard and Libecap ( ) Industry Cause All Expropriation risk Land Tenure uncertainty Oil Expropriation risk Oil Expropriation risk Housing Tenure uncertainty Fisheries Tenure uncertainty Agriculture Enforcement Water Tenure uncertainty Effect GDP per capita increased % Investment delayed Investment increased % Investment increased % Investment increased % Asset value increased % Productivity increased % Income % higher Timing of Impact years years Immediate Immediate years Immediate years years Note : This table summarizes the main findings of the papers discussed in the previous section of the main text. Each study has a different issue with property rights and the impact on the outcomes of interest estimates the increase in investment in the United States due to the improved property rights specification in Controlling for country and time period effects the data show a statistically significant increase in investment of percent or roughly double in the United States since passage of the U.S Commercial Space Launch Competitiveness Act relative to countries that did not improve property specification. Together these small improvements in the security of property rights have the potential to lead to large increases in investment. As an approximation the CEA assumes that these improvements in property rights security will double the amount of investment in space. This number is in line with the evidence that has been discussed here To project the effect of the enhancements of property rights security that the Trump Administration s policies have achieved the CEA starts with data from Space Capital on total private investment in space activities. Figure illustrates the increasing rate of private investment in space activities The review of the literature discussed above shows that further property rights specification leads to increased investment and further economic Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | Figure Nongovernmental Equity Investment in Commercial Space Companies in the United States Dollars ( billions ) Enhanced property rights Current trend Sources : Space Capital ; CEA calculations Note : Data before reflect actual investment ; subsequent years are forecasts activity. In figure the diverging lines from to project the expected path of private investment as a result of policy developments in The Space Capital data suggest that a linear projection of private investment in space would reach $ billion in which is illustrated by the blue dashed line in figure However this does not take into account property rights enhancements that occurred in or will be occurring in the future Therefore the CEA projects that private investment in space will reach $ billion by This projection is based on a doubling of investment over the eight-year period which is in line with empirical estimates in the academic literature discussed above Establishing rights to distant resources with the goals of incentivizing economic development and investment has not always produced the desired results. The above-mentioned examples demonstrate how property rights specification and security can lead to increased investment. However aligning incentives is a necessary but not sufficient condition in the short term. For example the leading asteroid mining companies that were supporting the space resources language in the Commercial Space Launch Amendments Act of have both failed despite the benefit of positive Federal legislation. In addition the Deep Seabed Hard Mineral Resources Act which was passed in established a legal system for extracting resources from the deep seabed with hopes of achieving economic viability before Forty years after the law s passage the deep seabed mineral extraction industry still lacks the | Chapter technology for economical extraction and does not bolster the argument that enhanced property rights typically unlock commercial value. Certain similarities do exist with the space industry such as the need for technological innovation the considerable distance to the resources and some uncertainty about the types of resources for extraction Moreover the space resource extraction industry currently lacks a customer base other than national governments and even government demand will not become substantive until robust human and robotic operations on the lunar surface and elsewhere can be established. However several key differences would support a space resource extraction industry. First the commercial space industry benefits from public investment in civil space exploration which might result in a decreased amount of investment necessary for the development of basic technologies. In addition space exploration and research remain a national priority for many countries which may drive further development of the industrial base. Moreover space resource extraction potentially offers more valuable resources than deep sea mining ( Barton and Recht ) Looking Ahead Increased investment flowing from the enhancement of property rights expands the possibilities of economic activity in space and transforms abstract issues into real considerations for national economies companies and individuals Flag of Choice The origins of spacecraft and the settlement of international disputes beyond Earth s surface remain critical issues for space policy. The flag of choice in commercial space activity will depend on a nation s ability to provide the domestic infrastructure and international support needed to spur investment while mitigating risk. The development of a healthy space economy built on a strong industrial base sensible regulatory environment and the enforcement of property rights along with national support in international disputes will ensure that the United States becomes and remains the flag of choice for private space ventures Space vehicles similar to naval vessels are required to operate under the laws or flag of a particular country. The process of flagging occurs when a company incorporates itself in a country or launches from that country Once flagged the vessel must abide by the flag state s laws which include tax liabilities as well as labor and environmental regulations ( Taghdiri ) The process of selecting a flag leads companies to seek flag countries with a legal policy and regulatory environment that is most favorable for their business activities Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | The practice of finding a flag of convenience is one threat to maintaining a functional system of space travel because companies could opt for flags of countries with little oversight as is seen with waterborne vessels ( Llin s ) Panama for example has become the flag of choice for ships with more than double the number of ships of any other country due to an easy registration process and low-cost labor. In contrast to maritime law which places the responsibility for redressing damages on private actors the UN Outer Space Treaty established that countries assume the full responsibility and risk of spacecraft launching from their territory. This forces countries to weigh the costs and benefits of flagging spacecraft before allowing them to launch from their territories. Inevitably accidents in space will occur such as with the satellite collision between Iridium and Cosmos The incident occurred when the Cosmos a derelict satellite from Russia collided with Iridium a commercial U.S. communications satellite and both parties placed the blame on the other for not avoiding the collision. The United States and Russia were able to settle the potential dispute outside the Liability Convention but this event highlighted the need for a predictable system for resolving disputes in space to provide the certainty needed for long-term investment in space ventures. Flying under the flag of the United States will provide companies with the backing of a sovereign state with substantial diplomatic capital that is willing to engage on their behalf supporting a growing space economy in the United States ( box ) Incentivizing the Private Sector The Department of Defense continues to foster partnerships with the private sector through design competitions that award contracts to both large and small space technology companies and through consulting programs that mentor small companies in competing for these contracts. These events and programs include the Space Enterprise Consortium ; the Space Pitch Day which awards grants to accelerate new technology ; and the National Security Space Launch which is helping to create new engines and launch vehicles These partnerships help break down barriers to entry for smaller firms in this industry which will drive competition and innovation while decreasing the cost of operating within the space economy. To ensure that the United States maintains its leadership in space innovation and remains the flag of choice for space commerce it must maintain a business-friendly regulatory environment that offers streamlined permitting encourages innovation and risk-taking and safeguards workers the public and property The Trump Administration has prioritized regulatory reform over the past four years and it continues to focus on cutting red tape in the space sector. With regulatory authorities distributed among the Federal Aviation Administration Federal Communications Commission and National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration the Trump Administration has made efforts to | Chapter Box National Security and Space Space-based capabilities are crucial for the United States security. Space has become a primary component of U.S. military operations including missile warning geolocation and navigation target identification and activities to track adversaries. Remote-sensing satellites have greatly improved military and intelligence collection capabilities thereby reducing other countries ability to carry out covert military exercises and operations As advancements in the space sector occur such as technological improvements and lower barriers to entry foreign governments are developing capabilities that could threaten the United States freedom to operate in space. In a report the Defense Intelligence Agency points out how China and Russia in particular are trying to undermine the United States advantage in space ( DIA ) For example Chinese and Russian military doctrines present a view that counterspace capabilities serve as a tool to reduce the effectiveness of U.S. and allied military forces. Both countries have developed extensive space surveillance networks that enable them to monitor track and target American and allied forces. Additionally both China and Russia are working on their cyberspace and jamming capabilities The Trump Administration recognizes the importance of establishing and maintaining influence in space and providing space security for U.S interests and the American people. In March the White House unveiled a new National Space Strategy that places an emphasis on peace through strength in the space domain. Though adversaries are attempting to use space as a weapon the United States stance is to protect the space domain from conflict and secure the United States vital interests in space namely the freedom of operation in space to advance security economic prosperity and scientific knowledge Although peace in the space domain is a top priority the National Space Strategy affirms that the United States needs to be vigilant about any harmful interference within the space domain that negatively affects America s or its allies vital interests and must deter counter and defeat any such threats Space systems are vital to the U.S. economy and national security and they enable key functions such as global communications ; positioning navigation and timing ; scientific observation ; exploration ; weather monitoring ; and multiple vital national defense applications. In September President Trump issued Space Policy Directive ( SPD ) Cybersecurity Principles for Space Systems which provides guidance on the protection of space assets and supporting infrastructure from evolving cyber threats The National Space Strategy also emphasizes the importance of better leveraging and supporting the commercial sector to ensure that American companies are leaders in space technology. This is discussed more throughout this chapter To strengthen the United States military position in the space domain President Trump established the United States Space Force ( USSF ) as the Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | sixth branch of the U.S. Armed Forces by signing the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year Vice President Pence has stated that the mission of the Space Force is to develop and implement the unique strategy doctrine tactics techniques and procedures our armed forces need to deter and defeat a new generation of threats in space ( Pence ) Its responsibilities include developing military space professionals acquiring military space systems maturing the military doctrine for space power and organizing space forces to present to our Combatant Commands ( USSF ) modernize the authorization process for new space missions as directed in Space Policy Directive-2. In addition Federal Government procurement regulations are often complex and burdensome for the private sector. In fact government-procured space systems were historically characterized by high costs long program schedules and frequent delays due to these regulations ( Butow et al. ) This discouraged efficiency innovation and the entrance of new actors into the market. In the interest of increasing competition and innovation while reducing costs and bureaucracy the Administration continues to remove undue regulatory barriers and increase the efficiency of existing processes. Doing so will foster a free and prosperous space economy enable commercial space companies to operate more efficiently and allow new firms to participate in the private space industry Furthermore the Administration has recognized the important role the Federal Government plays in promoting an environment that encourages investment in the space economy. This starts with outlining clear and coordinated policy goals and stimulating public and private activity to achieve them By increasingly shifting the role of the government in the space domain from that of owner and operator of technology to that of customer of private products and services the United States increases demand for commercial activity and supports the growth of a viable space economy For example NASA can use commercial service contracts within the Artemis Program including those governing transportation communications and power systems to facilitate the return of manned missions to the lunar surface and to encourage their permanent operation there. The Department of Defense also serves a critical role in creating demand within the private sector because this Administration has prioritized the protection of national security in space. Applying the same concepts to space resources the Federal Government can reduce risk to the private sector for new technologies such as space mining and manufacturing. By acting as an initial substantial and dependable customer for early entrants into space resource markets the Federal Government can encourage private investment by offering to purchase products on forward contracts. With the assured revenue that comes from | Chapter these contracts private firms can use increased economies of scale to further reduce the costs of these new technologies which opens the market to new customers Prioritizing regulatory reform and investment in the space sector builds a strong foundation for a thriving space economy. The Trump Administration has taken action to make this future a reality and it will continue to foster the environment that spurs investment in the private space sector Conclusion Secure property rights are a fundamental tenet of the U.S. economy. Property rights help individuals and firms set expectations for how the outcome of their investments will be distributed. However there are costs for setting up and further specifying property rights. The literature on the economics of property rights discusses how to balance the benefits from improved expectation setting for individuals investment decisions against the costs of enforcement Although applications like space mining and space solar power satellites might be decades away from being profitable enterprises it is worth laying the foundation for the emergence of future space industries now Economic activity in space will benefit from further property rights enhancement and specification which is advantageous when net enforcement costs are exceeded by net benefits. To this end the Trump Administration has initiated policies to enhance property rights and thus to encourage further investment in space. The Executive Order Encouraging International Support for the Recovery and Use of Space Resources and the Artemis Accords help to further property rights specification by rejecting an ineffective treaty that suggests communal property and by motivating other economies to follow the United States lead in developing safe and sustainable best practices in space Recent policies to improve the ability of firms to gain certainty regarding their investments lay the foundation for further development of the space economy. The academic literature provides many examples across time geographic range and resource application of the large effects on investment and economic activity driven by enhanced property rights security. Based on these previous experiences with improvements in property rights security the CEA estimates that recent Trump Administration policies will add an additional $ billion to private investment in the space sector by Property rights enhancement coupled with public-private partnerships can solidify the longterm health of the commercial space economy Exploring New Frontiers in Space Policy and Property Rights | x Chapter Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade As documented in the Economic Report of the President the Trump Administration inherited a legacy of asymmetric trading arrangements that had imposed steep costs on U.S. manufacturing and segments of the labor market. Indeed some recent academic literature finds that import displacement after the establishment of Permanent Normal Trade Relations with the People s Republic of China was the single biggest factor in the decline of the U.S. employment-to-population rate after ( Abraham and Kearney ) Also this shock was associated not only with a precipitous decline in previously relatively-stable U.S. manufacturing employment but also with increased mortality from drug overdoses in adversely affected communities ( Autor Dorn and Hanson ; Case and Deaton ; Pierce and Schott ) The Trump Administration has worked over the past four years to renegotiate unfair trading arrangements that have harmed in particular U.S. manufacturing and manufacturing employment. Much of this work came to fruition in with several historic trade agreements entering into force this year. This chapter details the benefits of the trade accomplishments of and shows that further work in renegotiating trade agreements to safeguard American workers will play a key part in returning the U.S. economy to the economic prosperity of the Great Expansion. In addition we describe the changing global economic environment punctuated by the COVID-19 pandemic that has caused firms and governments to rethink existing configurations of global supply chains and in some cases bring production closer to home On January President Trump joined Chinese Vice Premier Liu He in signing the U.S.-China Economic and Trade Agreement the Phase One Agreement a landmark deal that requires structural reforms and other changes to China s economic and trade systems in the areas of intellectual property technology transfer agriculture financial services and currency and foreign exchange. The centerpieces of the agreement include not only the numerous specific commitments that China made in these areas but also China s agreement to expand trade by importing an additional $ billion in U.S. goods and services on top of import levels. The United States maintains significant tariffs on $ billion worth of Chinese imports because China has not ended all of its unfair trade practices setting the stage for a Phase Two agreement in the future In addition to achieving this historic trade deal with China the Trump Administration has followed through on its pledge to restore U.S. manufacturing farming and business by signing into law the United States Mexico Canada Agreement ( USMCA ) on January overhauling the North American Free Trade Agreement. With the rules of the agreement entering into force on July USMCA promises to better balance trade with our neighbors to the north and south. USMCA establishes requirements for digital trade environmental standards and standards for workers rights between the three countries. Also American agricultural exports will increase by $ billion under USMCA thanks to better access to Canadian markets secured through the new agreement. Overall pre-COVID estimates by the nonpartisan U.S. International Trade Commission found that under moderate assumptions USMCA will increase U.S. gross domestic product by $ billion ( percent ) and create U.S. jobs Prepandemic analyses indicated that both the Phase One Agreement and USMCA would grow the U.S. economy. However with the COVID-19 pandemic spreading from China around the globe worldwide lockdowns temporarily disrupted the projected benefits from negotiating these trade deals and | Chapter highlighted the substantial risk in centralizing supply chains in China. As China shut down factories in the city of Wuhan a major manufacturing hub and also the origin of the coronavirus supply shocks rippled throughout the global economy and reached the United States long before the virus spread within the United States. This chapter examines COVID-19 s effects on global supply chains and discusses evidence that companies are already reducing their reliance on Chinese manufacturing As the process of U.S. economic recovery continues fair and reciprocal trade agreements will continue to be a critical component of returning to the economic prosperity of the Great Expansion. The Phase One Agreement USMCA an additional trade agreement with Japan and a renegotiated trade agreement with South Korea among others underscore the Trump Administration s commitments to securing trade deals that drive growth in the economy and the labor market. These agreements are the culmination of the Administration s commitment to the American worker addressing unfair trade practices that have adversely affected U.S. employment while also incentivizing domestic hiring and capital formation I nternational trade plays a critical role in driving economic growth and thus in helping countries around the world achieve unprecedented prosperity in the 21st century. Institutions in which the United States plays a key leadership role such as the World Trade Organization and its predecessor the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade established the institutional framework of the global trading system and facilitated growth in global trade But the benefits of the global trading system have at times come at the cost of America s own national interest. The Trump Administration has actively pursued actions to make trade with the United States international partners fairer and more sustainable. The Administration has imposed tariffs to protect national security and other U.S. economic interests. And by forging new trade agreements with China our North American neighbors and Japan as well as a renegotiated agreement with South Korea and narrower agreements with several other countries the Administration has ushered in a new international trade environment that promises to enhance U.S. economic growth and broadbased economic prosperity. The first three sections of this chapter examine these agreements Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | Although growth in global trade has increasingly taken the form of trade in intermediate goods and the globalization of supply chains events in recent years may slow that trend. The global recession trade and other geopolitical tensions ( especially between the United States and China ) and most recently the COVID-19 pandemic have all underscored risks associated with trade that have prompted firms and governments around the world to reconsider the benefits and costs of their existing configurations of global supply chains. The Trump Administration s recent and ongoing activities focus on reaping the benefits of trade while advancing the interests of American industry and safeguarding national security. The last section of the chapter considers these issues related to global supply chains The Phase One Agreement with China The U.S.-China Phase One Agreement is a first step in the resolution of U.S.China trade disputes. These tensions came to the forefront in August with the announcement in the Federal Register of an investigation by the Office of the United States Trade Representative ( USTR ) into China s technology transfer and intellectual property ( IP ) protection policies under Section of the Trade Act of This investigation led to a determination by the USTR that China engaged in certain unreasonable and discriminatory trade practices. The USTR took appropriate action by imposing tariffs on U.S. imports from China triggering tariff increases by China and responsive tariff increases by the United States from July to September On December the two countries agreed to the Phase One Agreement which President Trump signed on January This agreement has seven main chapters addressing structural reforms in the areas of IP technology transfer agricultural nontariff barriers financial services currency and Chinese purchases of U.S. exports ; and establishing a strong dispute resolution system. An eighth chapter provides details on amending the agreement effective dates and termination further negotiations and notice and comment on implementing measures ( USTR 2020b ) The Chinese purchases of U.S. exports are an important component of this agreement given that they were expected to provide immediate positive effects for U.S. producers. With the COVID-19 pandemic Chinese purchases of U.S. exports this year started slowly but have increased significantly in recent months. The structural provisions are the important first steps in creating much-needed reform in the Chinese economy Background In August the USTR opened an investigation into Chinese policies and practices regarding technology and IP under Section of the Trade Act of The USTR issued a report in March that detailed a variety of unfair | Chapter    '        $ ! !    / $ * )   "  $ ) ./   # $ )      )  #  ( * ) / #   )     / #  / * * &  ! !  /    '0  * !  I ( * -/.  billion  * ' '     $ ! !  R  /   ) /   0'4       " 0./       +/ (        +/ (     ; rose to in June   /  ' $  / *   # $ )   T  $ ! ! s  * )     E3+ * -/.   ) *    $ ' ' $ * )  in  " * *    ) *    $ ' ' $ * )  in  " * *   Range up to % on $  in goods billion  ) *  billion in goods     *    ! ! $   * !  / #          ) /  / $  Note : This table reflects the tariff rates when they went into effect not necessarily the current state of play. Tranche 4B was set to take effect December but due to the U.S. China Phase agreement these tariffs were never imposed as noted in the text. Dollar values are in nominal terms Table U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficit with China in Goods and Services Type of Deficit Bilateral trade deficit in goods Bilateral trade deficit in goods and services : Q2 Dollars Share of ( billions ) GDP : Q4 Dollars Share of ( billions ) GDP : Q3 Dollars Share of ( billions ) GDP Sources : Census Bureau ; CEA calculations Note : The trade deficit is annualized to calculate the share of GDP. Dollar values are in nominal terms Chinese policies and practices : ( ) forced technology transfer from U.S. inventors and companies to Chinese firms for market access in China ; ( ) nonmarketbased terms for technology licenses ; ( ) Chinese state-directed and facilitated acquisition of strategic U.S. assets ; and ( ) cyber-enabled intrusions into U.S commercial networks to steal trade secrets for commercial gain ( CEA ) Table describes the four tranches of tariffs that the United States imposed to bring China to the negotiating table to reform these costly policies. China retaliated with its own tariff actions against the United States in each tranche As part of the conclusion of the Phase One negotiations the United States suspended a tariff rate increase from percent to percent on tranches through and reduced the tariff rate on tranche 4A from percent to percent. China also cut its 4A tranche tariff rates by half Since the Section tariffs went into effect starting in July we have observed a decline in the bilateral trade deficit between the U.S. and China from $ billion ( $ at an annualized rate or percent of GDP ) to $ billion ( $ billion at an annualized rate or percent of GDP ) at Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | the end of ( table ) The bilateral trade deficit has increased slightly during the COVID-19 pandemic particularly as international trade in goods has recovered faster than international trade in services but remains below pre Section levels Major Provisions On December the United States and the People s Republic of China announced that they had reached the Phase One Trade Agreement. This agreement came just two days before the United States was set to impose tranche 4B which would have imposed percent tariff rates on an additional $ billion worth of U.S. imports from China. As a part of the agreement the United States suspended the tariffs set for December and agreed to halve tranche 4A tariffs on $ billion of Chinese goods to percent ( USTR 2019b ) On January President Trump signed the Phase One Agreement with the People s Republic of China establishing a foundation for a fair and reciprocal trade relationship between the two countries. This agreement requires structural reforms and other changes to China s economic and trade policies in these seven areas each of which corresponds to a chapter in the agreement : Addressing concerns related to intellectual property Ending China s practice of forced foreign technology transfer Lowering structural barriers to agricultural trade Expanding market access for U.S. financial service companies in China Addressing unfair currency practices Expanding trade through Chinese purchase commitments and Introducing a dispute resolution mechanism to effectively implement and resolve issues arising under the agreement Chapters and of the Phase One Agreement address U.S. concerns relating to intellectual property theft and forced foreign technology transfer and should help create a fair market and protect U.S. companies operating in China. Chapters and require China to lower financial service barriers and end unfair currency practices. Chapter sets forth purchase commitments including purchase commitments for agricultural commodities which China must meet to help create a more balanced and fairer trading relationship that benefits the United States. The removal of structural barriers to agricultural trade in Chapter should help achieve these purchase commitments. Finally Chapter which addresses dispute resolution creates a process for discussing implementation of and resolving issues arising under the Phase One Agreement Intellectual Property Chapter of the Phase One Agreement includes specific commitments to strengthen protection and enforcement of IP in China and reduce IP theft including with respect to trade secrets pharmaceutical-related IP and | Chapter enforcement against counterfeit and pirated goods. The Section report found a $ billion annual cost to the United States from IP theft ( USTR 2018a ) Several of the provisions in the Phase One Agreement are novel and require significant changes in China s practices. A large component of this addresses specific concerns regarding adequate and effective IP protection and enforcement in China. As part of China s implementation of the Phase One Agreement China has published numerous draft measures for public comment and has issued final measures in areas including criminal prosecution standards for trade secret theft civil enforcement of trade secrets destruction of counterfeit and pirated goods and online infringement on e-commerce platforms Reports from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) show China as the top source of counterfeit and pirated goods endangering the public with goods that pose potential health and safety threats. The Phase One Agreement contains provisions on the expeditious takedown and destruction of counterfeit goods. The agreement also includes obligations for China to take effective action against e-commerce platforms that fail to take necessary measures against infringement and ensures that government agencies and state-owned enterprises use only licensed software Technology Transfer In Chapter of the Phase One Agreement China agreed to end the practice of requiring or pressuring U.S. companies to transfer technology to Chinese entities including in relation to joint ventures acquisitions or obtaining business licenses. These commitments extend to any informal unwritten measures that China takes to force or pressure foreign companies to transfer their technology to Chinese entities which is a key concern identified in the Section investigation. China also committed to provide transparency fairness and due process in administrative proceedings and to ensure that any technology transfer and licensing take place on market terms. Moreover China agreed not to support or direct outbound foreign direct investment activities aimed at acquiring foreign technology with respect to sectors and industries targeted by market-distorting industrial plans. Though Phase One negotiations were ongoing China enacted its new Foreign Investment Law and amended its existing Administrative Licensing Law in order to address the use of administrative means to force technology transfer and the disclosure of trade secrets and confidential business information submitted by administrative license applicants Agriculture Chapter of the Phase One Agreement lowers structural barriers to agriculture trade. As for nontariff agricultural barriers China has removed many restrictive and burdensome import requirements including lifting its effective ban on Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | | Chapter   #  ) "  / *  ( ' ( ) /   /-  ( ' $ )   *  '  *   ! *     !   $ ' $ / $   )   *   /.   )   China s " '  / $ * )  $ ' '    $ ( ' $ ! $   *  ' $ ( $ )  /    ' ' *     * -/.  * !  * /  / *  )  /  $ )   '0  $   )    *    *    )   (  -& /      ! *      !   )   * 0'/-4       )   $ ( *   *  '  *    )   #  '/ #   -/ $ ! $   / $ * )  * '   )    /  # ) $   '   $  $ * )  ! *    * / *  * '  / *   ' ' *     ' $    $ ) "    // '  $ ( * -/.   ( *    )  / #  /  ./- $  /     /  ! * *   * -/.   /-  ( ' $ )  " $ ./-  / $ * )  ! *     !   $ ' $ / $   ' ' *  / #  $ ( * -/  / $ * )  * !     $   *   /.  $ / # $ )      * !  / # $   *  '    / #  U.S Department of Agriculture   #  ) "  # *  $ /.  /  $ ! !   /  * /   $   ' $   *   / #  * /   $   ' $     #     )   / #  *   ! *   ' ' *   / $ * )  $  ) * /   $  $ ( $ )  / *  and transparent for     ! $ (   (  )   ! *  $ ( * -/     $   )   $ ) !  ) /  ! * ( '   *   /.  #     * $ / $  relationship with China s growing wealth but strict regulations limit U.S * -/.   '/ # * " #   # $ )  # * -/ $  0'/0-  '  $ ( * -/.  $ )         /2 )   and the U.S. market share of imports is only %   ! /        )  $ )    # $ )    -/ $  ''4  * )   $ /.   !  (  -& /.  / *     * -/.   '/ # * " #  " '  / *  ./- $  / $ * )  (  $ )  )    # $ )     ) )      * 0'/-4   0/  / # $     -/ $  ''4  ( *   $ )   * (     # $ )  * 0'/-4   )    * $ )  ./- $  / $ * )   ' * ) "  $ / #  $  " $ ./ $ ) "  !   $ ' $ / $  #   ' $ ( $ /      /  ! * *   * -/.  $ )   # $ )   )     # $ )   (  )   #   " * )  China is the world s lar " ./  $ ( * -/  * !  $   /.  /  $ ! !   /  * /    )   # 4/ *  ) $ /   * / *  * '  # 0-/     * -/.    $   )   i ) !  ) /  f * ( '   * -/ $  0'/0-  '  p- *   /.    /  p * 0'/-4   )   l $  b-  $ ) "  c  // '   /  f * *    $    *      epartment of  griculture ( )  "  ' $  / #  $ ( * -/  / $ * )  * !   )   ! * *   *   /.   #  ) "   ! * *   " '  / $ * )  * goods approved by  the Food and Drug Administration   )   the   / $ * )  '     ) $    )    / ( * # $     ( $ ) $ ./-  / $ * )    )    $ ( * -/      # $ )      # $ )   ! * *    (  )   $  " '  / $ * )  #   # '      &      ! * *   * -/.    ! * *        *   /.  / *  $ /.  ' $ ./  * !   ' ' *   '  !      $ / $  *   /  $ ( * -/.   /-  ( ' $ )  / #  " $ ./-  / $ * )  )  ' $  ) $ ) "  *   ! *     !   * -/.   # $ )   (  )   ! *  !   #   " * )  $ / #  $ /.  ' $ ./ *  &  .0++'4   0/     !   * -/.  #  ve  ./-0 " " '     / *  ./- $  / $ * )  $ )  " $ ./ $ ) "   )   ' $  ) $ ) "  !   $ ' $ / $   )   *   /.   ) $ (  '  f   ( ' ( ) /    /-  )  ) /   $  /   '  ! ! $  $ ) /   $ )    )   $ .&     " '  / *   *  '  *   ! *   " $  0'/0-  '   $ * /  # ) * ' * "  *   /.  / #  /   * ) /  $ )  ./- * ) "    ( $ ) $ ./-  / $  $ ( * ( ) /.  $ ( $ /   *  '   $ /  / $ (  / *   )    "  * !   ( * ) / #   # $ )   (  )   ! *   $ * /  # ) * ' * "  # $  #  $    ! *  ! * *    )   !   *   /.  #     ./ $   ''4  " * )    Chinese  '/ #  #   " * )  But e3 $ ./ $ ) "  " '  / $ * )  # $ )      * -/.  " $  0'/0-  '   $ * /  # ) * ' * "     '    " $  0'/0-   #    )   " ( ) /   * $ $ * )   *   /    -& /   $  <BILL : PLEASE MAKE THIS A TURNED FULL PAGE TABLE ; PHOTO-REDUCE/ENLARGE IF NEEDED : > U.S. poultry products which had been in place since Although not all the structural changes and commitments listed in table have been completed certain key changes have been made resulting in improved market access for a number of U.S. agricultural products. The market overview for each product reveals that Chinese demand has continued to rise for these products but before the Phase One Agreement U.S. exports had been restricted. Changes made by China include the listing of additional U.S. food manufacturing and feed additive facilities eligible for export to China recognition of the Food and Drug Administration s oversight of dairy food safety and the removal of other sanitary and phytosanitary barriers. The lowering of barriers to agricultural trade described in table is necessary for the agricultural purchases China has promised Financial Services Chapter of the Phase One Agreement addresses long-standing barriers faced by a wide variety of U.S. financial services companies including those in banking insurance securities credit rating and electronic payment services. These barriers include joint venture requirements foreign equity limitations and various discriminatory regulatory requirements. As one key example China committed to allow U.S. securities fund management futures and insurance companies to establish wholly foreign-owned companies in China thereby providing the potential for U.S. companies to fully control and generate profits from their businesses. Removal of these barriers will allow U.S. financial services companies to compete on a more level playing field in China Currency Chapter of the Phase One Agreement includes policy and transparency commitments related to currency issues. The chapter addresses unfair currency practices by requiring strong commitments to refrain from competitive devaluations and targeting of exchange rates while promoting transparency and providing mechanisms for accountability and enforcement. The enforcement mechanism enables either the U.S. Department of the Treasury or the People s Bank of China to refer exchange rate policy or transparency issues to the Bilateral Evaluation and Dispute Resolution Arrangement established in Chapter of the agreement which we discuss below China has a long history of pursuing a variety of economic and regulatory policies that provide their economy with a competitive advantage in international trade. This includes intervention in foreign exchange markets in concert with the maintenance of capital controls that together harm U.S. export competitiveness by facilitating the undervaluation of the renminbi. In August the U.S. Treasury ruled that China was manipulating its currency under the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | After this determination the U.S. Treasury and the People s Bank of China engaged in negotiations over currency issues to eliminate unfair Chinese practices that gain competitive advantages. More broadly China made commitments in the Phase One Agreement to refrain from competitive devaluations and to not target its exchange rate for competitive purposes and it agreed to publish relevant information related to exchange rates and external balances In this context in January the U.S. Treasury determined in its Report to Congress on Macroeconomic and Foreign Exchange Policies of Major Trading Partners of the United States that China would not be designated as a currency manipulator at that time Chinese Purchase Commitments Chapter of the Phase One Agreement specifies commitments for Chinese purchases of a selected group of U.S. goods and services. For the first year of the agreement China has committed to purchase an additional $ billion of U.S goods and services over the baseline followed by an additional $ billion of purchases in the second year ( table ) Purchases are broken down into four sectors : manufactured goods ( percent ) energy ( percent ) services ( percent ) and agriculture ( percent ) From to the agreement states that the countries project that the trajectory of increases in the amounts of manufactured goods agricultural goods energy products and services purchased and imported into China from the United States will continue in calendar years through As part of the trade deal China will also reduce its structural trade barriers which should result in an expansion of market-based access for U.S. goods and services aiding these purchase commitments as described above for U.S exports of agriculture. Because barriers to China s markets primarily take the form of nontariff barriers specific purchase commitments help promote China s adherence to its structural reforms in the agreement. As a result of the Phase One Agreement China has already begun taking actions to reduce its    '      $ / $ * )  '      * -/.  / *   # $ )   * )   *  * !     ' $ )   *   /  C  / " *    ) !   /0-          " * *    ) "   $    " $  0'/0-   * /  '    * ' '    $ ' ' $ * )    * ' '    $ ' ' $ * )              * /  '   * ' '    $ ' ' $ * )     ) /age  * !  / * /  '            Source : Trade Agreement between the United States of America and the People s Republic of China   ! /   ) )    * /  the two    ) /age  * !  of the / * /  '   *  ) * /    /'4       / *     / *  * )  $ ) "  | Chapter retaliatory tariffs enabling greater market access and increased purchases. In two separate waves China announced tariff reductions or chose not to impose tariffs on $ billion worth of U.S. goods and available tariff exemptions on goods classified under tariff codes ( MOF ) Due to the COVID-19 outbreak international trade fell dramatically as economies around the world contracted. As a result purchases from China early in the year were lower than anticipated. However purchases have increased significantly in the past few months. The USTR ( 2020c ) estimates that as of mid-October China had purchased over $ billion in U.S. agricultural products about percent of its target under the Phase One Agreement Record or near-record U.S. exports to China are expected in for corn pork beef pet food alfalfa hay pecans peanuts and prepared foods Dispute Resolution Chapter creates the Trade Framework Group to be led by the United States Trade Representative with a designated Vice Premier of China. This group s purpose is to ensure implementation of the Phase One Agreement and resolve disputes in a fair and expeditious manner. The United States and China created the Bilateral Evaluation and Dispute Resolution Office to deal with dayto-day matters. Each party can file a complaint to the other for not acting in accordance with the agreement at the working level and then escalate to the deputy and principal levels if no resolution is achieved. Each party may also raise matters of urgency directly at the principal level. Regular consultations are also set up to ensure compliance. Regular consultations are also set up to ensure compliance Unlike other trade agreements the Phase One Agreement does not provide for independent third-party dispute resolution. If the two parties can not resolve a dispute then the complaining party is authorized under the agreement to take proportionate responsive action that it considers appropriate against the offending party. This can take the form of tariffs on goods imported from the other party or the suspension of a provision in the agreement benefiting that other party among other actions. The responsive action may remain in effect until the resolution of the dispute. If the respondent party finds that the complaining party s action was taken in bad faith its only recourse is withdrawal from the agreement upon days notice Chapter of the Phase One Agreement provides for a series of meetings or telephone calls to ensure the success of the agreement including monthly Designated Official calls quarterly deputy calls and twice-yearly principallevel calls. In addition technical groups from the United States and China confer on a regular basis. During a principal-level call in August the parties noted sustained commitment to the success of the agreement as well as noticeable progress toward reaching the agreement s goals. They discussed China s steps to engender greater protection for intellectual property rights Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | remove impediments to American companies in the areas of financial services and agriculture and eliminate forced technology transfer ( USTR 2020d ) This call also served as a discussion on the significant increases of Chinese purchases of U.S. products and any additional action needed to implement the Phase One Agreement. Both parties remain committed to the success of the agreement with progress already made and a shared commitment to future necessary steps What Is Not in Phase One ? The Phase One Agreement with China is designed to lay the groundwork for a Phase Two negotiation. The Phase One Agreement does not address certain underlying structural issues creating interest for a Phase Two Agreement in the future ( White House 2020a ) The two countries still have very different economic systems as China asserts the state as the principal actor in the economy creating friction between the two countries. Despite some tariff concessions the United States maintains most of the Section tariffs still in effect because China has not addressed all the issues identified in the Section investigation Some of the main issues remaining include China s massive government subsidies to and its preferential treatment of state-owned enterprises ( SOEs ) Many Chinese SOEs depend on government subsidies and loans from stateowned banks to compete with more efficient private firms. Important sectors in China s economy are state-directed leading to policies and practices that provide significant artificial advantages to domestic companies while discriminating against or otherwise disadvantaging foreign competitors. China s Made in China program is a plan announced in that aims to make China a global high-technology manufacturing power ( McBride and Chatzky ) Many see this as a threat to U.S. leadership in high-technology industries citing China s subsidies the setting of market share targets for Chinese companies and the use of policies designed to substitute Chinese products for other countries products in the Chinese market and eventually abroad. China has released a list of areas in which investment by foreign firms is extremely limited or not allowed. These areas include infrastructure the media agriculture and some types of scientific research Another issue of concern is China s engagement in cyber-enabled theft and its intrusions into U.S. commercial computer networks for commercial purposes. According to the U.S. Department of Justice China is involved in more than percent of economic espionage cases and more than percent of the trade secret theft cases the department has overseen since ( DOJ ) National security concerns regarding technology and cyberspace are also significant issues including concerns related to the Chinese companies Huawei and ZTE. The United States has banned the use of Huawei and ZTE 5G equipment by U.S. companies and citizens and has been urging its allies | Chapter to follow suit by not investing in Huawei s 5G technology services due to the potential for China to spy on customers ( Vaswani ) Australia New Zealand and the United Kingdom are other major countries that have banned Huawei from their 5G networks The United States Mexico Canada Agreement The United States Mexico Canada Agreement ( USMCA ) which took effect on July is a new agreement that replaces the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) Free trade agreements establish areas between two or more countries in which the duties and other restrictive regulations of commerce are eliminated on substantially all the trade between the constituent territories in products originating in such territories ( WTO ) NAFTA established free trade in goods and services between the United States Canada and Mexico. The ability to maintain free trade in goods and services in the NAFTA area depends on rules pertaining to everything from customs administration to identification of the scope of covered services to dispute settlement. The original NAFTA rules were more than years old USMCA updated these rules in order to reflect the lessons learned under NAFTA and other trade agreements as well as economic and technological developments. Among these USMCA ensures the free movement of data across borders improves trade facilitation strengthens intellectual property protection for U.S. firms limits access to international arbitration in investment disputes ( thus steering such disputes to the courts of the country hosting the investment ) and modifies the requirements for an automobile to be eligible for duty-free treatment. In particular the agreement requires that a higher percentage of an automobile s parts be sourced within the USMCA region for production if the vehicle is to qualify for duty-free treatment. Altogether over the next five years USMCA is projected to increase U.S. gross domestic product ( GDP ) by $ billion ( percent ) and create U.S. jobs according to pre-COVID estimates by the independent nonpartisan U.S. International Trade Commission ( USITC ) Rules of Origin for Automobile Production For certain products USMCA revises the rules of origin which establish the value that must be added or processes that must occur in the territory of one or more USMCA parties for a good to be considered a USMCA-originating good If considered a USMCA-originating good it will be entitled to preferential dutyfree treatment upon importation into the territory of a USMCA party ( USTR 2020a ) In particular USMCA increases the regional content requirements for automobiles traded under the agreement. NAFTA required percent ( by value ) of an automobile s parts to be sourced in North America and USMCA raises the requirement to percent depending on the vehicle type ( USTIC Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | ) In addition under USMCA North American auto manufacturers that trade under the agreement must purchase at least percent of their steel and aluminum from the United States and its territories Canada or Mexico. Finally annually to percent of the manufacturing costs of imported automobiles must be produced by workers who earn at least $ per hour Although the USITC estimates that these provisions will create on net jobs in the U.S. automobile industry they will likely reduce growth in other sectors of the economy. And though these negative effects are more than offset by other USMCA provisions these provisions will collectively raise the costs of producing automobiles in the United States and thus increasing the consumer prices of cars and reducing real incomes ( USITC ) Digital Trade USMCA contains the most comprehensive set of provisions for digital trade in a U.S. trade agreement. The agreement prohibits discriminatory restrictions on trade in digital products and services between USMCA partners and ensures the free movement of data across borders. Moreover a U.S. company is not required to disclose proprietary source codes and algorithms to USMCA partners or to locate its computing facilities in their territory as a condition of doing business ( USITC ) Altogether these provisions are designed to reduce barriers to U.S. investment in Mexico and Canada including in the financial services sector. The data transfer provisions are estimated to reduce U.S. trade costs by between and percentage points for a broad class of sectors ranging from agriculture to manufacturing to business services ( USITC ) Many of the economic benefits of USMCA are generated through these digital trade provisions. Specifically the USITC estimates that these provisions will reduce trade policy uncertainty ( USITC ) Although the agreement prevents USMCA partners from establishing restrictions on trade in digital services data flowed freely among the United States Canada and Mexico before the signing of the agreement. Nonetheless research suggests that uncertainty about whether such regulations will eventually be imposed can reduce trade and investment between countries and a reduction in this uncertainty can yield economic benefits ( USITC ) Intellectual Property Protection USMCA introduces many provisions to enhance the protection and enforcement of the IP rights of U.S. firms. First USMCA requires that countries grant patent extensions in response to unreasonable delays in their patent-granting offices ( USITC ) USMCA also provides procedural safeguards for the recognition of new geographical indications including strong standards for protection against issuances of geographical indications that would prevent U.S. producers from using common names such as mozzarella as well as establish a mechanism for consultation between the parties on future | Chapter geographical indications pursuant to international agreements ( CRS 2020a ; USTR 2020a ) In addition the agreement calls for a minimum copyright term of life of the author plus years and for those works with a copyright term that is not based on the life of a person a minimum of years after first authorized publication ( USTR 2020a ) The USMCA provides for the most comprehensive protection for trade secrets of any prior U.S. trade agreement. It requires countries to provide including with respect to trade secret theft by SOEs civil procedures and remedies criminal procedures and penalties prohibitions against impeding licensing of trade secrets judicial procedures to prevent disclosure of trade secrets during the litigation process and penalties for government officials for the unauthorized disclosure of trade secrets ( USTR 2018c ) USMCA confirms that the enforcement of IP also applies to the digital environment ensuring that firms relying on digital trade receive adequate protection ( USITC ) Labor USMCA enshrines core worker rights which will have the most notable effect in Mexico. The Mexican labor market is hampered by a largely informal economy and a lack of protections for workers ( ILO ) Many workers are part of undemocratic unions also known as ghost unions that are not supported by the majority of the workers they allegedly represent. These unions form illegitimate collective bargaining agreements alternately known as protection contracts with an employer-dominated union without workers seeing or ratifying the agreement. Such protective contracts are estimated to represent a significant percentage of collective bargaining agreements in Mexico. When workers try to form their own union their employer tells them that they were already a part of one and subject to the parameters stipulated in the agreement they never had a chance to see ( Mojtehedzadeh ) USMCA addresses each of these issues by supporting Mexico s creation of independent bodies to resolve labor disputes guaranteeing democratic worker representation and collective bargaining rights and providing enforcement tools to ensure that Mexico meets the USMCA s labor obligations ( USTR 2020a ) Although these provisions will primarily affect Mexico by promoting higher wages and improving labor market conditions for workers the U.S economy could also benefit. To the extent that these provisions reduce this disparity between Mexican and U.S. wages U.S. firms will be less likely to offshore production to Mexico increasing the bargaining power of U.S. workers In addition U.S. export markets may benefit from the increased purchasing power of the Mexican consumer ( USITC ) Reform of the Investor-State Dispute Mechanism NAFTA contained provisions allowing an investor of one NAFTA party to submit to international arbitration claims that another NAFTA party ( the host party ) Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade |    '   The (   /  * !    )      )    $  *  )   $ ) "     $ ) $ ( $   # # * '    *  '   .0'/.   ) /   '0  * !   ' '   * ( (   # $ ( ) /.   ) /   '0  * !      * ( (   # $ ( ) /.    /    #  ) "  $ )   '0  * !      * ( (   # $ ( ) /.    )      * ' '   ( $ ' ' $ * )      $  *   * ' '   ( $ ' ' $ * )      *      ) / )  / $ * )  '       * ( ( $ $ * ) had breached investment-related obligations in NAFTA and thereby harmed the investor or its investment in the territory of the host party. This arbitration mechanism known as the Investor-State Dispute Settlement ( ISDS ) raised concerns about its effect on the ability of host state regulators to exercise their prerogative to regulate in the public interest. Under USMCA the ISDS will no longer be available between the United States and Canada after June Instead investment-related claims by U.S. investors against Canada and by Canadian investors against the United States will need to be filed in local courts ( USITC ) For disputes between U.S. and Mexican investors USMCA limits the scope of claims that can be submitted to ISDS except where investors have certain government contracts in specific economic sectors. When such conditions are met it is the view of the United States and Mexico that the risk of breach of investment-related obligations and consequent harm warrant maintaining the availability of ISDS. When these conditions are not met aggrieved U.S and Mexican investors must first attempt to resolve their disputes in domestic courts. Only if these efforts are unsuccessful after a period of months may they have recourse to ISDS. The USITC estimates that these changes to ISDS for Mexico will reduce both domestic and foreign capital investment in Mexico by $ billion ( percent ) while slightly increasing investment in the United States ( USITC ) Agricultural Provisions Agricultural trade among member countries that was already duty-free under NAFTA will continue to be duty-free under USMCA. Moreover USMCA expands market access opportunities for U.S. dairy poultry and egg exports to Canada Canada imposes tariff rate quotas ( TRQs ) on dairy products which restrict the amount of dairy products it can import from other countries. Although Canada will be permitted to retain its TRQs USMCA will boost exports of U.S. dairy products to Canada. Similarly the agreement will preserve U.S. TRQs for sugar while slightly increasing U.S. imports of sugar from Canada ( USITC ) USMCA also provides a mechanism for biotechnology cooperation and fair treatment in quality grading for American wheat and nondiscrimination and transparency commitments regarding the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages. In total USMCA is expected to increase U.S. agricultural exports by $ billion per year ( percent ) ( USITC ) | Chapter Table U.S. Employment Sector Effects of the United States Mexico Canada Agreement Sector Employment overall Agriculture Manufacturing and mining Services Source : U.S. International Trade Commission Value ( thousands ) Percent Increase over Five Years Table Effects of the United States Mexico Canada Agreement on U.S. Trade ( percent changes relative to the baseline in ) Aspect of Trade U.S. trade with Canada U.S. trade with Mexico Exports ( percent ) Exports ( dollars billions ) Imports ( percent ) Imports ( dollars billions ) Source : U.S. International Trade Commission Trade Facilitation Several USMCA provisions will improve trade facilitation that is the administrative procedures that enable traded goods to be processed quickly and efficiently at the border. USMCA changes the threshold below which goods are exempt from formal customs procedures ( the de minimis threshold ) for goods entering Canada and Mexico while the United States will retain its current thresholds for imports from these countries ( USITC ) This will help expedite the customs process for low- and moderate-value packages ( i.e. with a value under $ ) which will benefit U.S. e-commerce firms in particular by lowering processing costs. Other measures will boost trade facilitation for e-commerce firms for example by permitting electronic authentication for transactions e-signatures and paperless trading. Altogether these provisions will boost U.S. e-commerce exports by $ million ( USITC ) Overall Economic Effects USMCA will have a positive effect on many industries in the U.S. economy creating jobs and increasing wages for U.S. workers in the agricultural manufacturing and services sectors. Over the next five years USMCA will increase U.S. GDP by $ billion ( percent ) and will create jobs across a broad range of sectors according to pre-COVID estimates by the USITC ( table ) It will also boost exports to and imports from USMCA partners by $ billion ( table ) Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | Box Bahrain s and the United Arab Emirates Agreements with Israel On September the United States hosted representatives from Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates as they signed agreements to normalize relations with Israel. The President of the United Arab Emirates subsequently issued a decree stating that the United Arab Emirates law requiring a boycott of Israel was repealed. Since the founding of Israel in the Arab League has maintained a boycott of the country. ( The Arab League consists of Middle Eastern and African countries and entities : Algeria Bahrain Comoros Djibouti Egypt Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco Oman the Palestinian Authority Qatar Saudi Arabia Somalia Sudan Syria ( suspended since ) Tunisia the United Arab Emirates and Yemen. ) Due to the boycott both Israel and the boycotting countries miss opportunities for increased trade relations. Before only two Arab states had normalized relations with Israel : Egypt ( ) and Jordan ( ) ( There was also a secondary boycott of companies that did business with Israel. It ended with the Oslo Accords in ) The Palestinian Authority also maintains relations with Israel. A literature review of the Arab boycott found that it imposed trade costs on Israel of roughly $ billion a year ( Anthony et al. ) If trade between Israel and Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates grows in line with other countries that have normalized relations with Israel it would increase by an estimated $ million annually. In order to estimate the trade effect of Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates normalizing relations with Israel we use the examples of Egypt and Jordan. In Israel imported $ million worth of goods from Egypt and Jordan and exported $ million of goods to them. This is roughly percent of Egypt and Jordan s combined GDP. The CEA estimates that if Israeli imports and exports to Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates increased to this same percentage of Bahrain s and the United Arab Emirates GDP annual Israeli imports and exports with them would increase to $ million and $ million respectively. The vast majority of this increase will occur with the United Arab Emirates as its economy is much larger than Bahrain s Other Trade Agreements Beyond USMCA and the Phase One agreement the Trump Administration has sought to improve the United States terms of trade with other countries. In the United States renegotiated parts of its trade deal with South Korea to ensure fair trade for the U.S. auto industry. In the United States reached a Stage One trade agreement with Japan to reduce or eliminate tariffs on many U.S. food and agricultural goods exports and then in opened talks with the United Kingdom to pursue a free trade agreement. In addition the United | Chapter States hosted representatives from Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates as they signed agreements to normalize relations with Israel ( see box ) U.S.-Japan Trade Agreements On October the United States and Japan signed a Stage One outcome from bilateral negotiations consisting of two individual agreements : the U.S.Japan Trade Agreement ( USJTA ) and the U.S.-Japan Digital Trade Agreement ( USTR 2019c 2019d ) The USJTA provides for Japan cutting or eliminating agricultural tariffs and quota restrictions for scores of U.S. products such as beef and nuts in return for limited cuts and the elimination of import tariffs on U.S. industrial and agricultural goods ( CRS ; Schott ) Each side respectively agreed to remove or reduce restrictions on about $ billion in imports ( $ billion total ) covering roughly percent of all trade between the countries ( CRS ) The Digital Trade Agreement covers $ billion in digital trade and negotiators modeled many of the provisions in the deal after those in the USMCA ( USTR 2020e ) The agreement ensures barrier-free data flows prohibits data localization laws that mandate having domestic computing facilities and prohibits arbitrary disclosures of imported source codes and algorithms. Other provisions include prohibitions on customs duties on electronic transmissions ( CRS ) Several topics were not included in negotiations and were left for a larger future deal ( CRS ) A key Japanese trade objective revolves around automobiles Japan s top export to the United States. Japan hopes to reduce current U.S. tariffs on its auto exports as was originally negotiated in the TransPacific Partnership and to ensure that new tariffs are not imposed ( Goodman et al. ) Although Japan imposes no tariffs on U.S. auto exports the United States maintains that nontariff barriers such as certain testing protocols for automobiles limit U.S. exports with the result that Japan s automotive exports to the U.S. are times higher than its imports from the United States ( USTR 2019a ; CRS ) Consistent with recent practice the United States will also seek provisions on exchange rate issues ( USTR 2018b ) The U.S.-South Korea Free Trade Agreement On September the United States and South Korea signed an agreement to revise the U.S. South Korea Free Trade Agreement ( KORUS ) The agreement mainly focuses on automobile trade considering that the largest share of the $ billion trade deficit that the U.S. has with South Korea is concentrated in the automobile sector ( Tankersley ; Overby et al. ) For example a key provision centers on U.S. auto exports to South Korea that adhere to U.S. safety regulations. Under the renegotiated agreement South Korea s allowance for U.S. exports of automobiles meeting U.S. safety standards doubled from to per manufacturer per year allowing U.S Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | exporters to ramp up sales and marketing for future exports and thus avoid concerns about reaching the limit. The United States will maintain its percent tariff on Korean trucks through ( USTR 2018e ) Beyond automobiles KORUS and accompanying side letters also address several other issues. These include updating certain trade remedy provisions and improving customs procedures in South Korea related to verification of U.S. origin something that is necessary for U.S. exporters to claim tariff benefits under the agreement without unnecessary delays ( CRS ; USTR 2018d ) Limited Trade Agreements with Brazil and Ecuador On October the United States and Brazil reached an agreement that focuses on trade rules and transparency contributing to the elimination of nontariff barriers between the two countries. The deal will facilitate the processing of goods at the countries borders enhance regulatory transparency promote good regulatory practices and strengthen rules addressing corruption. Other trade issues are expected to be addressed in a more comprehensive agreement including those related to IP and agricultural issues ( CRS 2020b ) On December the United States and Ecuador signed an agreement that builds on the U.S.-Ecuador Trade and Investment Council Agreement that has been in effect since Like the agreement with Brazil the new agreement with Ecuador will promote bilateral trade by updating trade facilitation between the two countries enhancing regulatory transparency and strengthening anticorruption efforts. The new agreement also seeks to foster trade and investment opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises in the two countries U.S.-U.K. Negotiations The United Kingdom formally exited the European Union on January but has remained in a status quo transition period through December ( Henley Rankin and O Carroll ) Consequently the U.K. began negotiating its own trade agreements in which could enter into force from January In May the U.S. and the U.K. launched negotiations on a comprehensive free trade agreement and conducted intensive negotiations throughout The United States objectives for the agreement are to reduce or eliminate market access barriers to U.S. industrial agricultural services and digital products to the U.K. including regulatory differences that impede bilateral trade and to deepen the already-extensive economic relationship between the U.S. and the U.K. to support employment and economic growth ( USTR 2020f ) Though the U.S. and the U.K. share the goal of an ambitious agreement the U.K. has political sensitivities in areas such as agricultural market access and regulations governing product standards and food safety ( Packard ) | Chapter Separately after the transition period between the United Kingdom and the European Union ends on January the U.K. will no longer be covered by existing EU agreements with other countries including the United States. Therefore the U.S. and the U.K. completed new bilateral agreements and mechanisms to ensure that there is no disruption to trade in certain products such as wine distilled spirits and marine and telecommunications equipment all of which are covered by existing U.S.-EU agreements ( USTR 2020f ) Finally the United States and the United Kingdom have other bilateral trade differences including the U.K. s implementation of digital services taxes targeting U.S. multinational firms unresolved World Trade Organization disputes on large civil aircraft that have resulted in retaliatory tariffs on both U.S and U.K. exports to each other and U.S. tariffs on steel and aluminum imports and the resulting EU ( and U.K. ) retaliatory tariffs ( CEA ; Elliott and Mason ; Isaac ) The Rise of Global Supply Chains In early the global economic outlook changed dramatically as the coronavirus responsible for the COVID-19 spread first through china and then through much of the rest of the world. The COVID-19 pandemic disrupted economic activity everywhere it spread as people restricted their movement to avoid health risks and governments closed schools and nonessential businesses in order to mitigate the public health threat. Moreover in an increasingly globalized economy localized outbreaks of the virus created effects that rippled beyond local borders to the rest of the world. The emergence of global supply chains over the past decades meant for example that covid-19 disrupted production in auto assembly plants in north america even before the pandemic spread to the United States as plants in North America assembled parts produced in wuhan china. The risks posed by disease natural disasters and trade wars have caused firms and governments to rethink global supply chains and in some cases bring production closer to home ( Schlesinger ) China and the Emergence of Global Supply Chains The past three decades have seen a rapid expansion of international trade and in particular the use of global supply chains as firms in the United States and around the world have relocated production off shore to take advantage of lower costs of labor and other inputs. Global supply chains have allowed for specialization and net gains from trade resulting in increased productivity and lower costs for consumers ( Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg ) Firms seeking lower manufacturing costs often found them in China with its large supply of labor and resulting low labor costs ( Cui Meng and Lu ) Although U.S. consumers and importing firms as well as competitive exporters have benefited from globalized supply chains some recent Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | academic literature indicates that the establishment of Permanent Normal Trade Relations ( PNTR ) with China at the end of imposed steep costs on U.S. manufacturing employment and innovation ( Pierce and Schott ; Autor Dorn and Hanson ) PNTR status meant that the United States extends permanently nondiscriminatory treatment to the products of China ( GPO ) Import competition from countries with low labor costs including China has exacerbated a reduction in U.S. manufacturing employment accounting for a quarter of the total decline in U.S. manufacturing employment between and and causing lower labor force participation higher unemployment and lower wages in affected communities ( Autor Dorn and Hanson ) Abraham and Kearney ( ) find that import displacement after the establishment of PNTR with China was the single biggest factor in the decline of the overall U.S. employment-to-population rate after although automation also played a role Displaced American workers have struggled to transition to new opportunities resulting in higher utilization of government safety net programs including unemployment disability and healthcare benefits ( Autor Dorn and Hanson ) The lack of valuable work reduced young males marriage prospects which was a factor in there being a greater share of single-headed households in communities affected by the China trade shock ( Autor Dorn and Hanson ) Moreover the worsening labor market conditions exacerbated socioeconomic distress leading to substance abuse and increased mortality from drug overdoses suicides and liver diseases ( Autor Dorn and Hanson ; Case and Deaton ; Pierce and Schott ) U.S. Firms Begin to Hedge the Risks of Global Supply Chains There are however some indications that the globalization of American supply chains has begun to partially reverse. First the financial crisis was an unprecedented shock to the global economy from which the expanding use of global supply chains has never quite recovered. The expansion of global supply chains measured as a share of trade slowed after the crisis and even reversed in the most recent year for which data are available due to slowing economic growth and trade reforms ( World Bank ) More recently tensions between the United States and China and the global COVID-19 pandemic have brought into focus some of the risks of global supply chains causing firms and governments to look for ways to reduce exposure to these risks ( Lund et al ) The Trade Slowdown in Response to COVID-19 As the COVID-19 pandemic spread around the globe it disrupted economic activity through private and public responses to quell its transmission. Real GDP for all the OECD countries fell percent in the first half of while U.S. real GDP fell percent ( not at an annualized rate ) Reductions in trade | Chapter  $ "      ( * -/.  Year-over-year change ( percent )   /. Goods  * *    )   s $   $   )     0'.   *    )           '  '  / $ * )  $ "       * -/.  Year-over-year change ( percent )   /.  * *    )   s $   * *   $   )     0'.   *    )           '  '  / $ * ) Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade |    '   ( * -/.   )    * -/.  * !   $       / *  / # * " #   +/ (    / *  ( * -/.     #  ) "  '  ! * (   * ' '     $ ' ' $ * )   ) /            '    ) * -/ation   $ ) / )  )    )   r  $  s $    * ) ./-0  / $ * )   '  * ( ( ) $   / $ * )  c * ( +0/ -s   )  information services     $ )  )  $  '  s $     #  "  ! *   * !  i ) / ' '  /0  '  p- * -/4    * ) ( ) /  g * *    )   s $    / #  b0. $ )  s $     * )  '  c0'/0-  '   )   r   / $ * )  '  s $    )  )   s $    Total          * -/.     #  ) "  '  ! * (   * ' '     $ ' ' $ * )   ) /                        *    )           '  '  / $ * )   exacerbated declines in GDP. Global merchandise exports as reported by the World Trade Organization fell percent in the first half of compared with the first half of and U.S. merchandise trade ( exports plus imports ) fell by percent over the same period Total U.S. trade of goods and services ( exports plus imports ) through October was $ billion ( percent ) below levels with the second quarter falling $ billion ( percent ) The drop in trade was largest in May with imports down percent year-over-year and exports down percent ( figures and ) Separating U.S. trade by goods and services reveals that the pandemic had a particularly large effect on trade in services. Moreover though monthly trade in goods has shown signs of recovering trade in services has remained over percent below the previous year Trade in services a major sector of the U.S. economy was hit particularly hard by the international travel restrictions implemented by the United States and many other countries around the globe to prevent or slow the spread of COVID-19. The impact however has been concentrated in travel and transportation with other service sectors seeing relatively lower declines in trade. On January President Trump issued a travel ban for most non-U.S. citizens coming from China ( White House 2020b ) Then on March President Trump issued a travel ban for most non-U.S. citizens coming from the Schengen Area which consists of European countries with a common visa policy ( White House 2020c ) Also effective March the Centers for Disease | Chapter  $ "     ( * -/.  * !   * *     ) /   #  ) "  ! * (   '  /    * ) /- $  Year-over-year change ( percent )   /.   # ) " )     ./  * !  w * '   # $ )    )    and  $  *  )     0'.   *    )           '  '  / $ * ) Control and Prevention ( CDC ) issued a no sail order for all cruise ships ( CDC ) International tourism and passenger travel services have taken the largest hit from COVID-19 The effect of the travel restrictions and the private sector s response to COVID-19 is apparent when looking at the level of service trade broken down by the type of service. As discussed the largest decreases are in travel and transportation services ( table ) Imports and exports of travel have fallen percent and percent respectively accounting for over two-thirds of the total drop in service trade. The European Union much of which was covered by the Schengen ban has seen the largest decline in service trade with the United States with imports from the EU down percent and exports to the EU down percent in through September Through October imports of goods to the United States have decreased by percent year-over-year. Most of the drop came in the second quarter when nominal U.S. imports of goods fell by percent. However imports to the United States have fallen at different times for different countries ( figure ) In the first quarter of imports from China plummeted reaching their lowest point in March at percent below their March value. This quarter was also when COVID-19 was widely present in China and China shut Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | down its economy to address the health crisis. By comparison in March U.S imports of goods from the rest of the world were only percent below their March value indicating that the economic effect of COVID-19 was mainly concentrated in China but had begun spreading to other countries In the second quarter of U.S. imports of goods saw their steepest declines in total. In April and May imports were down percent compared with the same period a year earlier. This drop was primarily driven by a percent drop in imports from Canada and Mexico. Imports from the Schengen Area and the rest of the world also dropped while imports from China rebounded although they remained below levels. This pattern of imports may be explained by the fact that China was reopening its economy in the second quarter while many other countries including the United States were shutting theirs down beginning in March. As governments around the world imposed shelter-in-place orders shuttering many businesses imports fell. Imports of goods began to rebound in June and July as governments lifted these orders The Decline in Imports of Intermediate Goods As discussed above the emergence of global supply chains has driven a dramatic increase in international trade in recent years. Global supply chains drive trade in intermediate goods which are goods used in the production of finished goods. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a particularly disruptive effect on supply chains through its effects on trade in intermediate goods Because global supply chains intricately connect distant locations localized shutdowns due to COVID-19 disrupted economic activity around the world through supply chain contagion ( Baldwin and Tomiura ) On January China closed the city of Wuhan a major manufacturing hub in Hubei Province and locked down additional cities shortly thereafter leading to supply chain disruptions in the United States as Chinese businesses ceased production of intermediate goods intended for the U.S. ( Xie ) Luo and Tsang ( ) use a network model to estimate that about percent of the impact of the Hubei lockdown on global output occurred through the effect on supply chains both inside and outside China The pandemic s effect on supply chains can be seen by analyzing data on international trade flows. These data are segmented into categories of goods consumption capital and intermediate goods using the broad economic categories defined by UN Comtrade ( ) Consumption goods are finished goods that are durable ( long lasting ) or nondurable ( one-time use ) goods that are readily available to a consumer to purchase directly or through a retailer or wholesaler. Capital goods are durable goods used in the production of other goods. Finally as discussed intermediate goods are goods used as inputs in the production of finished goods and accordingly are important for supply chains | Chapter    '      ( * -/.   #  ) "  ! * (   '.  ! *   '  /    * ) /- $   )    " $ * )      * !   * *   / # * " #    / *     * ) /-4  *   " $ * )    )     ) / (  $  /   * ) ( +/ $ * )    $ /  '   * ' '    $ ' ' $ * )    ) /   * ' '    $ ' ' $ * )    ) /   * ' '    $ ' ' $ * )    ) /        # $ )           $  *    # ) " )          ./  * !  * '    * '                  *    )           '  '  / $ * )  As discussed above early in imports of goods to the United States declined primarily as a result of China s lockdowns. In April and May as the pandemic spread and governments around the world adopted shelter-in-place orders imports of goods slowed down more dramatically. Imports began to recover in June and July as governments lifted their shelter-in-place orders However while imports of consumption goods rebounded sharply in June imports of intermediate goods remained at about percent below levels. By October imports of consumption goods were percent above levels ; however imports of intermediate goods continued to lag behind at percent below levels Through October U.S. imports of intermediate goods from the world decreased percent year-over-year primarily driven by the declines in imports from Canada Mexico and China ( table ) Imports of consumption goods are down only $ billion from levels while intermediate goods are down $ billion Imports of consumption goods may have rebounded faster than imports of intermediate goods because as governments lifted shelter-in-place orders consumers were able to increase their spending faster than firms were able to ramp up their production. As production continues to rebound it is not yet clear whether U.S. imports of intermediate goods will return to pre-pandemic levels or whether some supply chains will relocate to the United States Evidence That Firms Are Reducing Their Exposure to China With the COVID-19 pandemic and trade policy uncertainty highlighting risks in global supply chains U.S. businesses are considering moving production away from China to either other Asian countries closer to the U.S. ( near-shoring ) or back to the U.S. ( reshoring ) Although a lag in the data commonly used to measure global supply chains prevents the CEA from directly observing recent changes in supply chains surveys can provide a leading indicator of firms Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade |  $ "      ( * -/.  * !  * *   ! * (  / #   * '       * !   * *   Year-over-year change ( percent )   /.   $ /  '  * ) ( +/ $ * ) ) / (  $  /  )     0'.   *    )          '  '  / $ * ) plans to locate facilities. In the past year several surveys have attempted to evaluate the extent to which firms in the United States and elsewhere plan to change supply chains through the relocation of production or the diversification of input sourcing In January before the full extent of the COVID-19 pandemic was known the Bank of America surveyed analysts covering firms ( $ trillion in market capitalization ) across North America Europe the Asia-Pacific region ( excluding China ) and China finding clear evidence of movement in global supply chains. Across sectors percent of firms with global supply chains ( $ trillion in market capitalization ) are expected to shift at least a portion of their supply chains from current locations. The report concludes that the trend is clear : global supply chains are on course to be uprooted and brought home or transplanted to strategic allies. In a July update the Bank of America found that three quarters of that percent were expanding their reshoring plans ( Bank of America 2020a 2020b ) A March UBS survey of chief financial officers ( CFOs ) in the U.S. North Asia and China suggests that to percent of capacity represented by these executives will relocate from China ( UBS ) If actuated this would move between $ billion and $ billion in current Chinese exports out of China. A June UBS survey shows that among U.S. firms with manufacturing in China percent have moved or are planning to move some of | Chapter their manufacturing capacity out of China. Leading candidate destinations for relocation are the United States Canada Japan and Mexico Among North Asian ( excluding Chinese ) firms responding to the UBS survey percent of CFOs have moved or are planning to move capacity from China to home markets in Japan Taiwan and South Korea ( UBS ) This represents over percent of the Chinese production among the firms in the survey. The CFOs identified Vietnam Thailand and India as potential locations Even Chinese firms have relocated or are planning to do so percent of CFOs indicated that they would relocate a combined percent of their Chinese production. Further respondents reported plans to establish or expand supply chains closer to customers Among U.S. firms percent of CFOs reported that they had manufacturing in China of whom percent have moved or are planning to move capacity out of China. For those planning to move they indicated that they would shift a combined percent of their Chinese production. Plans to relocate are most common among healthcare firms ( percent ) consumer staples ( percent ) and technology ( percent ) followed by consumer discretionary ( percent ) industrials ( percent ) and materials ( percent ) The Bank of America ( 2020a ) finds similar results for the Asia-Pacific region ( excluding Chinese ) firms. Half of the sectors have firms that have already moved or intend to move largely to Southeast Asia and India. The survey finds that firms in percent of U.S. sectors representing $ trillion in market capitalization have already moved or are intending to do so Recent data on manufactured imports from low-cost Asian producers support the survey evidence that firms are moving supply chains out of China The management consulting company Kearney reports the ratio of the value of manufactured goods imported to the U.S. from low-cost Asian countries relative to the value of U.S. domestic gross output of manufactured goods ( Kearney ) A decline in this manufacturing import ratio does not necessarily indicate that production is reshoring to the U.S. but it does indicate substitution away from supply chains running through these countries In the manufacturing import ratio fell for the first time since ( figure ) The decline from percent in to percent in was driven by a percent contraction in imports from the low-cost Asian countries ( the numerator ) with U.S. domestic gross output of manufactured goods ( the denominator ) essentially unchanged. The decline in imports was led by a percent contraction in trade with China. Whereas percent of goods imported from the Asian low-cost countries came from China in : Q4 only percent did so as of : Q4. Though transshipment where goods are altered slightly to change their originating status is likely a partial factor this can not explain the entirety of the shift Another Kearney measure the near-to-far ratio measures the value of U.S. imports from Mexico divided by the value of imports from the same Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade |  $ "       ) !   /0- $ ) "  ( * -/    / $ *  Ratio ( percent )  *           * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $   )   $ "        / * !     / $ *  Percent ( imports from Mexico / imports from Asian low-cost countries )  *          * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $  | Chapter  )   Asian low-cost countries. An increase in the ratio indicates greater nearsourcing from Mexico relative to Asia ( figure ) Much like the reshoring index the near-to-far ratio jumped in as U.S. importers substituted away from Asia and toward imports from Mexico Drivers of Shifting Supply Chains Although no single factor is responsible for global supply chain dynamics the confluence of higher wages in China technology and automation trade policy tensions and tariffs and the COVID-19 pandemic have all been factors in a change in how firms evaluate supply chains. In this section we briefly discuss these factors and interactions between them Wages in China have risen relative to many other countries in recent years. In the 1970s observers noted the seemingly unlimited labor supply in China as workers migrated from rural China to urban areas ( Cui Meng and Lu ) Whereas percent of the population lived in rural areas in the 1970s the rural share of the population had shrunk to percent by Owing partially to China s one child policy China s population is aging exacerbating a restriction in labor supply now and in the future. The resulting rising wages are eroding Chinese cost competitiveness ( figure ) and incentivizing firms to consider manufacturing in Southeast Asia or closer to home with  $ "     "   * ) / # '4   * ( $ )  '    "  $ )      * ' '   Wages ( nominal U.S. dollars )  # $ )    '  $   #  $ '  )   $  *  # $ ' $ $ )  $ / )  ( )  * ) $   *   ) / )  / $ * )  '    *   "  ) $  / $ * ) Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | greater automation. Higher Chinese wages in comparison with other manufacturing centers persist even when controlling for productivity Businesses are also increasingly aware of growing geopolitical tension between the U.S. and China. Even if the U.S. and China remove tariffs in the short term businesses are adjusting for long-term tensions. COVID-19 has compounded these concerns as firms recognize the need to increase resiliency. As firms consider moving out of China they may look to automation to make up differences in labor productivity or to offset wage costs from relocating supply chains to countries with higher wages. The Bank of America estimates that by global robot installations will increase by million doubling levels ( Bank of America 2020a ) U.S. tariffs on Chinese goods have been factors in the relocation of supply chains. In addition to tariffs businesses are also aware of the broader geopolitical context of the U.S.-China relationship and believe that regardless of nearterm tariff policy the two countries will face frictions. For this reason Bank of America analysts cite both tariffs and national security as primary reasons for anticipated reconfigurations of global supply chains with U.S.-China tariffs expected to persist regardless of the Phase One trade deal ( Bank of America 2020b ) Since the Bank of America published its survey the COVID-19 pandemic appears to have further exacerbated U.S.-China tensions. As evidence of the role of national security concerns in driving supply chain relocation Intel and TSMC ( manufacturers of computer chips ) have located plants in the United States despite higher labor and capital costs ( Wu ) Conclusion The Trump Administration has reasserted U.S. interests in international trade policy by forging new bilateral trade agreements with China and Japan renegotiating the U.S. trade deal with South Korea and reshaping regional trade by modernizing the United States trade agreement with its most important trading partners Canada and Mexico. The Phase One Agreement with China when fully implemented promises to achieve an unprecedented expansion of U.S. exports to China and commits China to internal reforms that will make the country an improved trading partner for the United States. USMCA achieves new protections for U.S. interests across a range of areas including digital services intellectual property and labor. These agreements go well beyond the lower tariffs that have been the focus of past trade agreements by addressing structural and technical barriers to free and fair trade. Along with progress on other trade agreements these two major milestones will continue to drive U.S economic growth and create American jobs The COVID-19 pandemic reduced overall international trade and has brought into sharp focus some risks of existing global supply chain configurations that previously may not have been fully priced in. These supply chains | Chapter have the potential to tap into countries comparative advantages to create mutual gains from trade. But global supply chains are susceptible to disruptions from pandemics along with natural disasters and geopolitical tensions As the private sector considers the relocation of supply chains governments must weigh the benefits for some consumers and firms against the emerging understanding of the full costs to sectors facing import competition as well as the costs associated with the risks of supply chain disruption Pursuing Free Fair and Balanced Trade | x Part III An Effort to Rebuild Our Country x Chapter The Year in Review and the Years Ahead In the U.S. economy experienced the single largest adverse economic shock since the Great Depression due to COVID-19. The Business Cycle Dating Committee of the National Bureau of Economic Research determined that the economy peaked in February bringing to an end the economic expansion that began in June the longest such expansion in U.S. history. There were record declines in real gross domestic product ( GDP ) and payroll employment in the second quarter of Despite the sharpest rebound in real GDP and payroll employment since the Great Depression during third quarter the U.S economy has only partially recovered from its April nadir Declines in payroll employment were concentrated among low-wage workers. Overall inflation in was similar to that in previous years given that several months of substantial deflation early in the year were offset by higher-than-average inflation in later months. Housing markets and interest rates were affected by the pandemic but not to the same extent as real GDP or employment As of the writing of this Report fourth-quarter data for most indicators are not yet available. Blue Chip forecasts anticipate strong compensatory growth in However GDP forecasts and the slowing pace of the recovery of labor force participation show that many of these issues will persist through at least The first three chapters of this Report provide deep analysis of the major macroeconomic developments in the U.S. economy during It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a more succinct and summary review of the main macroeconomic indicators for the U.S. economy during The chapter then discusses the U.S. economy s future outlook including potential economic gains in the event of full implementation of the President s complete economic policy agenda as well as potential downside risks particularly near-term risks from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic The Year in Review This section summarizes the main U.S. macroeconomic indicators during with a focus on total economic output the labor market inflation the housing market financial markets and oil markets Components of Economic Output Real GDP fell by percent at an annualized rate during the first three quarters of ( percent nonannualized ) This decline was driven by an unprecedented contraction as a result of COVID-19 and measures taken to control the virus in the second quarter which saw real GDP fall at an annualized rate of percent ( percent nonannualized ) the largest quarterly decline since the series began in The second quarter s record decline followed a percent annualized contraction in the first quarter of In the third quarter real GDP grew percent at an annualized rate ( percent nonannualized ) the largest single quarter of economic growth on record and roughly twice the prior record of percent at an annualized rate ( percent nonannualized ) set in the first quarter of With growth in the third quarter the United States has recovered two-thirds of the economic output lost in the first half of the year due to the pandemic The decline in real GDP was widespread touching nearly every facet of the economy and component of output ( figure ) Consumer spending which accounts for roughly percent of the U.S. economy contributed most to the decline accounting for percentage points of the percent ( nonannualized ) decline. Third quarter consumption recovered percent of its decline during the first half of Investment contributed percentage point to the percent ( nonannualized ) decline in real GDP as increased residential investment and inventories were more than offset by a drop-off in nonresidential investment during the first three quarters. In the third quarter the level of investment recovered percent of its decline from the first half of Net exports made up percentage point ( nonannualized ) of the percent decline in real GDP and government spending made up percentage point ( nonannualized ) of this decline. Government spending ( which rose in the second quarter ) and net exports both fell in the third quarter of | Chapter  $ "    * ( * ) ) /.  * !    '      Dollars chained ( trillions )   * /  '  * ) ( +/ $ * )  * ) ( ) / ) ./ ( ) /  /  e3+ * -/  *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $        '  '  / $ * )  * /   #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * ) Consumer spending. Consumer spending fell markedly during Over the course of the first three quarters personal consumption expenditures fell by percent ( nonannualized ) Throughout the last years personal consumption expenditures have remained between to percent of disposable personal income but fell to percent of disposable personal income in the second quarter its lowest level on record ( figure ) As a result the personal saving rate personal saving as a percentage of disposable personal income surged from percent in the fourth quarter of to percent in the second quarter of before declining to percent in the third quarter. On a monthly basis the personal saving rate peaked in April setting a record high of percent. Total net wealth ( consisting of stock market wealth housing wealth and other wealth less liabilities ) also fell in the second quarter. Wealth data for the third quarter were not available as of the writing of this Report Consumer spending which as noted above accounts for roughly percent of GDP provided the largest contribution to the GDP decline in the first two quarters of as well as to the GDP expansion in the third quarter. The patterns in consumption reveal the uneven way that COVID-19 and measures taken to control the virus affected economic activity. Declines in some components of services were particularly affected : travel industries physician and dental services. In addition motor vehicle purchases also fell drastically. Real The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Consumption and Wealth Relative Share of Disposable Personal Income ( DPI ) Total net wealth share of DPI : Q3 Consumption share of DPI Consumption ( left axis ) Total net wealth ( right axis ) Sources : Federal Reserve Board ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA Calculations Note : Shading denotes a recession personal consumption expenditures accounted for percent of the decline in real GDP during the second quarter having declined by percent ( nonannualized ) While consumer spending on goods contracted percent ( nonannualized ) in the second quarter spending on services plummeted percent ( nonannualized ) A resurgence in personal consumption expenditures in the third quarter of reflected the partial reopening of businesses impacted by closures in the first and second quarters. Real personal consumption expenditures increased percent ( nonannualized ) in the third quarter accounting for percent of real GDP growth in that quarter. Consumer spending in the services sector alone accounted for percent of GDP growth in the third quarter Investment. During the first three quarters of private investment fell by percent ( nonannualized ) The declines in the first and second quarters of and percent ( nonannualized ) respectively were followed by a strong rebound ( percent nonannualized ) in the third. The drop in total investment was mirrored across each of the three main types of investment : nonresidential residential and inventories ( figure ) Notably the decline in investment was not as steep as during the Great Recession and investment rebounded more quickly though generally remained below prepandemic levels as of the third quarter | Chapter Figure Components of Investment Dollars ( trillions ) : Q3 Total investment Nonresidential investment Residential investment Inventories Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : Shading denotes a recession Nonresidential investment contracted and percent ( nonannualized ) in the first and second quarters respectively and then rebounded percent ( nonannualized ) in the third quarter so that the third quarter was percent below the : Q4 level. Within nonresidential investment investment in structures declined in the first three quarters of and as of the third quarter was percent below its year-end level. Declining investment in oil and gas exploration and production weighed heavily on investment in structures with investment in mining exploration shafts and wells declining percent ( nonannualized ) in the first three quarters of Nonresidential investment in equipment contracted by percent ( nonannualized ) in the first two quarters of though unlike investment in structures it began to rebound in the third quarter increasing percent ( nonannualized ) As of the third quarter nonresidential investment in equipment was percent below its : Q4 level with investment in information processing equipment surging to percent above the : Q4 level though industrial and transportation equipment investment were and percent respectively below their : Q4 level as of the third quarter of After edging up in the first quarter and declining in the second quarter nonresidential investment in intellectual property products increased in the third quarter and was percent below its : Q4 level in the third quarter The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | In the first quarter of residential investment increased percent ( nonannualized ) the largest single-quarter increase since : Q4. After contracting by percent ( nonannualized ) in the second quarter residential investment surged by percent ( nonannualized ) in the third quarter to a level percent above its : Q4 level Inventory investment or the change between goods produced ( or imported ) and goods sold ( or exported ) contributed negatively to real GDP growth in the first and second quarters of As firms invested to rebuild inventories private inventory investment accounted for percentage points or percent of annualized real GDP growth in the third quarter Government purchases. Compared with other components of GDP there was very little change in government purchases in During the first three quarters of government purchases fell by percent ( nonannualized ) As a share of GDP government purchases grew by percent over this period with all three categories of government purchases experiencing increases as a share of GDP ( figure ) Federal Government purchases increased substantially in the second quarter supported by the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security ( CARES ) Act and other types of emergency coronavirus funding ( see chapters through of this Report ) Although Federal spending rose during the first three quarters of State and local spending fell. Quarterly Federal Government nondefense consumption rose by $ billion ( in chained dollars ) ( percent nonannualized ) from the fourth quarter of to a peak in the second quarter of Similarly during the first three quarters of quarterly Federal Government nondefense gross investment rose by $ billion ( in chained dollars ) ( percent nonannualized ) By comparison during the first three quarters of quarterly state and local government consumption fell by $ billion ( in chained dollars ) ( percent nonannualized ) which outweighed the increase of $ billion ( in chained dollars ) ( percent nonannualized ) in quarterly State and local government gross investment Net exports. The first three quarters of saw a large drop in imports and an even larger drop in exports. Real net exports ( exports minus imports ) increased in the second quarter but fell in the third quarter. Overall net exports fell for the first three quarters because the decline in exports was larger than the decline in imports. During the first three quarters of real exports of goods and services fell by $ billion ( in chained dollars ) ( percent nonannualized ) while imports fell by $ billion ( percent nonannualized ) As a result net exports fell by $ billion over this period Trade in goods recovered faster than trade in services. During the first three quarters of real exports of goods fell by $ billion ( in chained dollars ) ( percent nonannualized ) and real imports of goods fell by $ billion ( in chained dollars ) ( percent nonannualized ) During the same period real exports of services fell by $ billion ( in chained dollars ) ( | Chapter Figure Government Purchases as a Share of GDP Percentage of GDP : Q3 Total government State and local Federal defense Federal nondefense Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : Shading denotes a recession percent nonannualized ) and real imports of services fell by $ billion ( in chained dollars ) ( percent nonannualized ) By the third quarter of real exports and imports of goods had both rebounded by about percent from their pandemic lows. By comparison during the same period real exports of services had rebounded by less than percent of pandemic lows and real imports of services had rebounded by roughly six percent The Labor Market The U.S. labor market experienced historically unprecedented declines in employment in March and April before posting a strong but partial recovery in the months immediately thereafter accentuated by record employment gains in May and June. The labor force participation rate also fell dramatically before retracing part of its earlier decline Unemployment. The scale and speed of the increase and decrease in unemployment in were unprecedented. In February before the COVID-19 pandemic struck the unemployment rate stood at percent. It surged to percent in April before falling sharply in the following months. As of November the unemployment rate ( U-3 ) had fallen to percent ( figure ) During the Great Recession the unemployment rate peaked at percent in October but it took more than four years to fall to percent ( December ) The data for unemployment insurance The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Unemployment Rate Percentage of labor force Oct. Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Note : Shading denotes a recession claims during are also historic : the week of March saw a tenfold increase in unemployment claims from to the largest increase on record The Bureau of Labor Statistics publishes several measures of the unemployment rate. U-3 the official unemployment rate measures the share of people in the labor force actively looking for a job who are unable to find one U-6 includes all these people but also those who ( ) want a job and are available for work and have looked for a job in the prior months but not in the past weeks or ( ) have given up looking for a job in the past weeks because they are discouraged by job prospects or ( ) want a full-time job but are forced to work part time for economic reasons. As a result U-6 is a much broader measure of unemployment and labor underutilization. In February before the pandemic struck the U-6 rate stood at percent. It rocketed to percent in April before falling sharply in the immediately subsequent months. As of November U-6 had fallen to percent almost half its pandemic high but still higher than at any prepandemic point since August more than five years into the preceding expansion. Whereas the gap between U-3 and U-6 was small in February at percentage points it has widened over the course of the pandemic and stood at percentage points in October Labor force participation. The labor force participation rate the fraction of people who are either working or actively looking for work fell in | Chapter Figure Labor Force Participation Rate Percent Oct. Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Note : Shading denotes a recession Figure Nominal Compensation and Earnings for Private Industry Workers Percent change ( 12-month ) : Q3 Average hourly earnings Hourly compensation for private industry ECI Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Note : Shading denotes a recession. ECI = Employment Cost Index The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | after rising in and and during the first two months of reversing a previous downward trend. From February to October the rate fell by percentage points. It fell to percent in April but had recovered percentage points by October ( figure ) Notably most of the recovery occurred in June. The rate did not recover much further between June and October This suggests the possibility that the 1.7-percentage-point drop in participation may be persistent. Consistent with this hypothesis Coibion Gorodnichenko and Weber ( ) find that a wave of early retirements explains much of the drop in participation Wages. Average hourly real wages rose by percent during the first three quarters of primarily because layoffs were concentrated among lowwage workers ( Crust Daly and Hobijn ) ( figure ) While this pattern is not unique to the current recession the change in average hourly real wages is more pronounced now than in previous recessions given the magnitude of the employment losses in March and April. That the rise in average hourly earnings is due to the composition of the workforce can be seen in the contrast with the measure of wages from the Employment Cost Index which measures wages directly for a fixed sample of job categories. This fixed-weighted measure increased only percent during the months through September Inflation Overall inflation in was below the average for The Federal Reserve has a target of percent inflation for the Personal Consumption Expenditures Chain-Type Price Index ( the PCE Price Index ) But this index rose by only percent during the months through October which was little changed from the year-earlier rate ( figure ) The total PCE Price Index includes volatile food and energy components and if these are excluded ( yielding the core PCE Price Index ) inflation rose by only percent during those months also little changed from the year earlier rate Looking at in detail some months had negative inflation. In particular month-over-month inflation was negative in March ( percent ) and April ( percent ) This deflation was driven primarily by changes in nondurable prices which fell percent in March and April. However inflation rose at above-trend rates in June July and August leading the overall 12-month change to rise back to the year-earlier rate of about percent The Housing Market Home construction and sales were substantially disrupted during the early part of the year as a result of COVID-19. This disruption did not translate into a decline in house prices however because tight housing supply partly a consequence of the pandemic and strong demand from low mortgage rates stabilized market conditions in the spring ( Gascon and Haas ) Indeed house prices have actually risen percent through the first nine months of | Chapter  $ "    * ) (   $   ) ! '  / $ * )      P- $   I )   Percent change ( 12-month )      '   ' * ) " )  *  %  / $  *      P- $   I )   * /  '      P- $  I )   *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $       '  '  / $ * )  * /  #   $ ) "   ) * /     $ * )        * )  '   * ) ( +/ $ * )   )  $ /0-   $ "     * $ ) "   $   )   Index ( Jan. = ; seasonally adjusted )  " Source : Standard & Poor s S&P CoreLogic Case-Shiller National Home Price Index Note : Shading denotes a recession The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure U.S. New Housing Formation and Single-Family Home Sales Thousands of units ( seasonally adjusted ) Sep. New and existing sales Housing starts Permits Sources : Census Bureau ; National Association of Realtors ; CEA calculations the year according to the S&P Corelogic Case-Shiller Home Price Index ( figure ) The disruption caused a severe but short-lived drop in housing sales housing starts and permits followed by a complete recovery ( figure ) New housing starts peaked in January at million units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) and fell by units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) or percent by April before recovering percent of its loss to million units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) by October. New housing permits reached a prepandemic peak in January at million units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) and fell by units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) or about percent by April before recovering to million units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) by October slightly above the prepandemic peak. Total housing starts reached a prepandemic peak in January at million units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) and fell by units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) or about percent by May before recovering to million units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) by October roughly percent above the prepandemic peak Existing home sales reached a prepandemic peak in February at million units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) and fell by million units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) or about percent by May before recovering to million units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) by October roughly percent above the prepandemic peak. New home sales reached | Chapter Figure U.S. Homeownership Rate Percent ( seasonally adjusted ) : Q3 Source : Census Bureau Note : Shading denotes a recession a prepandemic peak in January at units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) and fell by units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) or about percent by April before recovering to and stabilizing at about million units ( seasonally adjusted annualized ) by August roughly percent above the prepandemic peak. Brokers commissions and other ownership transfer costs for real residential investment contracted percent in the second quarter of the largest single quarter contraction on record. However in the third quarter commissions jumped up percent boosting commissions above prepandemic levels. The third quarter jump was the largest single-quarter expansion on record. Brokers commissions for real nonresidential investment fell percent in the first three quarters of This drop is in the same range as other three-quarter declines experienced during the past three years Evictions fell during the pandemic ( see figure in chapter of this Report ) due to the CARES Act and the President s Executive Order ( August ) which placed a moratorium on evictions until the end of The homeownership rate appears to have increased dramatically ( figure ) though there have been questions about data reliability because the U.S. Census Bureau temporarily suspended ( though June ) personal visits for the survey which reduced response rates. The percentage of rental units making rent payments in remained relatively stable compared with the same The Year in Review and the Years Ahead |  $ "    ) /  "  * !   ) /    ( ) /.      Rental units ( percent )   ) '  "    /  *  *  s National Multifamily Housing Council        '  '  / $ * ) month in ranging from a drop of to percentage points ( figure ) Financial Markets In U.S. equity markets experienced substantial volatility but ultimately recovered from losses experienced during the pandemic. On February the Standard & Poor s index closed at a prepandemic peak in However by March the S&P index had fallen by percent for the year. Yet by August it closed at a higher level than on February and following brief downswings in September and October achieved several all-time highs starting in mid-November and continuing into at least early December The Dow Jones Industrial Average index which measures performance of shares of the largest U.S. corporations followed a similar trend closing at a prepandemic peak of on February falling percent by March and achieving all-time highs starting in mid-November and continuing through at least early December. The NASDAQ index which is heavily weighted with shares of technology firms experienced shallower losses and a larger recovery closing at a prepandemic peak of on February falling roughly percent by March and achieving an all-time high of on September roughly percent above the prepandemic high | Chapter  $ "     -& /  * '  / $ ' $ /4  )       Index   /  *   Wall Street Journal  * /   #   $ ) "   ) * /    $ * ) ; VIX = Chicago Board Options Exchange s Volatility Index Stock market volatility increased during the pandemic and remained elevated through at least October The Chicago Board Options Exchange s Market Volatility Index measures the market s assessment of the volatility of the stock market ( derived from options prices ) This measure of volatility rose from on January to reach a peak of on March before dropping to by October ( figure ) As concerns over COVID-19 escalated in February and March enormous selling pressures led to a precipitous deterioration in corporate bond market liquidity conditions. In the two weeks prior to the Federal Reserve s announcement of numerous credit and liquidity facilities on March bond transaction costs soared in both high-yield and investment grade bonds. Over those two weeks the average cost for investment-grade bond transactions tripled jumping from basis points in February to a peak of almost basis points in mid-March. Similarly transaction costs among high-yield bonds jumped up from around basis points in February to nearly basis points in mid-March ( Sharpe and Zhou ) The spread between corporate bond yields and comparable Treasury yields took a similar path. High-yield corporate bond spreads rose from just below percentage points in early February to just below percentage points in Mid-march. Investment grade spreads quadrupled to percent in mid-March from percent in February. After the announcement and implementation The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | of several credit facilities corporate bond spreads substantially eased and transaction costs saw initial declines. As the Federal Reserve s lending facilities continued to offer relief corporate bond yield spreads generally continued to fall throughout the rest of the year reaching pre-pandemic levels in both investment-grade and high-yield bonds. Chapter of this report discusses the specific Federal Reserve lending facilities implemented to address the corporate bond market crises Interest Rates U.S. Treasury notes are the main form of debt issued by the Federal Government and their interest rates are relevant to Federal interest expenses. Because corporate debt usually move roughly in parallel with government debt these rates affect the cost of business borrowing as well The Federal Reserve s Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) lowered its target for the Federal funds rate by basis points to percent at unscheduled meetings on March and March Most short-term rates dropped by similar amounts. For example the yield on 3-month Treasury bills fell by basis points during March. The yield on 10-year Treasury notes ( which averages the expected value of short-term rates during the next years ) fell by basis points in March and another basis points in April  $ "   Ten Y    $ ) Three  * ) / #      * ) ./  ) /    /0- $ /4    /  Rate ( basis points )   /   *  s     '    *          '  '  / $ * )  * /   #   $ ) "  ) * /     $ * ) | Chapter The spread between yields on long- and short-term Treasury notes is useful as a forecasting tool. The yield spread between 10-year and 3-month Treasury notes began at low positive levels. Negative yield spreads have often preceded recessions so they are generally thought of as a leading indicator of recessions. In February the spread narrowed to zero ( foreshadowing a recession ) but has since rebounded to basis points a positive signal ( figure ) Interest rates are also important because the Federal Reserve often adjusts interest rates as one of its main methods to support its dual mandate of price stability and maximum sustainable employment. However short-term nominal interest rates in were near zero. The Federal Reserve may not be able to lower nominal interest rates below this zero lower bound. If it can not then interest rates near zero could take away one of its primary tools for stimulating economic growth. See chapter of this Report for a discussion of methods used by the Federal Reserve to combat the current recession at the zero lower bound Oil Markets Worldwide oil consumption fell percent during the first three quarters of following the typical pattern of energy demand falling during recessions ( EIA ) As a result Brent crude oil prices fell from $ per barrel on January to a low of $ per barrel on April before recovering to $ as of October The price of West Texas Intermediate an important U.S. oil benchmark actually went negative for the first time in history on April driven by fears of insufficient storage capacity ( BBC ) In response world production of crude oil and liquid fuels fell by percent between Q4 and Q3 ( EIA ) The Global Macroeconomic Situation The global economy contracted in as a consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic. In its October World Economic Outlook the International Monetary Fund forecast that global output would contract at a percent rate ( year-over-year ) ( IMF 2020a ) Due in part to China s rapid return to growth and faster than expected growth among developed countries in the third quarter the outlook improved slightly from June when the IMF expected global output to fall percent ( IMF 2020b ) A separate forecast published by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) in December expects the global economy to contract percent in With this economic contraction the World Bank ( ) anticipates an additional to million people worldwide will fall into extreme poverty. These forecasts are highly uncertain and depend critically on any resurgence of the virus intensity of social distancing policies and the efficiency and efficacy of vaccination programs The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Unprecedented fiscal and monetary policy undertaken by governments and central banks helped to avoid or dampen the adverse financial transmission mechanisms of the Great Recession. Fiscal measures in advanced economies were equivalent to percent of output while liquidity supports alone were equivalent to percent ( IMF 2020a ) Though smaller as a share of output fiscal and monetary support among emerging and developing economies was sizeable as well with fiscal measures equaling percent of output and liquidity measures equaling percent Despite the vast spread of COVID-19 there were notable differences in the timing and size of economic contractions. China which experienced the first outbreak of the virus experienced a percent ( nonannualized ) contraction in the first quarter of before officially rebounding to its level in the second quarter of Other countries including the United States experienced their largest contractions in the second quarter as the virus spread from China. Differences in output in the second quarter among these countries can be explained in part by changes in the stringency of measures undertaken to contain the virus and subsequent changes in mobility ( OECD ) To consider the cumulative loss in real GDP across countries the CEA calculated the percent of one year s real GDP lost during assuming a baseline with no growth during the first three quarters ( table ) This calculation represents the integral of real GDP losses during the first second and third quarters as proposed by Fern ndez-Villaverde and Jones ( ) Using this approach a country that experiences a percent decline in output during the first quarter and then experiences no growth in subsequent quarters has suffered a loss three times greater than a country that experiences no decline in real GDP during the first two quarters but a percent decline during the third quarter. This measure applies greater weight to contractions in growth at the beginning as this results in a longer period of lower economic activity. By this measure the United States has lost percent of a year s real GDP through the first three quarters of China lost the lowest share of a year s GDP ( percent ) while Spain lost the largest share ( percent ) among countries for which data are available Advanced economies. Economic growth in advanced economies such as Germany France Japan the United Kingdom and other European Union countries are expected to contract by percent in reflecting an upward revision of percentage points from June to October. This change reflects less severe than expected contractions in the second quarter and growth that exceeded expectations in the third quarter. In economic growth among advanced economies is expected to reach percent leaving the group percent below levels. However there is substantial heterogeneity within the advanced economies. Asian countries that were better at containing the spread of COVID-19 are expected to see smaller declines in growth. Japan for example is forecast to contract percent before rebounding with percent | Chapter Table Cumulative Losses of Real Gross Domestic Product Selected Countries through : Q3 Country ( or Group ) China South Korea Norway Sweden Japan Israel United States Germany European Union ( members ) Mexico Italy France India United Kingdom Iceland Spain Decline ( percentage of annual GDP ) Source : CEA calculations Note : Countries are shown for which data are available growth in Euro area countries that were comparatively worse at containing the virus like Spain are expected to see growth contract by percent in before growing at percent in according to the IMF ( 2020a ) Emerging markets and developing economies. The IMF anticipates that emerging markets and developing economies will contract percent in before growing at percent in However this forecast is buoyed by China which experienced a strong rebound in the second quarter according to official statistics. The IMF forecasts that China will grow at percent in When China is excluded from emerging markets and developing countries the forecast contraction in is percent while the forecast growth in is percent India experienced a high volume of COVID-19 cases and undertook severe measures to control the spread of the virus. Subsequent real GDP growth was worse than expected in the second quarter of leading the IMF to revise downward its forecast for India s economy is expected to contract percent in before returning to positive growth in at an percent pace ( IMF 2020a ) The Future Economic Outlook The United States is in the midst of a recovery from what has been a very severe recession triggered by the exogenous shock of the COVID-19 pandemic. Strong compensating growth is anticipated in buoyed by complementary fiscal The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | and monetary policy as well as reductions in the disease burden as vaccine candidates become more widely available through Operation Warp Speed This section reviews several economic forecasts as detailed in table and discusses upside and downside risks to the economic outlook | Chapter Consensus Bottom Blue Chip * Real GDP ( chain-type ) FOMC CBO BC * CBO BC * CBO BC * CBO Top Consensus Bottom Blue Chip Unemployment Rate ( percent ) FOMC * * CBO BC Interest Rate 91-Day Treasury Bills ( percent ) Level ( calendar year ) CBO BC Interest Rate 10-Year Treasury Notes ( percent ) Note : CBO = the Congressional Budget Office s July forecast ; BC = Blue Chip Economic Indicators December forecast combined with its October forecast for long-term projections ; FOMC = the Federal Open Market Committee s September forecast ; Top = the average forecast of the highest forecasters ; Bottom = the average forecast for the lowest forecasters. * The Blue Chip Forecasts for and beyond use October s year-over-year projections ; * * the FOMC s forecasted unemployment rate for the fourth quarter of that year Sources : Congressional Budget Office ; Blue Chip Economic Indicators ; Federal Reserve Board Top CBO ( actual ) Year GDP Price Nominal Consumer Index GDP Price Index ( chain-type ) Percent Change ( Q4-over-Q4 ) Table Economic Forecasts <BILL : PLEASE TURN THIS TABLE AND PHOTO-REDUCE/ENLARGE AS NEEDED> Forecasts from the Blue Chip Consensus the Congressional Budget Office and the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee Private and official forecasts anticipate GDP to bounce back strongly from the recession with percent or higher growth expected during the four quarters of by the July Congressional Budget Office s projection the November Blue Chip consensus and the September FOMC projection The Blue Chip forecasters range from percent projected by the bottom forecasters to percent projected by the top potentially indicating different assessments regarding the upside and downside risks discussed below and the magnitude and composition of additional support from fiscal and monetary policy. After a strong short-term recovery all forecasters predict that long-term growth rates will gradually fall back to averages of about percent per year although the Congressional Budget Office predicts a second growth rate peak in with a gradual decline to a long run average afterward The Federal Reserve expects increases in the Consumer Price Index to remain near target though interest rates are projected to remain below their long-term levels until the second half of the decade. In August the FOMC announced that it would target an inflation rate that averages percent thereby allowing periods of higher than percent inflation to compensate for periods when inflation fails to reach percent. As a result the FOMC may aim for inflation moderately above percent if prior rates of inflation have persisted below percent. This policy change means it will likely not preempt projected inflationary pressures with interest rate hikes as was done between and This shift will give greater space for the labor market to strengthen before the FOMC considers raising interest rates relative to the FOMC s previous policy stance The unemployment rate is expected to continue to fall throughout the upcoming years before settling at a long-run rate. There are substantial differences in estimates of what this long-run rate will be with the top Blue Chip estimates averaging percent and the bottom averaging percent These estimates are above the February observed unemployment rate of percent which was associated with a 12-month change in the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index of just percent below the Federal Reserve s target. As discussed below the interaction between labor force participation and labor market slack will have large effects on the unemployment rate wages and inflationary pressures Economic Objectives and Policy Economic prospects in the coming years depend critically on the Nation s economic policies. The Employment Act of called for the Federal Government to pursue the goal of maximum employment production and purchasing The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | power and it established the Council of Economic Advisers to support the President in meeting this goal. Building on this the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of called for the President to set forth annual numerical goals for several key economic indicators over a multiyear period as well as a program of policies for achieving the prescribed objectives regardless of the probability of that program being administratively or legislatively implemented The projections reported in table reflect the Trump Administration s goal of achieving maximum employment production and purchasing power | Chapter     P- $    * ) (  I )   P- $   I )   #  $ ) /4+ ) / ./  R  /  ) / ./  R  /   ) ( ' * ( ) /  D   10-Y     .0-y R  /   ) /    B $ ''.  N * /   ) /  ) / '    ' )      *      * !    * ) * ( $    )  '4. $     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $     -/ ( ) /  * !  / #      ! ! $   * !    )  " ( ) /   )     " /   * )  $ '  * !    * ) * ( $     $  * /   *   ./        * )    /     $ '   '    * !   * (      #  $ ) / ./   /  * )       $ ''.  $  (    * )     * )   (  -& /   $  * ) /    $ GDP = gross domestic product   '        #  $ ) /4+  * ( $ )  '       /0  '     ) /  C #  ) "   / *  Table Policy-Inclusive Economic Projections within the Federal budget window of ten years consistent with the objectives of the and employment acts and accordingly include the estimated impacts of the Administration s full economic policy agenda. Considering the economic challenges discussed in this Report and recent editions of the Economic Report of the President these are very ambitious economic projections. Achieving these targets will require full implementation of the Administration s complete economic policy agenda most of which requires Congressional legislation As discussed in the chapters of this Report as well as in the and editions of the Economic Report of the President the ambitious economic projections reflect the fact that the Administration s economic policy agenda has been similarly ambitious. In the very near-term the agenda includes full implementation of further legislation to support economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. Specifically the projections reported in table assume passage of additional legislation to provide for reauthorization and expansion of the Paycheck Protection Program to support small business employment an expanded employee retention tax credit a reemployment bonus and a temporary extension of targeted fiscal support to State and local governments schools and low- and middle-income households and households with unemployed workers In the near term the economic targets reported here also assume enactment of the President s $ trillion infrastructure proposal as analyzed in the Economic Report of the President. They also assume that all provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act that are currently scheduled to sunset or expire are instead made permanent. These include but are not limited to full expensing of new equipment investment the near-doubling of the standard deduction reductions of personal income tax rates across multiple brackets doubling of and expanded eligibility for the Child Tax Credit and a percent small business tax deduction. In addition the numeric targets assume enactment of a new middle-class tax cut as discussed in chapter of this Report including elimination of the second-earner penalty further raising the standard deduction and reducing income tax liability in the lowest personal income tax rate brackets offset at higher incomes by rate and threshold adjustments to ensure targeted tax cuts with no net tax increases. Such a design would target tax relief to lower- and middle-income taxpayers who face some of the highest effective marginal personal income tax rates thereby substantially raising labor force participation rates particularly among women and low-income workers. This is reflected in the supply-side components reported in table The economic targets also assume enactment of skills-based immigration reform a continuation of the Administration s comprehensive deregulatory agenda improved bilateral trade agreements with major trading partners and longer-run fiscal consolidation as discussed in the Economic Report of the President. They further assume additional labor market policies to incentivize The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | higher labor force participation including expanding work requirements for nondisabled working-age recipients in noncash welfare programs ; increasing childcare assistance for low-income families ; and enhancing assistance for reskilling programs through the National Council for the American Worker By any measure this is a very ambitious economic policy agenda However it reflects the bold requirements of the and acts : to set forth a program for achieving as rapidly as possible the goals of full employment | Chapter Average weekly hours ( nonfarm business ) Output per hour ( productivity nonfarm business ) Ratio of real GDO to nonfarm business output Sum : actual real GDOa Output per worker differential : GDO vs. nonfarm * * : Q1 to : Q4 : Q4 to : Q4 Growth Rate ( percentage points ) : Q3 to : Q1 : Q4 to : Q4 GDP and gross domestic income. Population labor force and household employment have been adjusted for discontinuities in the population series due to rounding ; : Q2 : Q3 : Q1 : Q4 and : Q4 are all quarterly business-cycle peaks. Gross domestic output ( GDO ) is the average of Note : All contributions are in percentage points at an annual rate. The forecast is based on data available on November The total may not add up in the nonfarm business sector and is also equal to row row Real GDO and real nonfarm business output are measured as the average of income- and product-side measures * * The output-per-worker differential ( row ) is the difference between output-per-worker growth in the economy as a whole and output-per-worker growth a Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Department of the Treasury ; Office of Management and Budget ; CEA calculations Ratio of nonfarm business employment to household employment Memo : Employed share of the labor force Labor force participation rate Civilian noninstitutional population age : Q2 to : Q4 Component Table Supply-Side Components of Actual and Potential Real Output Growth <BILL : PLEASE TURN THIS TABLE AND PHOTO-REDUCE/ENLARGE AS NEEDED full production and rising real incomes. Achieving these projected outcomes is therefore contingent on full implementation of the complete range of economic policies articulated here and in the and editions of the Economic Report of the President. In the absence of full implementation not only does the CEA anticipate that economic growth in the coming years will be lower than the numeric targets reported in table but also perhaps substantially lower in line with the economic projections summarized in table Near-Term Upside and Downside Risks As discussed throughout this Report the emergence of COVID-19 in late has burdened the economic outlook and continues to present near-term downside risks. The burden of the virus is heaviest for elderly people and for individuals suffering from-co-morbidities but extends to all segments of the population. The outlook is complicated further by the long-term health effects of COVID-19 which are not fully understood The COVID-19 pandemic dominated economic developments during and will continue to do so in In the near term the biggest downside risk to the economic outlook is that policy and behavioral responses to a resurgence of COVID-19 disrupt the considerable recovery in output and labor markets observed to date. For this reason in late the Administration continued to articulate support for additional fiscal measures discussed above to provide a bridge to the widespread availability of vaccine candidates developed under Operation Warp Speed ( Goodspeed and Navarro ) Upside risk to economic activity includes the possibility that an effective vaccine or vaccines will be rapidly distributed and administered to a high percentage of the population which thanks in part to Operation Warp Speed looks highly probable. Indeed multiple candidates have had successful trials evincing high effectiveness. Preliminary results have exceeded expectations and an Emergency Use Authorization ( EUA ) from the Food and Drug Administration has been issued for the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine with an EUA for the Moderna vaccine expected by the end of the year. In addition treatment for COVID-19 has improved throughout and will likely continue to improve thanks in part to EUAs of advanced therapeutics that reduce the illness severity and fatality rate for those affected. However there remains the possibility of viral mutation especially if the virus recrosses transspecies borders removing the resistance afforded by immune system responses built by infection or vaccination. For example Denmark has been forced to cull its mink populations to avoid such a result and other animal populations may follow Substantial challenges to distributing vaccines remain. Several of the promising candidates require cold temperatures during transportation and storage to maintain effectiveness an issue that will create challenges in many developing countries and some areas of the developed world. The distinct The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | threat posed by misinformation regarding the safety and effectiveness of vaccination will also need to be addressed. Creating a vaccine is only useful if a high enough percentage of individuals use it to protect themselves and others Dramatic pandemic-related shocks were felt in the labor market during early The U.S. employment level fell from a record-high of million in February to million in April a decline of over million in months For comparison during the Great Recession employment fell by million in months. However since April many temporary layoffs and furloughed workers have been recalled. American entrepreneurship has met the challenge as new high-propensity business applications ( i.e. applications with a high probability of turning into businesses with a payroll ) were by week of ( a percent increase from ) according to the Business Formation Statistics from the Census Bureau. These positive developments increased employment by million from April to November and reduced the official unemployment rate from to percent In the near term there is a risk that these trends temporarily reverse Rising cases have prompted the reimposition of lockdown restrictions and endogenous individual social distancing leading to a curtailment of expenditures on in-person consumer services. Even if case levels fall further recovery may still be characterized by a slower pace. Many temporary employment separations have now been restored increasing the proportion of the unemployed who will not be returning to their previous employment. Permanent separations require new search and matching as well as more structural adjustments which become more difficult the longer they are without employment. For example some workers may need to retrain for new industries that develop in response to permanent changes in consumer preferences Hall and Kudlyak ( ) observe that the labor market s recoveries from recessions have consistently been measured as roughly a reduction of percentage point a year in the unemployment rate. As the labor market regains the temporary layoffs and begins to reallocate permanent layoffs the rate of recovery will likely converge toward this rate. However looking at output Bordo and Haubrich ( ) find that typically the amplitude of a recovery is strongly correlated with the amplitude of the preceding contraction with the recovery following the Great Recession constituting a notable exception of the past years. As the long-term unemployed experience skill deterioration and potentially permanent income losses ( Hamermesh ; Ruhm ) rapid action to reemploy the most people possible is needed to minimize lasting harm to the labor market. One area where layoffs may continue is State and local governments which have seen reduced revenue in Another variable that has shown partial recovery is labor force participation. The 12-month moving average of participation had risen to percent in February from a nadir of percent in January In recent years the U.S. labor force participation has faced demographic headwinds from the | Chapter retirement of the baby boom population with rising participation on the eve of the pandemic driven by a 1.9-percentage-point increase in prime-age labor force participation. Even in February participation remained well below ( percentage points ) its early peak of percent though it was only percentage point lower for prime-age workers During the pandemic participation fell percentage points and subsequently rose percentage points during the recovery. Further recovery could be imperiled if the pandemic continues to encourage individuals near the age of retirement to retire early or encourages individuals to delay school or labor force entry. However there could be greater gains in participation if individuals choose to work later in life due to a desire to accumulate more savings for retirement if higher female participation rises during prime-age relative to previous cohorts and if workplaces offer greater availability of physically accommodating occupations including remote work. An additional upside risk is that some pandemic-induced investment in teleworking facilitates greater labor force participation from individuals who otherwise might face binding childcare constraints. Similarly the decentralization of work could cause individuals to move to more affordable and less restrictive areas which might increase economic activity in areas with lower costs of living such as rural areas and thereby improve family finances A tight labor market benefits workers by leading to higher wages and shorter spells of unemployment. A slack labor market does the opposite leading to substantial downside risks for the American worker from a slower recovery and to upside risks from a faster recovery. The lack of consensus in the U.S. Congress to implement the President s economic policy objectives for additional fiscal support in response to the pandemic particularly in the form of an additional round of the Paycheck Protection Program to help maintain employer-employee matches and organizational capital is therefore a substantial downside risk in the near term Relatedly in the absence of Congressional support for the Administration s near-term legislative priorities there is a risk of mounting business insolvencies particularly among small- and medium-sized firms adversely affected by the reimposition of lockdown restrictions. As losses incurred as a result of the pandemic and associated lockdowns are realized there is a nontrivial risk that defaults and insolvencies may impair collateral assets in commercial credit markets and therefore trigger downgrades of securities collateralized by those assets which would elevate the risk of broader credit disintermediation of the type discussed by Bernanke ( ) Tax code changes introduced by the CARES Act were designed to mitigate this risk by modifying the treatment of business tax assets specifically by introducing a five-year carryback for net operating losses ( NOLs ) in and ; suspending the NOL limit of percent of taxable income ; and allowing pass-through business owners to use NOLs to offset non-business income above the prior limit in and These The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | modifications were designed to mitigate the adverse shock to business cash flow in by allowing firms to spread losses over time Internationally however there is the risk that insolvency issues generated by severe and protracted lockdown restrictions abroad introduce new strains on fiscally weak sovereign governments most notably in emerging markets and Europe. Such strains would elevate the risk of a replay of the sovereign debt concerns that emerged in the aftermath of the Great Recession Long-Term Upside and Downside Risks A crucial variable for the long-run outlook for growth is the productivity of the workforce. This area has substantial upside risk for growth to outperform what would otherwise be forecasted based on the experiences of the post Great Recession economy Productivity measures how much economic output is generated from a given amount of inputs. As shown in table output per hour averaged annual growth of percent between : Q2 and : Q4. By contrast productivity growth averaged only percent between : Q4 and : Q4 After the passage of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act ( TCJA ) productivity growth averaged percent annually between : Q4 and : Q4. Improving this rate of increase is of paramount importance for meeting goals of raising real incomes across the income distribution as was observed in Chapter of this Report discusses several possible prescriptions for achieving this result such as incentivizing higher education institutions to better prepare students for the workforce immigration reform and infrastructure investment as well as making permanent some of the provisions of TCJA that are currently legislated to phase out As mentioned above demographic shifts continue to constitute a challenge to the supply-side potential of the U.S. labor market. The 65-and-older population grew by over a third ( percent or ) during the past decade. The first cohort of the baby boom generation turned in and the last cohort will turn in These demographic shifts have generated downward pressure on the aggregate participation rate over the past decade and will continue to generate downward pressure over the next decade Whether these individuals retire early or continue to actively participate in the labor market will have a major impact on the economic trajectory over the next decade. Policies such as those described in chapter of this Report can have a positive effect on participation alleviating the demographic drag. As discussed in the and editions of the Economic Report of the President making permanent the marginal personal income tax rate reductions in the TCJA can also incentivize continued participation among retirement and nearretirement age workers who theoretical and empirical research indicate are more responsive to changes in marginal personal income tax rates | Chapter The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted shortcomings in the healthcare system in the United States that lead to both upside and downside risks for long-term growth. As the pandemic has dramatically illustrated individuals with poor health are much more likely to suffer serious illness in the event of contracting the disease and consequently face a higher mortality rate. Life expectancy among particular segments of the population in the United States was falling even before the pandemic a trend that is the result in large part of drug overdoses ( particularly from opioids ) suicides and liver diseases which recent research suggests may be related to displacement effects of increased exposure to import competition from China following the establishment of permanent normal trade relations in ( Pierce and Schott ) Addressing the underlying reasons for these disturbing trends provides an upside risk that the loss of social cohesion mental health deterioration and poor diet and exercise can be successfully reversed. However there is also a downside risk that the situation gets worse with losses in productivity and participation resulting from more sickness and death There is also an upside potential that pandemic-induced investments in healthcare research and the rapid deployment of new therapies and vaccines as well as deregulatory actions to increase choice and access in the medical system can lead to better health in the future. Examples of deregulatory actions include expanded access to telehealth services increased scope of practice and further mRNA-based interventions. Observations by individuals may also result in greater precautionary personal measures in future influenza seasons reducing the annual burden of endemic disease An additional long-run risk is that the pandemic and associated lockdowns generate long-term economic scarring and amplify issues of economic inequality. Whereas in a stark reversal of trends under way during the expansion wage income and wealth inequality including among races were declining in the three years immediately preceding the pandemic the extreme regressivity of lockdown restrictions and consequent loss of employment and disruption to human capital acquisition may exacerbate economic inequality for years to come. Although the CARES Act attenuated income inequality in the near term over the long run school closures disparate access to remote learning and losses of on-the-job training and skills acquisition may introduce human capital deficits that compound over time and have a particularly adverse impact on the lower end of the skills and income distributions. Longterm scarring that depresses future supply-side potential could also complicate the task of monetary policy if inflation expectations become unanchored ( Kozlowski Veldkamp and Venkateswaran ) Finally to ensure robust long-term growth the United States must also address its rising debt burden. Structural and taxation incentives for debtfinancing investments have created a large increase in nonfinancial corporate debt growing from $ trillion at the end of to $ trillion in The The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | TCJA codified several improvements in capital allocation mechanisms including limiting the tax deductibility of interest payments on debt precipitating upside risk that this will lead to improved productivity growth. Lower interest rates due to the pandemic are unlikely to substantially increase during much of the budget window which may continue to incentivize debt-financing of business activity. The debt burden on individuals is also a cause of concern especially loans used to finance higher education. Since inflation-adjusted student debt balances have more than doubled in nearly every State and in parts of the Southeast they have nearly quadrupled with the student loan delinquency rate rising commensurately ( Hedlund ) This debt burden has been found to constrain occupational choice reduce marriage prospects and homeownership and increase the risk of bankruptcy ( Rothstein and Rouse ; Gicheva ; Mezza et al. ; Gicheva and Thompson ) As students who have put off entry into higher education decide whether to return the question of whether higher education will act as an expensive signaling device or as a skill-formulating institution has substantial upside and downside risks Conclusion The events of the past months have created a historically unprecedented year for the U.S. economy. Record declines in GDP and employment in the second quarter were followed by record increases in both of these economic indicators in the third quarter. Inflation housing markets and financial and energy markets were also affected although to a lesser extent than output and labor markets. Strong compensatory growth is anticipated in However GDP forecasts and the slowing pace of the recovery of labor force participation show that many of these issues will persist through at least Despite the historic pace of the economic recovery observed to date there remain risks to both the near- and long-term outlooks. In the near term particularly in the face of viral resurgence the Administration recognizes the need for further fiscal support to maintain attachments between employees and employers until the widespread availability of vaccines through Operation Warp Speed allows the resumption of normal levels of economic activity. Over the longer term building on the historic economic gains observed in and especially a program of economic policies that continues to incentivize domestic capital formation and increased labor force participation will be essential for ensuring a rapid return to the economic conditions prevailing on the eve of the pandemic. As discussed throughout this Report this program includes but is not limited to extending the provisions of the TCJA investing in infrastructure lowering high effective marginal income tax rates on lower-income workers further regulatory reform and continuing to upgrade bilateral trading arrangements. Such a program was instrumental in | Chapter generating a historically tight labor market and broad-based real income gains in following what had been the weakest economic recovery in postwar U.S. history between and The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | x Chapter Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity This Report analyzes the unprecedented health and economic shock of the COVID-19 pandemic and the historic policy responses to mitigate its impact on the Nation. The United States is making progress toward emerging from this crisis ; however our country continues to contend with an adverse shock of historic magnitude. The purpose of this final chapter is to review a collection of policy areas highlighted by the COVID-19 pandemic and to analyze potential reforms to meet the ongoing challenges facing the U.S. economy. We introduce these areas in this prefatory section and then the full chapter presents them in detail Strengthening connections to the labor force. The U.S. labor market s recovery since the initial effect of COVID-19 has been unprecedented with the unemployment rate falling by percentage points in seven months. However workers with a weaker prior connection to the labor force have experienced a slower recovery. This chapter discusses two important ways in which the tax code discourages lasting connections to the workforce : high effective taxes both on nonprimary earners in families and on low-income earners navigating the various Federal assistance programs Supporting balance between work and family. The recent suppression of economic activity has posed particular challenges for families. Parents of children whose schools were closed faced challenges in obtaining childcare while working. Parents who needed time off due to illness or to care for a sick relative faced difficult decisions regarding work and family responsibilities. This chapter discusses how even in normal times a lack of accessible paid leave and childcare for parents can lead to wider detrimental effects on society and how this challenge could be addressed Enhancing international coordination to address 21st-century challenges. Both the health and economic consequences of COVID-19 cross national boundaries given that disease transmission and supply chain disruptions in one country can have large effects on other countries. This chapter discusses how strong reciprocal trade relationships between the United States and other countries can preserve U.S. consumer access to foreign products and U.S. producer access to global supply chains while ensuring that American entrepreneurs face an even playing field that protects U.S. economic interests Creating a more effective healthcare system. COVID-19 caused a public health crisis that exposed strains on the U.S. healthcare system. This chapter reviews mechanisms that inefficiently drive up costs and reduce access to quality health care. These include restrictions on the supply of healthcare professionals information problems inherent in balance billing and a disconnect between Medicare prices and competitive prices for some medical services Building a dynamic economy through infrastructure improvement. Continued adjustment to the potential reallocation of economic activity and factors of production in response to the pandemic requires strong and versatile infrastructure. The Federal Government can target investment to increase the productivity of American industry. This chapter discusses the structural factors that inhibit improvements in infrastructure along with mechanisms to resolve them Generating a more skilled and resilient workforce. COVID-19 is imposing a large reallocation shock on the U.S. economy because temporarily suppressed output and changes in consumer preferences may weaken some firms and industries and strengthen others. Highly skilled workers will be needed not only to take advantage of these new opportunities but also to create them. This chapter discusses two ways to expand the skilled workforce : moving toward a more transparent and merit-based immigration system and improving human | Chapter capital formation for Americans attending institutions of higher education This chapter also highlights the success of Historically Black Colleges and Universities T he American economy faces challenges that not only were exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic but also extend into the postpandemic future as outlined above and as explained in detail below. Meeting these challenges will ensure that the United States not only recovers to its prepandemic levels of prosperity but also builds a more dynamic and resilient economy that will benefit all Americans Strengthening Connections to the Labor Force The COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent economic shock decreased prime-age labor force participation by percentage points erasing the unanticipated gains of the preceding three years and reaching its lowest value in April since the early 1980s before partially recovering. Increasing the labor force participation rate will require action addressing the elements of the Federal tax code that disproportionately deter labor force entry and skill upgrading This section identifies two areas in which Federal policy changes can remove barriers to participation in the workforce. Taken together these tax reforms would constitute a momentous middle class tax cut From the early 1960s until the turn of the century the United States experienced a sustained and pronounced rise in the employment-to-population ratio which measures the percentage of the civilian noninstitutional population that is working from percent to nearly percent. This trend was driven by the participation of females many of whom were in two-earner households. However over the past years this trend has been eroded by two recessions in and and subsequent slow recoveries coupled with an aging of the population. Even among the prime-age labor force of to 54-year-olds the employment-to-population ratio fell from a peak of over percent in to only percent in the immediate aftermath of the Great Recession. Only by did the U.S. economy nearly return to its 2000s peak under the historically strong labor market conditions that existed before the arrival of the COVID-19 shock. Figure summarizes these dynamics Abraham and Kearney ( ) discuss several factors behind the stagnation and decline in the employment-to-population ratio between and These include the effects of import competition from China automation disability insurance programs childcare costs and shifting social norms reducing the stigma of not working ( especially among men ) on labor supply Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity |  $ "    ( ' * ( ) / / *  * '  / $ * )    / $ *  Ratio ( percent )   $ (   "  years  ' '   "  " *  *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $       ( ) In addition to these factors the Federal Government s income tax code is an important impediment to the growth of the labor force due to both the way that second-earners are penalized by the system of joint taxation and the high combined effective marginal rates of Federal and State taxes faced by low-income earners. While the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act reduced hindrances to investment and brought more low-income earners out of Federal income tax liability altogether by nearly doubling the Standard Deduction many filers in these two groups continue to face high effective marginal tax rates under the current code. This section discusses the negative effects of family taxation and the causes of the high effective marginal tax rates faced by many low-income earners ( estimated to be as high as percent by Altig et al. when taking into account Federal and State taxes along with phase-outs of credits and deductions ) This section also provides a broad outline of possible tax reforms that could spur economic growth by stimulating labor market participation by second-earners and low-income earners two groups with relatively high responsiveness to labor market incentives Dual-Earner Couples Among married couples the prevalence of dual-earners increased steadily during the postwar years ( figure ) This trend demonstrates the growing | Chapter  $ "    $ ./- $  0/ $ * ) * !  * $ ) /   $ '  Share ( percent )   *  )   * '  $ ) " '  )   * '  *    ) /   * '  / $ * )   importance of two-earner couples but also how their growth has stagnated since the 1990s. The female labor force participation rate in countries that do not differentiate between single-earner and dual-earners families such as Sweden also stagnated during this period but remained at a higher level Guner Kaygusuz and Ventura ( 2012a ) find that the participation rate of married women in Sweden is nearly percentage points higher than in the United States. Even though Sweden s overall tax burden on labor earnings is considerably higher its system of separate taxation which taxes individuals based on their own earnings instead of penalizing them for the earnings of their spouse leads to noticeably lower marginal tax rates on second-earners the individual in a dual-earner couple that has lower earnings. In some cases Sweden has a rate that is nearly percent lower than in the United States according to Bick and Fuchs-Schundeln ( ) Before the United States levied income taxes at the individual level although couples living in States with community property laws were taxed as if each spouse earned half of household income. As the tax system became much more progressive concerns began to arise that wealthy husbands could engage in income-shifting to avoid heavy taxation in upper brackets. By transferring some of their assets to their wives ( who generally had lower incomes ) their transferred asset income being might be taxed in a lower tax bracket. The shift to joint taxation meant that couples added their income together when Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | filing taxes. This switch greatly increased marginal tax rates on second-earners because the first dollar of the second-earner is effectively taxed at the marginal rate of the last dollar earned by the primary-earner. A study suggests that this switch depressed married female labor force participation by percentage points in the postwar period among women most likely to be affected by the law despite going into effect before the widespread acceptance of women in the workplace ( LaLumia ) If the move from individual to joint taxation had occurred after the shift in norms the effect would likely have been considerably larger The Marriage Penalty and the Second-Earner Penalty The second-earner penalty is distinct from the marriage penalty that is more often discussed in that the former deals with marginal taxation and the distribution of work incentives within couples whereas the latter is related to changes in the total tax burden a couple faces before and after they get married. For example in before the TCJA the increase in the tax rate from to percent occurred at $ for single persons but at $ for couples. Thus if two individuals in a relationship each had $ in taxable income they would each fall into the percent tax bracket before marriage but would be pushed well into the percent bracket after marriage because of their combined $ in taxable income. As a result they would face a higher total tax bill as a married couple than they faced as individuals in a relationship before marriage ( because each new tax bracket for married couples began at an income level at less than twice the income level for single persons ) In other cases a couple may have a marriage bonus if their tax burden under joint filing is lower than their combined tax burden when they filed two separate returns as unmarried individuals. The Office of Tax Analysis at the Treasury Department estimated that before the TCJA roughly percent of nonelderly married tax filers faced a marriage penalty while percent enjoyed a marriage bonus. The TCJA greatly reduced this tax penalty for the vast majority of married couples by ensuring that the size of the standard deduction and the location of tax bracket thresholds for joint filers were double those for single filers In contrast the second-earner penalty refers to the fact that under a progressive tax code joint filing imposes higher tax rates on second-earners than if they were filing taxes as a single person. Figures and plot the average combined income and payroll tax rate faced by single filers and second-earners without and with children based on current law. Single filers face an average tax rate defined as total tax obligation divided by total income that starts near percent. If however that person gets married to someone earning $ his or her average second-earner tax rate defined as the added tax the joint household faces from the second-earner s decision to work divided by the amount of those second-earnings starts at over percent. If the single filer were to marry someone earning $ he or she | Chapter  $ "   Average Tax Rate on the Pretax Wages of Single Persons and Second-Earners ( without Children ) Tax rate ( percent )  $ ) " '   $   $   $ persons   / *   e  )   / *   e  )   / *   e  ) Pretax wages ( thousands of dollars )  *     / $ * )  '     * !    * ) * ( $      #              '  '  / $ * ) would be subjected to average second-earner tax rates starting at nearly percent with State income taxes further pushing up this rate. This does not take into account governmental aid programs which impose a high effective tax rate on individuals who are in the phase-out range for governmental programs as discussed below Figure reveals that the second-earner penalty is even starker for people with children because of means-tested provisions in the tax code such as the Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) a refundable tax credit that subsidizes the wages of low-income households especially those with children. The credit gradually rises with income in the phase-in region before eventually leveling off and then phasing out as household income continues to grow. The design of the EITC therefore incentivizes labor force participation. The net result for single filers with less than $ is a negative total tax obligation with average rates for some below percent ( i.e. a subsidy rate of over percent not including other governmental assistance programs ) However if the single filer gets married to a person earning $ their joint income causes the EITC to shrink in addition to pushing the second-earner into a higher tax bracket resulting in an average tax rate of about percent which represents an increase of nearly percentage points for low-income second-earners Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | Figure Average Tax Rate on the Pretax Wages of Single Persons and Second-Earners ( with Children ) Tax rate ( percent ) Single persons Married to $ 40K earner Married to $ 80K earner Married to $ 120K earner Pretax wages ( thousands of dollars ) Sources : National Bureau of Economic Research TAXSIM ; CEA calculations The joint nature of the income tax code introduces a bias toward singleearner families encouraging them to specialize with one spouse at work in the market and the other engaging in tax-free home production. This may not be an optimal allocation for the individual family or the overall labor force absent such a skewed taxation system. For example both individuals may wish to work outside the home but the tax penalty for doing so discourages them. The existence of a second-earner penalty is intrinsic to any progressive income tax code with joint filing though the magnitude of the penalty can vary the steeper the rate structure the larger the second-earner penalty. For this reason past tax reforms in the United States that lowered marginal rates also mitigated but did not eliminate the second-earner penalty For example the and tax reforms which brought the top marginal tax rate down from percent to percent and eliminated loopholes to broaden the taxable base were responsible for at least one-fifth to one-quarter of the 13-percentage-point rise in labor force participation by married females during the 1980s according to research by Kaygusuz ( ) This estimate is based only on the direct effects of the tax code change but after taking into account the contribution of the tax cuts to higher wages the effect may very well have been much larger. This same research attributes to percent of the rise in participation to rising female wages during the 1980s. Bronson and Mazzocco ( ) also conclude that the primary effect of the Reagan and | Chapter George W. Bush Administrations tax cuts was to increase married female participation. Malkov ( ) finds that along with the and tax reforms the TCJA created welfare gains for married couples and reduced the second-earner penalty because of the overall lowering of the marginal tax rate schedule Tax Reforms to Mitigate the Second-Earner Penalty and Boost the Labor Supply There are two ways to eliminate the second-earner penalty : reduce progressivity which the Administration does not recommend or move toward individual taxation. Guner Kaygusuz and Ventura ( 2012a ) find large gains in economic output welfare and female labor supply ( because women are more likely to be second earners ) from moving to a proportional income tax However Bick and Fuchs-Schundeln ( ) point out that taxing two-earner labor income jointly acts as a greater impediment to female labor supply than does the progressivity of the tax code. They also find that moving completely to a system of individual instead of joint taxation that is replacing the current single head of household and joint filing statuses with one individual status that features a revamped system of deductions and tax brackets would boost female labor supply by percent. Guner Kaygusuz and Ventura ( 2012b ) find a percent increase in the supply of married women and percent rise for married women with children in response to a shift from joint to individual taxation that eliminates the second-earner penalty. Similarly Borella De Nardi and Yang ( 2019a 2019b ) estimate that shifting away from joint taxation completely would raise the labor force participation rate of married women by percentage points for women under the age of and by percentage points for women between the ages of and These numbers are high but research by Crossley and Jeon ( ) indicates that when Canada reformed its tax code in in a way that reduced the marginal tax rate for certain married women that group s participation rate increased by nearly percentage points Such a complete shift toward individual taxation would mark a dramatic reform for the United States. Moreover Fruttero and others ( ) point out that eliminating the current joint tax rate schedule entirely could have a negative effect on single-earner households. This finding assumes that the tax rate schedule for the new unified individual filing status that replaces it would have income brackets between those of the current single and joint brackets ( if the new schedule instead adopted the current joint brackets the static drop in income tax revenues would be larger ) As an alternative to universal individual taxation the Federal Government could allow second-earners to directly protect their earned income through segmentation whereby married couples filing jointly have the option of applying the joint rate schedule to the primary earners income and the rate Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | schedule for single persons to the earned income of the secondary ( lower ) earner. Other proposals include allowing a second-earner deduction or credit Under segmentation all deductions credits and dependents enter into the joint tax calculation based on the primary-earners income ( and any income not derived from wages salary or self-employment of the second-earner ) The Federal Government could also use means-testing for the EITC to exclude the earnings of the second-earner reducing the implicit tax in the phase-out region of the EITC for dual-earning couples because each $ in higher second-earner wages and salary income has no effect on the EITC amount received by the household Under this reform the earnings of the secondary earner would be taxed as if earned by a single person having no children with only the standard deduction applicable. As a result this tax reform option would allow families to protect the second-earner from tax penalties associated with the income of the primary earner. In other words second-earners would owe the same amount of tax based on their paycheck income regardless of the earnings of their spouse or other sources of family income thereby directly eliminating much of the second-earner penalty currently embedded in the tax code. Correcting this disincentive would create a situation wherein second-earners would be able to participate in the labor market on a basis similar to single persons High Marginal Rates for Low Earners Perversely some of the highest effective marginal tax rates on labor income fall upon low-income earners individuals making at or slightly above the poverty line. Altig and others ( ) calculate that one in four low-wage workers face lifetime marginal tax rates above percent taking into account the combination of Federal State and local taxation and benefits programs. Over half of low-wage workers face lifetime marginal rates over percent. Chien and Macartney ( ) find that among households just above the poverty line and that have children the median marginal tax rate is percent as shown in figure Some households face a marginal tax rate above percent As a result a low-wage household that increases its earnings by $ will lose more than $ to combined explicit and implicit taxation. This mechanism locks households in a cycle of poverty and impedes their ability to climb into the middle class This situation is the result of a combination of the structure of benefit programs and Federal and State income taxes. U.S. Federal individual income taxes are progressive and the first bracket rates ( and percent ) are relatively low. States collect most of their revenue from sales and property taxes ; however States also tax individuals labor income accounting for percent of State and local government tax revenue. The lowest-bracket State-level income tax is as high as percent in Illinois Kentucky Massachusetts Oregon and Utah ; percent in North Carolina ; and percent in Minnesota thus | Chapter Figure The Marginal Effective Rate on Low Earners Median marginal tax rate ( percent ) Poverty status ( percent ) Sources : Chien and Macartney ( ) ; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ; CEA calculations Note : This figure shows the marginal tax rates on households below the poverty line after a $ earnings increase. Because households with children are recipients of more government aid programs and consequently see a greater reduction in benefits they pay a higher effective marginal tax than households without children. The most common combination of aid programs is SNAP EITC Child Tax Credits and Medicaid / Children 's Health Insurance Program. For a household of two the dollar value of percent poverty is $ and of percent poverty is $ increasing the tax burden on low-wage labor income. In addition complex benefit programs often include phase-outs that can jointly create extreme losses in benefits as a result of gains in income. This reduction in benefits functions similarly to a tax on income. There are also programs in which earning above a certain threshold can result in a sudden large loss in benefits with no gradual phase-out Programs such as the EITC Medicaid Temporary Assistance to Needy Families ( TANF ) Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Child Care Assistance Section Housing Vouchers Energy Assistance and Children s Health Insurance Program can provide valuable assistance but at the cost of a large administrative burden to the government and a complex web of procedures that families must navigate to receive aid. In combination they also impose high costs on the acquisition of earnings-enhancing human capital effectively punishing families for augmenting their human capital by rapidly withdrawing government assistance Altig and others ( ) illustrate the benefit cliff faced by a hypothetical mother with two children. She loses access to benefits as her income rises with notable drop-offs in total benefits after $ in annual earnings. In terms of net resources she is nearly as well off financially earning $ a year as when she is earning only $ a year. This constitutes a severe impediment to the acquisition of new human capital through labor market advancement Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | Box Limiting Tax Expenditures to Facilitate Pro-Growth Reform : the SALT+MID Deduction The TCJA combined lower taxation on investment individual rate reductions an increase in the Child Tax Credit and a dramatic expansion in the standard deduction with the imposition of tighter caps on the State and local tax and mortgage interest deductions. Specifically the TCJA increased the standard deduction from $ to $ for single filers and from $ to $ for joint filers while capping the State and local tax ( SALT ) deduction at $ and reducing the maximum mortgage principal eligible for the mortgage interest deduction ( MID ) from $ million to $ These reforms weakened the MID and SALT deduction by both reducing the incentive to claim them relative to the larger standard deduction and by reducing the maximum MID and SALT deductions that can be claimed One reason for limiting these tax expenditures is that they are skewed to high-income households as shown in figure 11-i. In addition they each create economic distortions. Specifically the SALT deduction makes it easier for State and local governments to increase their revenue at the expense of taxpayers in other jurisdictions by diverting taxes that would otherwise be paid to the Federal Government into local receipts. This forces taxpayers in other locales to shoulder a greater share of the burden. Because local taxes are capitalized in local home prices particularly in supply-inelastic markets the partial defraying of tax increases causes the SALT deduction to artificially inflate housing prices in high-tax areas. The MID also fuels price increases  $ "  $        $ ./- $  0/ $ * )  * !    s      % 0./    *  )  * ( | Chapter while encouraging homeowners to finance their home purchases with debt instead of equity During the crafting and passage of the TCJA some outside groups ( e.g. National Association of Realtors n.d. ) expressed concerns that the changes outlined above would diminish the tax benefits of homeownership by inducing people to switch from itemization to claiming the standard deduction. Indeed the share of individual returns that claimed itemized deductions fell from percent in to only percent in Notably the individuals who switched to claiming the standard deduction generally benefited because they chose this option over claiming the still-existent MID However the housing market has proven incredibly strong and resilient in the years since passage of the TCJA. Homeownership has increased since after nearly a decade of consistent declines during and in the aftermath of the Great Recession As predicted home price growth did weaken in some areas due to the TCJA reforms. Li and Yu ( ) find that the $ SALT cap caused the growth rate of home values to decline by percentage point per year in high-tax areas with the effects felt most strongly within the medium range of properties on the market. Rappoport ( ) measures the response of house prices to all the deduction provisions mentioned above and estimates a percent average reduction across metropolitan areas. Martin ( ) in turn finds an even larger average decline of percent but with variation across zip codes and income classes. Each of these research papers comports with the assertion above that the SALT deduction and MID prop up home values and thus their removal should create the opposite effect and make homeownership more affordable for Americans Although slowed home price growth reduces equity increases for incumbent homeowners in high-tax areas first-time buyers gain easier admission into homeownership by facing more affordable housing choices and being able to make smaller down payments. In fact marked the beginning of the turnaround in the U.S. homeownership rate which had been on a stubborn downward path from percent in to percent in By : Q1 the homeownership rate had recovered to percent. In fact research by Hilber and Turner ( ) find that the MID has had no discernible effect on the overall level of U.S. homeownership. Sommer and Sullivan ( ) go even further demonstrating that limiting the MID actually improves homeownership by making housing more affordable which is particularly relevant to young prospective buyers who lack the accrued savings to make large down payments. Consistent with this finding the data reveal that households under the age of have experienced the largest homeownership gains Looking across states the CEA finds that the period after the TCJA s enactment evinced relative homeownership gains not declines in states with high mortgage income plus State and local tax ( MID SALT ) deduction intensity compared with States with lower MID SALT deduction intensity Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | Here intensity is defined as the ratio of MID SALT deductions to adjusted gross income in States with an above-median ratio ( which equaled percent in ) are considered to have high MID SALT intensity and those below the median are categorized as having low MID SALT intensity Using State-level homeownership data from the Census Bureau covering the : Q1 through : Q2 period the CEA employs regression analysis to measure changes in comparative homeownership dynamics between these two groups of States in the years after the TCJA compared with the years before. This analysis controls for permanent State differences as well as seasonality. The CEA finds that homeownership rates in States with high MID SALT deduction intensity increased by an average of percentage point per quarter in the period after the TCJA s enactment relative to States with lower MID SALT deduction intensity with the difference growing over time as shown in figures 11-ii and 11-iii. States with high and lower MID SALT deduction intensity had statistically indistinguishable homeownership rates in and the first half of Elevated homeownership in States with high MID SALT deduction intensity began in : Q3 ( percentage point higher than in lower-tax States ) one and a half years after the TCJA s enactment and was over percentage points higher in : Q2. The average 0.9-percentagepoint increase in States with high MID SALT deduction intensity translates into a percent gain per quarter relative to the average homeownership rate of percent across all States during the analysis period  $ "  $ $        $ ./- $  0/ $ * )  * !          % 0./    *  )  * (  | Chapter  $ "  $ $ $  * ( * wner. # $    /  $ )  $ " # -Tax     * (   with  *       Percentage points : Q2       *   )     ) / )  '   )   $         '  '  / $ * )  * /     /  /  $   * ) $    / *  #     # $ " #               / $ * )  $ ) / ) $ /4  $ !  $ )   / #   / $ *           / $ * )  / *    % 0./   " *  $ )  * (       "  /  / #  )    ) /  # $  #    / #  (  $  )   / $ *  * !  / * /  '           / $ * )   ( * ) /.  / *  / * /  '      ( * ) /.    *   ' '   /  /  $ )    #  # $ " # /  * !    #     ) /.  / #  " $ * )  ./ $ (  /  * !  / #    "  # * ( * ) # $   /  $ )  # $ " #       D        / $ * )  $ ) / ) $ /4   /  /  '  / $  / *  ' *       D        / $ * )  $ ) / ) $ /4   /  /  ! *    " $ )   -/    )   ./ $ .&  $ )  $   /  / #  /  / #  " $ * )  ./ $ (  /  $  ./  / $ ./ $   ''4  $ " ) $ ! $   ) /   /  )     *     * ) /  ! *  / #  * $  '   * '  / $ * )   ( * ) "  *   / $ * )  $ / # $ )  / #   (   /  /  *  / $ (   #  " $ * )  $ )  '0    * ) /- * '.  ! *   /  /   ( (   $   '   )   ( * ) / #   ( (   $   ' Reducing the benefit cliffs faced by families receiving assistance can be accomplished by reforming these programs to ensure that there is a low or no penalty for improving wage income. Removing provisions that create nonconvexity and nonlinearity in benefit schedules and consolidating the patchwork of benefits into a more user-friendly system would be a substantial improvement. Allowing a grace period during which an individual maintains benefits after commencing a new job or receiving a raise can smooth the transition to a higher income level. When phase-outs do happen starting them sooner and having them progress more slowly will reduce the disincentives they create Progress toward the goal of skill accrual and independence can be made by reducing the Federal labor tax rate on the lowest income tax brackets Although it may appear at first glance that the burden of taxation is light on the lowest earners in the U.S. economy the structure of benefit programs and the income tax system impose a high tax rate on low-earners wage income Removing impediments to increasing productivity and earning higher wages is of critical importance for the long-term recovery of the U.S. economy. In the spring of labor force participation dropped percentage points and has to date only partially recovered by percentage points. Increasing participation among marginalized groups can assist in reversing this trend Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | The middle class tax cut discussed above would remove impediments to higher labor force participation and economic growth. However it would likely reduce Federal tax revenues even when dynamic growth effects are taken into account. In the past the U.S. has successfully increased fiscal capacity for progrowth tax reform by coupling rate reductions and other broad-based relief provisions with the elimination or limitation of tax benefits. Such benefits act effectively as a form of spending even if they are disguised as a broad reduction in tax liabilities. Proposals for reducing these tax expenditures have been subject to claims about pernicious results in the past. However as detailed in box this prediction did not come to pass after the limitation of the State and local tax ( SALT ) and mortgage interest deductions ( MIDs ) Supporting a Balance between Work and Family The COVID-19 crisis has had divergent effects on families with children. In April and May when most schools did not provide in-person learning opportunities employed workers with children under years of age were more likely than employed workers without children to work fewer hours ( figure ) The crisis has also illuminated an underlying issue with the lack of high-quality affordable childcare and paid family leave. This absence not only hurts the labor market prospects of the parents or family members in question but also affects the entire U.S. economy Family demographic changes and increased participation of women in the workforce have caused the lack of paid family and medical leave to generate costs not only for workers and their families but also for society. From to the labor force participation rate increased for mothers with children younger than three years ( percentage points ) younger than six ( percentage points ) and younger than ( percentage points ) Families are facing increased pressure to balance caregiving needs at home with work demands. Paid family leave ( PFL ) policies attempt to ease this pressure by allowing families to take time off from work when a baby is born or adopted or when someone in the family is ill and needs care. The lack of PFL is a serious issue that affects the most vulnerable workers reducing their ability to engage in the workforce and meet family responsibilities This Administration helped to address these issues by offering tax credits to employers that voluntarily offer paid family and medical leave to employees earning below $ Although this provision of the TCJA will sunset at the end of the COVID-19 pandemic and containment measures have expanded the need for such leave by altering the ways in which many Americans work and attend school. Individuals must look after their children more than before because schools and daycare centers are closed or have limited hours. In addition the ability to take time off to recover from illness or help others recuperate is critical in containing the virus. The Families First | Chapter  $ "    #  ) "  $ )   ( ' *    * -&  $ / #    /0  '  *  * T #  )    '  *      ( $ '4     $ / #   # $ '   )    $ / # * 0/   # $ '   )   Year-over-year change ( percent ) Jul.  )        ) 0' Sources : Current Population Survey ; Integrated Public Use Microdata Series database ; CEA calculations Coronavirus Response Act extended paid family and medical leave to employees of businesses with fewer than employees which allowed workers to take time off when they were ill or needed to care for family members. The act was a temporary action set to expire at the end of funded by a refundable tax credit and advanced funds not already on deposit with the Internal Revenue Service. Paid leave remains an important policy issue as Americans continue to navigate the pandemic and look toward the future. However access to such leave policies is often underprovided by private markets The market failure that any Federal paid leave program addresses centers on the positive externalities that paid leave programs generate. A paid leave program accrues some benefit to both the employer and employee in the form of higher efficiency and productivity. This increase is often not large enough for low-wage workers to receive such benefits from their employers However there are additional benefits to provision that spill over and result in a positive externality for society. When workers are unable either to take leave or work while ill ( which creates additional problems ) they drop out of the workforce lose income contribute less in tax revenues and economic growth become more dependent on the government s safety net and may even live Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | shorter lives.1 Budig and England ( ) estimate that of the percent wage penalty mothers endure per child about one-third can be explained by a loss of job experience due to time off or part-time work as a result of childrearing Staff and Mortimer ( ) similarly conclude that loss in time spent either at work or in school is the greatest factor in explaining the motherhood pay gap. At the same time these families suffer and there may be adverse consequences for maternal and family health. Even though workers may realize the cost that such a lack of leave may impose on them they may not account for external costs to the public healthcare system. Similarly the costs for society of not giving workers access to paid leave are not internalized by businesses which are focused on minimizing their own private costs of production. It may also be impossible for small businesses with liquidity and capacity constraints to offer paid leave even if leave would generate a direct net benefit for their operations Aguirre and others ( ) find that if women s labor force participation rates increased to equal those of their male counterparts U.S. gross domestic product ( GDP ) could increase by percent. Houser and Vartanian ( ) estimate that women who take paid leave are percent less likely to receive public assistance and percent less likely to receive food stamps in the year after a child s birth when compared with those who do not take any leave. Not only is paid leave associated with fewer dollars in public assistance spending it reduces the chance that a family receiving public assistance will increase its use of public assistance after a child s birth Unequal Access to Paid Family and Medical Leave The Family and Medical Leave Act of ( FMLA ) guarantees unpaid family and medical leave to percent of American workers ( U.S. Department of Labor ) The FMLA grants employees the right to take weeks of unpaid leave to care for newborn children seriously ill close family members or themselves Employers are not required by the Federal Government to provide paid leave for employees Figure shows how access to PFL regardless of whether provided through the FMLA varies with wages as of Generally higher-income workers are more likely to have access to PFL ; percent of workers in the highest wage quartile have access to PFL while only percent of workers in the lowest quartile do Although the majority of workers were eligible for leave through the FMLA in access to leave through the FMLA is not uniformly distributed throughout the population. In those who worked for large employers were more likely to have access to FMLA leave because employers with fewer than Sullivan and von Wachter ( ) find a sharp increase in mortality rates for male workers as a result of work displacement even years after the displacement takes place. Displaced workers therefore have a lower life expectancy by about to years | Chapter  $ "       / *    $    *   -/ $ '       "    "   * )  # $ " # ./   -/ $ '  * // * (   -/ $ ' Type of Leave   ( $ '4  '   )  $    ( $ '4  '    $    $   * )  '  '    $      / $ * )   $   $  &  '    $   # * ' $   Percentage of workers  *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $     ( ' *   ) ! $ /.    * /   * -&    " *   $ ) / *   -/ $ '      "   "   *   ( '    ) /  * !  * -&  # *    "   "  !  ' '  $ )  / #  / *    ) /  * !   ' '  * -&  #       / *   $   !  ( $ '4  '  employees are not required to offer it ; percent of private sector workers were eligible for FMLA but they worked at only percent of worksites. Lowwage workers were more likely to have an unmet need for FMLA leave. Nearly in ( percent ) workers who made less than $ an hour reported that they needed to take leave but did not qualify for FMLA compared with percent of workers who made more than $ an hour. Several States have supplemented unpaid leave through FMLA with paid leave programs of their own. As of January eight States have enacted PFL with divergent requirements and benefits.2 This creates a patchwork system that generates a complex burden on employees and employers that could be alleviated with a nationwide paid leave policy. Worryingly Sarin ( ) finds that employers may discriminate against female job candidates if paid leave is offered ; prohibiting firms from firing employees for taking State-sanctioned paid family leave reduced the female share of new hires at large firms by percentage point or percent A paid leave program that is not directly paid for by the employer could reduce the incentive for such discrimination These States are California Connecticut Massachusetts New Jersey New York Oregon Rhode Island and Washington. A paid family leave law will be effective in the District of Columbia in July in Massachusetts in January in Connecticut in January and in Oregon in January Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | Effects of Paid Leave on Employment and Earnings Because very few States in the United States have experience offering paid leave programs the research on paid leave has either relied on household surveys like the Current Population Survey or State-level administrative data on actual take-up of leave. The empirical literature provides evidence that paid leave promotes employment more hours worked increased income and breastfeeding. These factors often disproportionately benefit disadvantaged populations Many studies of paid family leave programs find that the programs do increase labor force participation though some find no or negative effect Jones and Wilcher ( ) study the effects of State-family leave policies in California and New Jersey and find that access to PFL increases maternal labor market participation by over percent in the year of a birth an effect that remained significant even five years later. However Bailey and others ( ) study the short- and long-term effects of PFL in California and find that for first-time mothers who elected to take the paid leave there was a negative effect on their employment of between percent and percent in the short term and between and percent in the long term. Rossin-Slater Ruhm and Waldfogel ( ) find that California s PFL initiative doubled the use of maternity leave from three to six weeks on average. In addition it increased working hours and wages for mothers of young children by between and percent. This effect was particularly pronounced in disadvantaged groups a finding backed up by Bartel and others ( ) who find a disproportionately large difference between White and Hispanic access to paid leave and that under California s PFL fathers of infants were percent more likely to take leave an effect particularly pronounced for fathers of first-born children Finally Bartel and others ( ) note that PFL increases breastfeeding by an average of days which might lead to long-term health benefits particularly for disadvantaged families The effects of paid family leave on incomes and earnings are mixed. Even with PFL families may suffer from lower earnings in the long run although some lower-income women may benefit from a short-run wage boost. Bailey and others ( ) find that the earnings of first-time mothers with access to paid family leave were reduced by between $ and $ in the short term and between $ and $ in the long term relative to their mean level of prebirth earnings. For first-time mothers who elected to take paid leave the negative effect on their earnings was between $ and $ in the short term and $ and $ in the long term. Timpe ( ) similarly finds that expansion of disability insurance programs to cover pregnant women and mothers of infants caused women s wages to fall by percent and led to decreases in family income for families in the middle of the income distribution. In contrast Campbell and others ( ) study the effect of expanding temporary disability | Chapter insurance to new mothers in Rhode Island and find no wage effects for women in households making less than $ as a whole but positive wage effects in the three years after giving birth for women for households making less than $ For women in households making between $ and $ the wage effect was positive in the year after birth and indistinguishable from zero thereafter. Kleven and others ( ) find no long-term effect on female labor market outcomes but that leave of longer duration can have a negative effect on the labor force penalty imposed by children Although the empirical evidence on paid leave shows varying effects this could be a consequence of different empirical approaches data used and years covered. Analysis on this topic is often hindered by a lack of high-quality data on access to and take-up of paid leave and the fact that few States currently offer a State paid leave plan. At the same time while employers are starting to offer paid leave voluntarily such programs are more common among larger employers in certain industries. Finally while labor market outcomes are important for measuring the efficacy of paid-leave programs gains in alternative metrics such as child health quality can be persuasive in determining whether net societal benefit is generated as a result of a program Implementation of Paid Leave The TCJA incentivized private provision of paid leave by offering a tax credit to employers. Several members of Congress have proposed possible reforms to give more American workers additional access to paid leave. The Federal Employee Paid Leave Act ( FEPLA ) signed into law December expands the FMLA s 12-week paid leave benefit for the civil service to cover all FMLA leave and to allow the Office of Personnel Management to grant an additional four weeks of leave. The FAMILY Act proposal would create a new payroll-tax financed wage insurance program that would pay cash to those caring for a new child or close family member. The New Parents and CRADLE Acts would instead allow those caring for newborn or newly adopted children to receive a portion of their Social Security benefits while on leave. Members    '    * ) " $ * )  '          * *  '.  " $ '  / $ * )  T $ / '     )  $ ) "   * -/  ! *   * -& $ ) "    ( $ ' $        /   #   * -& $ ) "    ) /.   ' $  $ ' $ /4    /  * !    #    * (  ! *    ( $ ' $    /   #   * -/   * -& $ ) "    ( $ ' $    /   $    / *      )    ( ) /  $ )  / #    of the child s birth or adoption    /  /     ) /  "    ) /  '  '    $ ) "     * ) /.    )      ! *  !  ( $ '4   )   (  $   '  '      / *   /     $ /  ! *   ) /  '  '    *    * ) " $ * )  '     #   $   Note : FMLA = Family and Medical Leave Act of ; HSA = Health Savings Account Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity |    '    ) )  '   * ./  * !    $     ) /  '   )     $   '    Scenario  ( b $ ' ' $ * )  * !  d * ' '  )   Type of Leave   $   '        &   )  $ *     )  $ *     )  $ *     )  $ *        ) /  '       * /  '       *    ( $   )   ) / $  ) ./ $ /0/   * * & $ ) "  ) ./ $ /0/ $ * )        '  '  / $ * )    * /  The four s  )  $ *  !  / *   ( +/ $ * )    * 0/  * "  (     )  $ *  s   -/ $  $  / $ * )   /    $ ( $ '   / *  / # *  *    )   p- * "  ( of the Family and Medical Leave Act    )  $ * s    -/ $  $  / $ * )   /    ( *   * ) $ ./ ) /  $ / #  $ ./ $ ) "  S/  / ' '   $   '   * "  (    )  $ *    (  / #  /  #  ' !  * !  the * -&  are * )  $  &  '    )    * 0/  * !   * -&  * )   ) /  '  '   * '    -/ $  $  /  And s  )  $ *    (  that  $ )   * -&   $ $ ) "   $   '   * '    '  $ (  / #  ) ! $ /.   ! /  ! *  &.  * !   $   ( ' * * $    '  of Congress have proposed four tax policy changes to support new parents as seen in table The difference between the proposals hinges on the method of financing any new program of paid leave as well as the scope of that program. In general some proposals have favored using existing programs such as Social Security or the Child Tax Credit and allowing workers to access funds early. In contrast other proposals have favored new types of financing such as a new payroll tax on employers and employees to finance paid leave. The proposal on paid leave sponsored by Senator Bill Cassidy the Advancing Support for Working Families Act would allow families to claim an advance payment paid back over years through lower child credits. This act would provide no additional money to families beyond the value of bringing a future payment forward in time ( or qualified delayed or nonrepayment due to unfortunate circumstances faced by the family ) An additional policy to expand paid leave could be financed and distributed by State Unemployment Insurance ( UI ) programs as proposed in the President s Budget and would be scored at $ billion for a UI-based proposal offering weeks of leave. This estimate depends on the assumptions of take-up rates ( table ) The cost ranges from $ million in Wyoming to $ billion in California with a median cost of $ million in Louisiana using take-up assumptions based on the FMLA experience. The cost as a share of State wages ranges from percent of annual wages in the District of Columbia to percent in Idaho and Mississippi with a median of in Georgia Maine Missouri Nebraska Tennessee and Vermont ( figure ) Estimates made using the American Enterprise Institute Brookings Working Group on Paid Family Leave Calculator available at https : //www.aei.org/spotlight-panels/paid-family-andmedical-leave-cost-model/. The CEA further assumed a wage replacement rate of percent with maximum weekly benefits of $ a one-week waiting period and work requirements in line with those from FMLA | Chapter  $ "    * ./  * !    $     ( $ '4   )    $  &   /  /    "   *      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $    ( $   )   ) / $  ) ./ $ /0/        '  '  / $ * )        #   * !   / #  )   / *   / *   / *   / *  *   # $ " # One potential issue with funding paid leave through State UI systems is that typically State programs vary significantly when it comes to eligibility wage replacement rates and the duration of benefits. This can lead to uncertainty and confusion for workers regarding their eligibility for paid leave It can also be problematic for employers to understand if their employees have access to the State program or not and can lead to different compliance requirements across states. Therefore at a very minimum to guarantee uniformity across states it would be important to ensure that any leave taken for the explicit purposes of birth adoption fostering a child or medical leave be subject to the same rules across State programs. Tenure eligibility could be similar to the FMLA program so that workers need to work with an employer for about a year. Finally as the current COVID-19 crisis has shown State UI systems can come under significant pressure if additional programs are tacked onto them. Therefore adopting this approach to paid leave provision would require additional planning and administration and also an investment in State UI programs Paid leave could alternatively be offered through the EITC or the Child Tax Credit ( CTC ) Allowing parents to access the portion of the EITC and the CTC they normally receive as a tax refund at the time of birth instead of after filing taxes could help parents finance the costs of parental leave. Married parents making between $ and $ a year with two children could receive Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | between $ and $ in advanced funds to fund parental leave. An additional $ flat payment upon the birth of a child also could give parents of all income levels funds to cover their expenses and to take time off work at an estimated annual cost of $ billion This policy can be illustrated with a hypothetical two-parent married family with two children under age Both parents work and it is assumed each parent makes the same amount of income and has only earned income As noted above the family can receive payments only from the refundable portion of each tax credit since the nonrefundable portion can be used only to reduce actual tax liabilities and is not available as a cash transfer. Withholdings can be reduced to take into account these credits thereby increasing takehome pay In for a family with annual income of $ the EITC contributed $ to their income while the CTC contributed roughly half that. The combination of these credits could thus provide the family an advanced payment of $ which could be used to meet childcare expenses associated with the birth of a child. In combination with the $ bonus the family receives over $ toward meeting childcare expenses at the time of a birth or the adoption of a child. For a family earning $ this is a significant means of financial support that enables them to provide care for the child for several weeks even if they do not have paid leave from their employer According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention nearly million babies were born in the United States in Offering a $ baby bonus would cost an estimated $ billion each year. Though this may not involve the need for new funding advancing the CTC and EITC could increase improper payments and would increase administrative costs. In the past the take-up rate of the advanced EITC was low leading to an end to that program However that program was not specifically targeted at new parents The Lack of Childcare Although paid leave is important for working parents who need time off immediately after the birth or adoption of a child affordable childcare is often needed for parents to transition back into the workplace. In an earlier report the CEA estimated that as of the high cost of childcare was preventing up to million parents from joining the labor force ( CEA ) Over percent of these parents were married mothers percent were single mothers percent were married fathers and percent were single fathers. In addition to these million parents the CEA estimated that another million nondisabled working-age parents were working only part time and may require childcare to increase their working hours. Each of these million parents had According to the U.S. Department of State only babies were adopted internationally in fiscal year | Chapter a child under age and had no other potential nonworking caretaker in the household There are societal benefits to high-quality affordable childcare that do not accrue solely to the parent and their employer. The positive externalities generated by higher labor force participation at the intensive and extensive margins such as increased tax payments and reduced enrollment in assistance programs provide a basis for government interventions that support childcare Though substantial government assistance for childcare is currently offered through the tax code and transfer programs the benefits are spread over multiple programs and may not necessarily reflect current childcare costs. The high cost of childcare is also a result of government regulation of childcare centers and providers. And though implementing a high standard of safety for caretakers is of paramount importance excessive regulation and credentialing reduces the supply of childcare available raising the costs above what some Americans can afford A large body of literature in economics has studied the effect of the high costs of childcare on labor force participation. One Federal program discussed further below is the Child Care and Development Fund ( CCDF ) A recent study by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services finds that a percent increase in the CCDF leads to a nearly percent increase in maternal employment ; this conclusion tracks with a meta-analysis ( Morrissey ) finding that a percent increase in the price of childcare reduces maternal employment by to percent. The effects were strongest for single mothers mothers with young children under the age of four and mothers with low incomes. A tripling of CCDF funds for example could bring an additional mothers with young children into the labor force. Blau and Kahn ( ) show that the gap in labor force participation between women in the United States and other countries belonging to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) could be explained by the lack of paid leave laws and childcare availability in the U.S An earlier report from the Pew Research Center ( ) showed that for families with working mothers average weekly childcare expenses rose by percent between and and that costs as a fraction of family income were much higher for lower-income families. In addition to its effect on labor force participation the high cost of formal childcare is a possible reason why the U.S. has a higher reliance on informal care compared with other OECD countries Increasing Access to Childcare As discussed in the last subsection spending on childcare can be helpful for enabling work and improving labor force participation especially for women Today families receive some support for meeting childcare expenses through the CCDF as well as through various tax credit programs Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | The CCDF is a consolidated block grant to States funded by both discretionary and mandatory Federal dollars that generally funds childcare by providing vouchers to families for use in childcare centers family childcare homes before- and after-school care and in some informal settings. In total the CCDF provided $ billion in childcare assistance in with percent of funds coming from the Federal government and percent coming from the States. States additionally subsidize childcare directly through the TANF program. States provide additional funds to eligible families based on TANF rules which vary by State but generally include only low-income families that meet program requirements. In $ billion in TANF Federal block grant and State maintenance-of-effort funds were spent on childcare In addition to these subsidies two tax benefits for households specifically subsidize childcare while enabling parental work or educational activities The larger of these tax benefits is the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit ( CDCTC ) which allows taxpayers to take a credit of up to $ per child under age for qualified childcare expenses for up to two children for a total of $ This credit is worth a fixed proportion which ranges from to percent of these qualified expenses and depends upon the taxpayer s adjusted gross income with the higher percentages applying to lower incomes. The second tax benefit specifically tied to childcare is a provision whereby employers may allow employees to contribute up to $ in pretax earnings to flexible spending arrangements which can then be used to pay for childcare expenses.6 However expenses claimed for the exclusion may not be included among the childcare expenses claimed for the CDCTC. In combination the CDCTC and flexible spending arrangements for childcare expenses benefited million families in for an average benefit of $ per family. The combined cost of the CDCTC and flexible spending arrangements was $ billion in Many of the policy ideas discussed above for funding paid leave could also be used to fund family childcare needs. For instance tax credits like the EITC and the CTC added over $ for two-parent two-child families with annual incomes of $ in If these credits were further expanded so that families could claim them in advance this would allow families to pull forward money in a time of need. Of these the EITC is the best targeted at lowerincome households and is the most beneficial for covering their childcare costs because it is fully refundable. The CTC is only partly refundable and is not as targeted to lower-income households as the EITC. Its benefits extend well up the income ladder. Modifications of the CDCTC could increase its capacity to The CDCTC is nonrefundable and thus only kicks in once the taxpayer begins to pay income tax Crucial to this credit both spouses ( if filing jointly ) must earn income or be enrolled in school and the childcare provider can not be a spouse parent or other dependent. The CDCTC is also available for the care of disabled dependents Flexible spending arrangements use the same qualifications for eligible expenses as the CDCTC Employers may also fund the childcare flexible spending arrangement directly up to the statutory limit | Chapter cover childcare costs. Currently the cap on the size of the credit has not kept pace with inflation which means that while childcare costs have increased the maximum benefit has not kept pace with these changes. In addition the dependent care credit is nonrefundable which means the lowest-income families can not take advantage of it Federal policy could encourage an increase in the supply of high-quality childcare to reduce its cost to American families. Policy changes could allow more individuals to provide noninstitutional childcare to friends and neighbors either by relaxing regulatory requirements or by ensuring that the burden of credentialing requirements for childcare providers is efficiently achieving the goals of safety and quality. Potential policies could include lowering the educational requirements for caretakers and increasing the ratio of students to teachers when it is consistent with safety and educational benefit to do so. As discussed in chapter of this Report the benefits of deregulation tend to favor households in the lower-income quintiles and improving access to affordable childcare while maintaining a high standard of quality has the potential to greatly benefit lower-income parents Enhancing International Coordination to Meet 21st-Century Challenges The COVID-19 pandemic caused a historically unprecedented simultaneous global supply and demand shock reducing the output of each of the Group of Seven economies by about to percent. This section discusses issues with existing international bodies that were underscored during the response to the pandemic. Rather than a one-size-fits-all approach this section analyzes the benefits of a narrow-deep relationship with the United States trusted allies and friends and a broad-shallow relationship with nations that do not share the same value systems as the United States. Incongruity in values takes on profound economic significance because the current global economy is driven by interwoven networks a prominent example of which is the Internet itself Although networks possess great economic potential they also introduce vulnerabilities and as detailed below tend to work best and most securely between trusted participants. These profound differences in fundamental values create distrust and limit the extent to which it is beneficial to share systems. It is U.S. policy that multilateral institutions are useful and they continue to be effective for implementing U.S. policy priorities. This section discusses the benefits of supplementing existing institutions with stronger bilateral ties with allies that share U.S. values The global economy is in the midst of the most profound technological revolution in history the information revolution which continues to transform communication production commerce and conflict. Social and economic transformations continue to accelerate. The continued growth in Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | connectivity and computing power is driving 5G artificial intelligence nanotechnology three-dimensional printing and the Internet of Things each a major revolution. Quantum computing rapidly advancing biotechnology and profound innovations in energy all facilitated by or a part of the information revolution loom on the near horizon. The international order is at a historical inflection point fraught with both great opportunities and dangers. To ensure success global and domestic strategies must be grounded in the economic realities of the 21st century. The choices made now will reverberate for a very long time The Economics of Networks Coordination and Standard Setting Today s world is driven in large part by the economics of networks which can be characterized as any economic or institutional relationship in which the greater the number of participants the more valuable the network s function becomes to each participant. A classic example is a telephone system. If only a few people have access to a telephone system its usefulness is obviously limited to calls between those few. If in contrast the vast bulk of the population of a region has access to the system then its usefulness to any one user ( and to all of them jointly ) is vastly increased. Human languages themselves are networks the more people who use a language the more beneficial for all users it is to know that language. Any interconnected system of transportation communication or technologies constitutes a network because the more linkages and connections there are the more useful it is to all users. As noted above the Internet is a network. Railroads are networks as is the highway system ; if a new hardtop road more effectively connects a rural village to a superhighway it also simultaneously more effectively connects the rest of the world to that rural village In their foundational work Katz and Shapiro ( ) and Farrell and Saloner ( ) define network effects as positive consumption externalities such that the benefit that a user derives from consuming a good is increasing in the number of other consumers that use the good. They distinguish between direct network effects whereby a user s utility is directly dependent on the number of other users such as arise in a telephone system and indirect or market-mediated network effects such as arise in markets for operating systems where complementary goods such as software will be in better supply the more users adopt the system. They explain how the benefits of standardization and interoperability are rooted in such network effects. In this subsection we use a broad definition of network effects to encompass any coordinated network of standards. When countries share the same standards business is simpler to conduct between these separate jurisdictions leading to benefits for all participants. The more members are sharing standards the greater the gains for each participant leading to a network effect working through the | Chapter supply side. This definition of network effects includes any kind of widespread standard that generates benefits from interoperability For example standardizing the manner in which computers can communicate with one another constitutes a network ( the more users of the standard the better for all concerned ) If equipment hardware machinery parts or tools of any sort are standardized then they constitute a network ; for instance the metric system is a network and the more tools and machines that are built using the calibrations inherent in this system the more valuable each of them is because they are more interoperable. Networks mesh and overlap with one another and they are used in various complementary combinations One might use the English language ( a communications network ) to convey a message within an email message ( part of a communications network ) about purchasing a train ticket ( employing a commercial and transportation network ) and an intent to hire a ride-share car upon arrival ( coordinated through a communications and commercial network ) Modern market economies are vast networks of networks that pull in entrepreneurs labor capital materials and legal infrastructure ( among other factors ) to meet the evolving demands of consumers and governments around the world in real time. What makes this broad network system tick are the many networks enmeshed within it. For example what facilitates an exchange at arm s length such as a credit card purchase of a pizza is a set of trusted networks including not only the confidence that the money will be moved among the pertinent accounts to render payment but also the legal remedies implied if the ingredients of the pizza are harmful due to negligence Similarly international institutions and standards constitute networks of international trade investment communications regulation and procedures to resolve disputes. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development which originated in as the Organization for European Economic Cooperation was established in its original form to coordinate the administration of the U.S. Marshall Plan and today serves as a network by which countries identify and discuss common problems ( OECD n.d. ) The Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Transactions network allows financial institutions including central banks a secure means by which to communicate and transact ( Cook and Soram ki ) More recently the United States Mexico Canada Agreement ( USMCA ) is a network setting standards for economic activity between the three joining countries ( USITC ) Whereas the purchaser of tainted pizza has recourse in U.S. courts international networks can often fail to enforce standards. This is especially problematic when participants in international networks do not share the values of free societies and exploit these same networks to their advantage disadvantaging the free societies. As a result the effectiveness of networks at the international level is reduced. Economic activity will recede when international coordination and standard-setting create uncertainty. This Administration in Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | particular has been focused on the failure of global networks to enforce intellectual property protection. It is of vital national interest that global networks such as international trade capital markets and anti-money-laundering or antiterrorist financing are aligned with the values of the United States. This necessitates working alongside like-minded allies and partners individually and within existing international frameworks to ensure that global standards do not disadvantage the United States The Current Paradigm for Coordination and Standard Setting This Administration has both recognized the potential benefits of international coordination yet also highlighted the real limitations faced by international institutions in their coordination and standard-setting efforts. Recent successes include the update to the U.S.-Korea Trade Agreement ( KORUS ) the U.S.-Japan Trade Agreements and USMCA. As discussed in chapter trade agreements enhance U.S. firms access to supply chains and foreign markets allow U.S. consumers to enjoy a wider variety of goods and services and generate gains for the U.S. economy At the same time it has become increasingly difficult to work with some existing international institutions. Institutions made up of a broad membership with disparate goals value sets and trust structures are most vulnerable to suffer ossification and become ineffective. Although these institutions can and do provide broad value they often fail to produce deep gains through enhanced cooperation between members and are unable to allocate gains among competing interests. And though several international institutions are aptly characterized by these circumstances the trade space provides an appropriate example. Rather than working through the WTO s Doha Round or multilaterally balancing the interests of many parties this Administration has focused on achieving gains through narrower agreements as discussed above In the case of the WTO the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative ( USTR ) has noted in the most recent annual report on the WTO that the Appellate Body has added to U.S. obligations and diminished U.S. rights while several of [ the Appellate Body s ] interpretations have directly harmed the ability of the United States to counteract economic distortions caused by nonmarket practices of countries like China ( USTR 2020a 2020b ) This is the predictable outcome of a network that includes countries with fundamentally different values and limited enforcement capabilities. More broadly international organizations have faltered due to a confluence of factors including the size of the organizations the emerging multipolarity of international affairs and the fact that existing organizations largely addressed low-hanging fruit early in their tenure. Large institutions contain members with wildly divergent situations and goals increasing the frictions and transaction costs of achieving gains through coordination | Chapter    '     / $ * ) s  * !           * )  ) $ / $  /    * ( ' /     -/ $  $  ) /.    / $ * )  ( * ) / #   )        /.     ) )      "     *          )     )        * )     0'.       )       *     "         * #    *   $ ' ' * )  ) )    * &4 *       *    *   )    *         '  '  / $ * )  Note : GATT/WTO = General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade / World Trade Organization To illustrate this first point consider the durations of the negotiation rounds of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade / World Trade Organization ( GATT/WTO ) shown in table These rounds have increased steadily over time alongside the number of participants with the Doha round initiated in November still outstanding ( Moser and Rose ) Increased participation an indicator of broader multipolarity in the WTO is associated with longer negotiation durations. Measures of productivity such as average tariff cut per year of negotiations show a relative stability through the Uruguay round ( Martin and Messerlin ) though there will need to be large cuts as part of the Doha round for this trend to continue This relationship makes clear the trade-off the United States faces in working through some broad international organizations. Though the potential for benefits rises with organization size so do heterogeneity costs from increased diversity among these states ( Posner and Sykes ; Bradford ) On the margin a new member must be valued against the cost of reduced cohesion and ability to make decisions. It is important that international organizations reach optimal membership decisions with failures of judgment resulting in a free-rider problem where countries are unwilling to contribute and unlikely to engage in voluntary arrangements ( Buchanan ) This is not to say that the WTO or other international institutions would necessarily be better off as a result of a U.S. withdrawal. Aside from working to generate new gains for the U.S. through narrow cooperation U.S. participation in broad international institutions also serves as an institutional safeguard against the possibility of those institutions taking actions that contradict American values and priorities or becoming dominated by America s rivals. The United States participation leverages heterogeneity costs to its advantage making it difficult for countries Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | with different values to co-opt existing institutions. The Trump Administration has recognized this and thus has worked both within existing institutions and outside them to generate gains from deeper coordination Evaluating the costs and benefits of admitting new members to an organization or evaluating an agreement is complicated because of changes in the global landscape and difficulty in enforcing international agreements. For example the situation in was quite different than today. Many of the trade agreements of that period were made with a desire to support countries as a strategic counterbalance against totalitarian economies ( Martin and Messerlin ) At that time the United States was willing to accept nonreciprocal and unfavorable trade deals to benefit American allies ( Baldwin ) However this has proved harmful when international institutions have been unable to enforce compliance. The USTR has noted that China s entry into the WTO [ was ] on terms that have proven to be ineffective in securing China s embrace of an open market oriented trade regime ( USTR 2020a 2020b ) As detailed in the Economic Report of the President the United States has very little negotiating power today within the existing WTO structure because the current U.S. trade barriers are so low. This makes the negotiating process exceptionally difficult for the United States Another difficulty is that enforcing agreements is made conditional on a country s accession to an international organization. Consider the case of China s accession to the WTO. As part of this agreement the WTO engaged in consent tailoring which involved requiring China to engage in economic reforms as part of the accession process. At the time it was thought that through accession China would also engage in economic reform. But this has not come to fruition. Neomercantilist nations such as China that engage in industrial policy create dangers in markets characterized by network economics. A government that is heavily subsidizing a champion company for a network niche as China has been doing with Huawei and 5G might exploit the dominance of the company to pursue geostrategic interests and might not be a trustworthy steward of a network upon which so many and so much will rely. These issues beg the question of how to proceed toward the goal of free fair and reciprocal trade within the broader network of trade agreements and international organizations Adam Smith stated in The Theory of Moral Sentiments ( ) that to make a market economy work trust is an essential component. Successfully navigating the challenges inherent in this rivalrous global environment will necessitate economic partnerships with other like-minded and trusted nations in a deeper and more integrated manner than what has been done in the past As Evensky ( ) states : When trust is shaken individuals pull back and the market system contracts. Where trust grows individual energy and creativity are unleashed and the system grows. This is the great geostrategic and economic challenge that confronts international economic structures today : | Chapter how to build govern and maintain extensive cross-jurisdictional networks while ensuring that they are secure reliable and based on well-founded trust Opportunities for Advancing Coordination To remain nimble future deep international partnerships must be based on economic and geostrategic interests as well as on shared values. Economic theory suggests a way forward. As opposed to seeking shallow agreements between countries with differing belief systems the United States can generate gains through deep integration with countries with a similar economic situation and regulatory system ( Buchanan ) One approach to this integration is to develop narrow collectives like the European Union and African Union that work in parallel to and in support of broad international organizations These collectives rebalance the cost-benefit analysis by attempting to reduce heterogeneity costs and allowing for gains through deeper integration. This can be done by adopting global rules or creating rules from scratch to advance the goal of borderless markets ( Davies and Green ) Another approach is to create bilateral agreements between countries with similar economic values that can later be extended into multilateral agreements such as USMCA. Under this framework political and monetary action would remain the prerogative of each country. Moreover regulatory uniformity would not be enforced by an extranational government but alignments could be achieved through mutual recognition and acceptance of equivalency in the outcome of each system. Nations may pursue two different methods of regulating industry but can still reach regulatory convergence on key issues such as safe products fair work environments and well-stewarded natural resources For example in the United States and Australia entered a limited mutual recognition arrangement for regulatory exemptions that would permit U.S and eligible Australian stock exchanges and broker-dealers to operate in both jurisdictions without the need for these entities to be separately regulated in both countries ( SEC ; Jackson ) This foundation of trust provides a model for international cooperation that could provide economic returns not captured by current multilateral efforts while still constituting a laboratory for eventual broader multinational efforts ( Buchanan ) These approaches have the potential to benefit all the countries involved by allowing deep integration with aligned nations while maintaining an economic relationship with countries that are unable or unwilling to couple their economies under a framework of shared values and trust. As the importance of these collectives grow they will offer greater benefits to membership creating an incentive for countries to meet the criteria for joining ( Bradford ) The U.S. has the potential to generate particularly large gains through coordination with like-minded countries to help limit negative externalities from countries with different goals. The enforcement of intellectual property rights provides an example. The U.S. used Section tariffs to enforce Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | intellectual property rights against China. Intellectual property theft is quite costly : the OECD estimates in a study that international trade in counterfeit goods amounted to $ billion in The IP Commission ( ) estimated in that the cost to the U.S. economy of counterfeit goods pirated software and theft of trade secrets is more than $ billion a year. Assuming a discount rate of percent the cumulative cost of inaction is $ trillion The Office of the Director of National Intelligence estimated in November that economic espionage through hacking costs $ billion a year. Although the U.S. has achieved enhanced protection of intellectual property through bilateral negotiations with China ( discussed in chapter ) additional gains could be achieved by working alongside like-minded countries that share the United States perspective on intellectual property protection. By creating a collective to better enforce intellectual property rights against China the U.S can increase the gains and lower the costs Reorienting American policy from a broad-shallow framework to include narrow-deep coordination will allow for greater benefits and flexibility in making trade agreements. This will allow for the stagnation of the past decades to be overcome and create a higher-income and more closely linked world As recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic continues building international structures for a return to prosperity and prevention of future reoccurrences becomes of paramount importance Prospects for U.S.-U.K. Coordination As an example of this new approach to economic partnerships the U.S. could explore the potential for an explicit economic and geostrategic deep partnership with the United Kingdom. There are many possible nations with which the U.S. could partner in this way and this is just one possibility. Although trade agreements like KORUS and USMCA provide excellent templates for future partnerships and highlight important areas of coordination for contemporary economies ( see chapter for a discussion of these agreements ) future agreements could go beyond a trade deal. Blueprints for such cross-border arrangements have been outlined in depth by Tafara and Peterson ( ) in the context of financial market regulation The optimal economic result would be economic integration that increases gross trade flows and innovation. Trade in goods services labor and ideas would be as free as possible yet consistent with maintaining full sovereign independence. Facilitating this goal would involve intensive bilateral processes such as a free flow of labor through streamlined processes facilitating citizens of the U.S. and U.K. to work and live in the other s jurisdictions or mutual recognition of financial institutions that would enhance the global reach of both markets. Another area of potential benefit is the security of devices software and networks. The U.S. and U.K. would benefit from coordination on determining what types of devices are not secure and pose a risk to | Chapter the development of safe networks. Yet another area for enhanced coordination is institutions of higher learning which provide the foundation for future innovation. A U.S.-U.K. consortium of universities might act as a catalyst for centers of innovation and further collaboration. The exchange and flow of faculty students and ideas would build tremendous technological momentum in itself The U.S. and U.K. could vigorously and jointly prosecute the theft of intellectual property and coordinate remedies like tariffs sanctions and prohibiting the operation of certain firms to form a truly deep partnership The economic benefits of such a partnership could be substantial. As a narrow example consider the agreement on automotive industry standards between the European Union Japan South Korea and other countries ( though not the United States ) which increased automotive trade between partner countries by more than percent through regulatory harmonization In exploring the elimination of tariffs between the U.S. and the U.K. a report by the USITC found that U.S. imports from the U.K. would increase to percent and U.K. imports from the U.S. by to percent although the aggregate output effects were not substantial ( USITC ) A broader review of the literature on mutual recognition agreements by the OECD found that in almost all cases such agreements boosted international trade flows between partner countries ( Correia de Brito Kauffmann and Pelkmans ) The direct benefits of any agreement will be sensitive to the provisions therein. However what is both more valuable and more difficult to value are the early and future network effects of such an agreement The U.S. is positioned to lead in the development of a new generation of flexible bilateral economic partnerships that protect national sovereignty and interests while seeking to produce gains from cooperation. This stands in contrast to the expansion and sharing of networks with countries with which the U.S. has fundamental disagreements and with which it does not share sufficient trust to warrant generating the vulnerabilities that are inherent in shared processes. Pursuing deep integration with allied nations will facilitate economic recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and create a safer world where such a crisis can be addressed in a more coordinated fashion Creating a More Effective Healthcare System The U.S. healthcare system faces several interwoven challenges. The current COVID-19 pandemic is focusing attention on the importance of a resilient and efficient healthcare system for maintaining a strong and vibrant economy. This section discusses several of these challenges and potential reforms that would increase the efficiency of the American healthcare system. Increasing transparency in healthcare markets and increasing the supply of healthcare will help individuals access treatment both for any direct COVID-19 health effect and also for other diseases and injuries Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | Rationalizing the Provision of Healthcare Professionals Several elements of the current healthcare market structure impose large distortions on the mobility and training of healthcare professionals. These distortions limit the supply of medical practitioners especially to underserved rural and low-income populations artificially increasing medical costs. Alleviating these distortions could generate gains for many Americans Medical professionals currently face large hurdles to labor mobility due to restrictive licensing requirements. Because medical licensing is performed at the State level providers can not easily move between States as they face both monetary and temporal costs in the form of additional examinations interviews fees and paperwork. This creates a strong distortionary effect on the labor market which is particularly pronounced in metropolitan areas that cross State lines where healthcare workers can face major bureaucratic and monetary barriers to taking a job only a few miles away. Such regulatory burdens on employment are associated with lower levels of job-switching which may decrease upward economic mobility result in higher rates of unemployment and ultimately lead to higher prices for consumers Efforts are being made to limit the distortionary effects of these regulations within the health sector through interstate licensure compacts. These compacts aim to either provide portability or streamline the acquisition of licensure in other signatory states. However the effectiveness of such plans is limited by incomplete adoption across states. Figure demonstrates the patchwork nature of three of the largest licensing compacts for healthcare providers : the Nurse Licensure Compact ( NLC ) the Advanced Practice Nurse Compact ( APRNC ) and the Interstate Medical Licensure Compact ( IMLC ) The IMLC is further limited because it provides only a streamlined process for physicians to apply for licensure in other states which decreases some of the bureaucratic obstacles but retains the negative effect of licensure fees on provider mobility. Further complicating the regulatory landscape there are similar compacts for other healthcare professions including social workers mental health professionals physical and occupational therapists pharmacists and dentists Efforts to combat the inefficiencies of individual state licensing have been ongoing for decades. When the Federal Government has taken targeted action to remove barriers it has been successful. The Department of Veterans Affairs ( VA ) allows licensed physicians to practice in any state to increase the quality and decrease the cost of care and the Health Resources and Services Administration award grants to State-licensing boards to encourage cooperation which has resulted in the landscape of interstate compacts that can somewhat ameliorate the issue. More recently the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ( CMS ) has taken deregulatory actions spurred by the COVID19 pandemic that allow licensed providers to care for Medicare patients across | Chapter  $ "   The    * ( ) /  * !   *    $ .&  ) )   ) /   * /   #        $ '    * (    / $   ! /   $ ) "  )   /       / * /  '  * !   ./  /      $ * )   '   )   $ /   ' $  )   *  '  ! *   ' '  #  '/ #     * ! $ * )  '.   '/ #       *   ./- $  /    /  /   $ /    # $  $  )   *  '     0' '   *  $ ' $ /4  ! *        $ ) "     0' '   *  $ ' $ /4  ! *          $ /    # $  $  )   *  '         0' '   *  $ ' $ /4  ! *              $ /    # $  $  )   *  '               State boundaries to facilitate increased care in hotspot areas and enable a nationwide expansion of telemedicine. The Federal Government may be able to increase the availability of care and decrease the cost of healthcare by playing a coordinating role. Creating incentives for States to either adopt stronger portability of licensure between States or encourage the usage of a Federal licensure system modeled on the approach of the VA are strong steps toward increasing access to care and curbing rising medical prices Other supply-side problems include the limited number of medical schools and accredited residency slots for medical school graduates. Of medical school applicants only ( percent ) matriculated into a medical school in Though U.S. medical school enrollment has increased by percent between and residency training positions have expanded at a rate of just percent a year Reducing the barriers to entry for aspiring doctors and improving the educational process for individuals pursuing a medical profession would ensure that the United States has superior healthcare provision in the years to come. There would be positive feedback effects for patients from adding more doctors in historically underserved areas because it would enable a lighter burden to be placed on each doctor reducing burnout and encouraging more Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | individuals to join the medical field as doctors nurses and other healthcare professionals. According to the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality ( ) in recent years the rising prevalence of burnout among clinicians ( over percent in some studies ) has led to concerns on negative effects to access care patient safety and care quality. Doctors suffering from burnout are more likely to leave their practice which reduces patients access to care. Burnout can also threaten patient safety and care quality when depersonalization leads to poor interactions with patients and when affected physicians suffer from impaired attention memory and executive function To address concerns that funding for graduate medical education ( GME ) is poorly allocated this Administration has proposed since fiscal year to consolidate all GME spending in the Medicare Medicaid and the Children s Hospital GME Payment Program into a new mandatory capped Federal grant program. The distribution of funding to hospitals through this new grant program would depend on the proportion of residents training in priority specialties as well as other criteria identified by the Secretary of Health and Human Services. Such an improvement in the distribution of GME funds would serve to achieve a better distribution of healthcare specialties address shortages in healthcare professionals nationally and especially in medically underserved communities and incentivize better training of healthcare professionals Balance Billing When a patient sees an out-of-network provider they may be liable for the difference between what the provider charges and the amount their insurer would have paid an in-network provider. This difference known as the balance billed amount is owed in addition to any other out-of-pocket amounts such as deductibles and copayments. In some cases patients actively choose to pay this additional amount in order to seek care from an out-of-network provider. When a consumer lacks key information or choice in what they are purchasing such as when a patient unknowingly receives care from an out-ofnetwork provider or when a patient does not have the ability to select an innetwork provider there is a market failure. This situation can arise even when a patient receives care at an in-network hospital because different providers within a given hospital independently make decisions on which types of insurance to accept. Adopting network matching at the Federal level would require any provider that takes care of patients at a hospital to bill as in-network any patient who the hospital also considers to be in-network The Trump Administration has taken direct actions to address the issue of surprise billing. In June Executive Order directed agencies to ensure that patients have access to meaningful price and quality information before the delivery of care. Beginning in hospitals will be required to publish their real price for every service and to publicly display in a consumer-friendly easy-to-understand format the prices of at least | Chapter different common services that are able to be purchased in advance. In April the Administration began requiring providers to certify as a condition for receiving supplemental COVID-19 funding that they would not seek to collect out-of-pocket expenses from a patient for treatment related to COVID-19 in an amount greater than what the patient would have otherwise been required to pay an in-network provider. In May the Department of Health and Human Services released the Health Quality Roadmap to empower patients to make fully informed decisions about their healthcare by facilitating the availability of appropriate and meaningful price and quality information Several States have also taken action on balance billing though many resort to price-setting or arbitration which can alter the negotiating power of hospitals insurers and physicians. For example California has attempted to limit patients cost sharing for all nonemergency physician services at in-network hospitals from out-of-network physicians at the greater of the insurer s local average contracted rate or percent of the Medicare rate for the given service. As a result physicians have criticized the law for giving insurers the upper hand in negotiations and for decreasing patients access to care. In addition New York s arbitration system has been criticized for granting excessive bargaining power to providers in their rate negotiations with insurers resulting in higher reimbursements and premiums. By contrast an analysis by the Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) found that network matching could actually lower costs by reducing the ability of healthcare providers to negotiate higher rates from insurers avoiding New York and California s pitfalls by harnessing market forces to address the balance billing issue The CEA finds that protecting patients from balance billing could provide an economic benefit of $ billion a year by creating greater predictability in healthcare expenses. A total of percent of privately insured patients in a given year will seek emergency room care and percent will be admitted to the hospital. Data from a recent study indicates that of these patients about percent can expect to receive a surprise balance bill with an average amount of $ for emergency room care and $ for inpatient admissions. The elimination of balance billing lowers uncertainty and increases transparency Based on the statistics above the actuarial value of this reduction in risk is $ per patient a year and patients value the elimination of uncertainty at percent of this amount.7 Thus percent of $ per patient multiplied by the million adults covered by private insurance yields an aggregate annual economic benefit of $ billion from eliminating balance billing This is calculated from the statistic that households willingly pay $ in health insurance premiums for each $ in average payouts Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | Medicare Inpatient Rates According to data on national health expenditures from CMS Medicare hospital payment is currently one of the most regulated price mechanisms in the U.S. health economy accounting for about $ billion in government expenditures in alone. A recent proposal for a new Federal rule seeks to better calibrate the price mechanism to market prices. The existing pricing systems rely on estimates of growth rates of costs based on assumptions that often have little bearing on market prices outside Medicare Fee for Service. One proposed solution is to rely on data from Medicare Advantage pricing which is partly based on private sector negotiations. However there is a concern that Medicare Advantage pricing is closely linked to Medicare Fee for Service pricing. If the private sector negotiations are using prices set by the government as an anchor then the price discovery is curtailed and the usefulness of the negotiated price is limited The CEA completed an analysis to compare private and government prices for the top inpatient Diagnosis Related Groups ( DRGs ) based on the inpatient payment system used for Medicare fee for service ( FFS ) payment. A DRG is a patient classification system that standardizes prospective payment to hospitals and encourages cost containment initiatives. In general a DRG payment covers all charges associated with an inpatient stay from the time of admission to discharge. Specifically Medicare FFS average payments are compared with Medicare Advantage and Private Insurer data from using a publicly available data source ( Parente ) Figure displays the percent change in the relative price of Medicare FFS when compared with Medicare Advantage and Private Insurers. The relationship between Medicare FFS and private insurance payments and Medicare Advantage does not support using Medicare Advantage as a close substitute for competitive market pricing ( i.e. prices set by private insurers ) If they were close substitutes the observations would cluster narrowly around the 45-degree line shown in the figure. This analysis supports furthering the development of the proposed Federal rule to integrate pricing that more closely matches competitive market prices Future policy analyses will be able to take advantage of the new all-payer insurer synthetic database created by the price transparency Executive Order of June This database could easily confirm and extend this initial analysis and provide strong evidence of the need to revisit the economic price control mechanism used to set Medicare FFS inpatient payment prices The health reforms discussed above would be complemented by a continuation of the health information technology reforms that took place this year ( see box ) Better storage and sharing of information about health care will increase transparency reduce cost and improve the experience of patients | Chapter  $ "     ) /   #  ) "  $ )    $              ( ) /.   * (    $ / #    $       ) /  "   )    $  /  )   *    $  " ) * $  '  /    *  Percent change compared with private insurer Percent change compared with private Medicare Advantage  *    )            '  '  / $ * ) Building a Dynamic Economy through Infrastructure Improvement The infrastructure of the United States is made up of physical elements like roads and ports but also of less obvious components like digital infrastructure. The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted the importance of high-quality infrastructure in responding to the crisis as well as increasing the productivity of the American workforce. Locally planned and led infrastructure projects are desirable because of their ability to be responsive to the specific needs of local communities. However when projects are too large for local financing require coordination between multiple States or are instrumental in achieving national goals the Federal Government has a role to play. This section details the infrastructure investment channels in which the Federal Government s intervention would be beneficial The Federal Government s Role in Infrastructure Investment Federal involvement in infrastructure investment can have a beneficial effect as a countervailing force in local politics. Local politicians often face strong incentives to prefer new projects over maintaining existing ones and they may Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | Box Continuing the Historic Modernization of Health Information Technology Begun during COVID-19 The decentralized nature of the U.S. healthcare system can create challenges for coordination in a national public health crisis. In March it became evident that more precise health data were needed to coordinate the COVID19 response. Given the number of agencies needing these data the Federal Government embarked on an ambitious plan to modernize the national health information technology ( IT ) infrastructure to facilitate the seamless secure reporting of critical and sensitive health data from healthcare organizations and IT vendors. This effort led to the creation of the Federal data platform named HHS Protect that has allowed Federal agencies along with State and local partners to coordinate using shared data. This platform streamlines processes and connections to ensure data quality while eliminating time-intensive duplicative IT work HHS Protect contains within a single portal over billion data elements across different data sets. This information is available in real time to drive the Federal and State government responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. Having access to this real-time data allows the government to more accurately pinpoint patients in need to identify regions and healthcare systems that are under strain and to allocate treatments and resources more rapidly and efficiently. Having granular hospital-level data in near real time has been critical for developing an understanding of the severity of the disease the status of capacity and staffing constraints and the supply and demand of personal protective equipment. The HHS Protect platform has also played a central role in the COVID-19 vaccine trials. Specifically using data from claims and other sources it allows analysts to algorithmically identify at-risk populations and locations on the verge of a COVID-19-surge to target data gathering so as to quickly and efficiently meet the necessary benchmarks for trial validity No such infrastructure existed before this massive data mobilization and IT modernization. In contrast to the prepandemic status quo currently percent of hospitals report data consistently and percent report every single day. Similarly automated connections now exist for case and laboratory reporting from State and local jurisdictions. In addition to the data and platform the Federal Government has built out new and existing teams of experienced well-trained analysts from HHS the CDC the U.S. Digital Service and other agencies as well as leveraging the expertise of trusted external partners to ensure that these data are available in an actionable interpretable form to inform decisionmaking This groundbreaking effort will also prove useful for future pandemics and other health crises. For example it can facilitate more in-depth exploration of the recent declines in American life expectancy and can target resources to combat opioid overdoses suicides and heart disease. One important innovation that has emerged is the creation of Health Information | Chapter Exchanges in multiple States that link real-time electronic health records data to track intensive care unit surge capacity for COVID-19 patients. This platform could combine data from public and private insurance transactions to greatly enhance the planning execution and response to future pandemics. As mentioned above one policy proposal advocates the allocation of GME funding to areas with greater medical need. This platform could be adapted to identify those areas and ensure that they receive the healthcare professionals needed to provide a high quality of life for residents. The innovations developed during the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to serve Americans in the years to come also avoid imposing user fees that could be unpopular among frequent users ( Kahn and Levinson ; Glaeser and Ponzetto ) Over a short time horizon maintenance is often a more effective use of funds than new capital investment. Keeping existing infrastructure in good repair is likely to have a larger economic effect than building new infrastructure given that existing infrastructure is already woven into the fabric of highoutput economic environments and generates a higher marginal return than new construction. Nadiri and Mamuneas ( ) find no evidence of overinvestment or underinvestment in highway capital by the end of the 1980s indicating that maintaining the existing stock would ensure the correct amount of infrastructure intensity after that point with new infrastructure only needing to be built at a rate commensurate with the growth of the population and economic needs. Every $ spent to keep a road in good condition prevents $ in costs when it has fallen into a poor condition ( AASHTO and TRIP ) Given that estimated output multipliers for transfer payments to State and local governments for infrastructure range between and focusing funding on repair could have a positive effect on GDP ( CBO ) According to the CBO ( ) in the share of Federal spending on maintenance was just percent of total Federal spending on transportation and water infrastructure and the real dollar amount spent has remained flat since the 1980s even as the stock of infrastructure has increased. State and local spending have not increased their growth rates to compensate. Currently the Federal Government primarily funds road infrastructure through the Highway Trust Fund. But this fund is now facing insolvency with a projected deficit of over $ billion as soon as Zhao Fonseca-Sarmiento and Tan ( ) estimate that the current cost of deferred repairs might be as large as $ billion or percent of GDP. Nongovernmental estimates find that $ billion to $ billion per year would be needed to cover the infrastructure investment gap through ( McBride and Moss ; American Society of Civil Engineers ) Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | Simple and transparent metrics for discretionary grants would allow fulfillment of projects that have difficulty getting local funding because of their size or cross-jurisdictional nature. This would include projects across multiple States and that fulfill significant national goals. The process could expand upon the existing TIGER/BUILD model which entails federally funded discretionary grants that attempt to achieve national objectives but could improve on them by emphasizing numerical metrics for economic safety and environmental impact by using cost-benefit analysis that follows a consistent and clear evaluation process. The Federal Government can provide technical assistance to avoid biasing the process against smaller applicants and ensure adherence to best practices ( U.S. Department of Transportation ) As discussed in chapter of this Report public-private partnerships ( PPPs ) can enable provision of high value infrastructure at a low cost to the government. Well-designed PPPs are structured to ensure that the private partner has strong performance incentives at the same time that the public interest is protected ( Istrate and Puentes ) For example if the same entity builds and manages the project this can align incentives to minimize operational costs in the design and implementation of the project. Best practices for PPPs include robust competition between private vendors to win the partnership and contractual terms that optimally divide the risk burden between the vendor and the government. If the private entity is allowed to earn a return to the investment through user fees the partnership contract must carefully consider what if any role the public retains in terms of approving or setting the fees. If the infrastructure will be a natural monopoly as a road on public land with few competing roads nearby this issue is particularly important to address Finally efforts can be made to avoid deterring private financing of infrastructure investment funded by user fees. The cost of capital of PPPs relative to public risk assumption and funding is high ( Arezki et al. ) As detailed by Makovsek ( ) the government can take several actions to offset the risk and uncertainty private investors face when contemplating publically beneficial investment. Such hurdles include failure of environmental review change in political situation or other regulatory hurdles that introduce additional risk to the process of providing public infrastructure. In addition the interest on State and local government debt instruments is exempted from taxation and government-owned entities providing infrastructure services are given preferential tax treatment. Offering guarantees against the unavoidable risk of infrastructure provision and equalizing taxation treatment could increase private investment Infrastructure and Productivity Productivity a measure of the ratio of outputs to inputs is the result of a complex interaction between infrastructure education research investment and | Chapter  $ "       *   / $ $ /4  Percent change at annual rate   -'4     " Five    "  *       ( )        '  '  / $ * ) implementation. Especially important for productivity growth and innovation are public infrastructure investments because the choice of where and what to build has tremendous implications for the enterprises that rely on them If productivity increases an economy can create more with less. This leads to a higher-income economy with more leisure time and less environmental degradation for the same level of economic output For decades there has been concern within the United States regarding a decline in labor productivity growth ( Munnell ) As shown in figure the late 1990s saw a rise in productivity growth as industry implemented new information technologies ; but since the Great Recession productivity growth has remained depressed. This decline in productivity growth does not appear to be due to mismeasurement ( Byrne Fernald and Reinsdorf ; Syverson ) Research productivity has been found to be declining as a result of requiring more resources to advance the frontiers of scientific knowledge in existing fields ( Bloom and others ) New fields such as artificial intelligence quantum computing and autonomous vehicles can reverse this trend when their benefits are diffused to the broader economy. However there is a concern that dynamism is falling for cutting-edge fields. Astebro Braguinsky and Ding ( ) find that start-up formation by doctorate recipients in science and engineering has fallen partly due to increased complexity and administrative costs Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | Box 5G Infrastructure The United States has begun the transition to 5G technology for wireless communications. Far from a minor improvement on 4G the next generation of wireless communications features vastly expanded data capacity and speed unleashing new opportunities for innovation and economic growth As a simple example movies will be downloaded over the Internet at speeds more than times faster than is possible today. However the technology may also enable transformative applications such as self-driving cars remote surgery and increasingly intelligent manufacturing. In a report the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) describes the country as at the brink of another technological revolution in which 5G networks will make possible once-unimaginable advances ( FCC ) The FCC further reports that the wireless industry is expected to invest more than $ billion over years to deploy infrastructure for 5G that million jobs will be created and that the boost to GDP will be half a trillion dollars The integration of digital technologies with artificial intelligence and machine learning has been called the fourth industrial revolution ( Schwab ) This integration will be enabled by 5G technology. Over time 5G is expected to enable transformative applications through two novel facilities : massive machine type communications ( mMTC ) ; and ultrareliable low-latency communications ( URLCC ) The abbreviation mMTC refers to the capacity of the 5G infrastructure to support a very large number of devices in a network of sensors known as the Internet of Things. For example smart cities may deploy dense monitoring systems that reduce the cost of public services from city lighting to garbage collection by allowing for more efficient provision. URLLC refers to 5G performance standards that are designed to support mission critical communications. URLLC provides for data delivery at latencies as low as millisecond with percent reliability. Use cases include automated energy distribution in a factory or energy grid intelligent transportation systems and bioelectronic medicine ( Rysavy Research and 5G Americans ) Although private providers such as ATT Verizon and T-Mobile are investing in and building out the 5G infrastructure the Federal Government is playing a key role in organizing auctions for commercial licenses to the electromagnetic spectrum. This is a complex undertaking because 5G is designed to use different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum in combination. 5G providers will use high-band spectrum ( frequencies above gigahertz ) to transmit vast amounts of data at high speeds with low latency However high-band spectrum does not travel far and can not for example penetrate walls. Providers will use mid-band spectrum ( frequencies between and gigahertz ) to augment the high band spectrum for broader coverage at somewhat reduced speeds. Finally providers will use low-band spectrum ( frequencies below gigahertz ) to efficiently transmit data across very broad geographic areas at lower speeds | Chapter The FCC has made significant progress in implementing its strategy named Facilitate America s Superiority in 5G Technology. In and the FCC ran three auctions ( auctions and ) that released almost gigahertz of high-band spectrum to the market ( FCC 2020a 2020b n.d. ) These auctions generated about $ billion in gross bids for just over licenses. Winning bidders included ATT Verizon T-Mobile and US Cellular along with smaller wireless providers. On August the FCC concluded its first auction ( auction ) of mid-band spectrum for 5G releasing about megahertz of spectrum in the range of to gigahertz. The auction generated $ billion in gross bids for licenses. Winning bidders included Verizon the Dish Network and several large cable companies. The FCC is currently organizing a spectrum auction to repurpose megahertz of mid-band spectrum for use with 5G. The spectrum which is in the range of to gigahertz is currently used by fixed satellite service companies primarily to deliver audio and video content to cable systems. As part of the auction process the satellite companies will vacate the spectrum allowing 5G providers to use it instead Despite the disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic the FCC has pursued an expedited schedule for the auction finalizing bidding procedures in August with bidding under way as of December The FCC is also working on targeted changes to facilitate 5G usage of low-band spectrum. Finally the Department of Defense has contributed to the government s 5G efforts ; in August it announced that it will release megahertz of mid-band spectrum in the range of to gigahertz which was hitherto reserved for military use to be auctioned in late with commercial use starting in To the extent that the Federal Government can support the infrastructure necessary to ensure that these emerging fields can flourish this will enhance productivity. However government support for business structures that are no longer viable will decrease the rate of productivity by preventing creative destruction a process whereby innovative firms enter the market and stagnant firms exit ( Acemoglu et al. ) Consequently government operates optimally not when it invests in specific enterprises favoring certain companies over others but when it provides rules and transparency that allow companies to compete on an even playing field ( see box for a discussion of how the government allocates spectrum allowing companies to fairly compete ) Judicious government investments in infrastructure can fulfill this goal The Costs of Building Infrastructure Foerster and others ( ) find that the annual rate of GDP growth has fallen more than percentage points since As they argue part of the reason for this is a decline in the trend in total factor productivity of the construction Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | sector of percentage point. Although this decline in productivity was reversed after the trend value of construction sector labor fell by percentage point between and The cost of building highway infrastructure in the United States has risen percent between and according to the National Highway Cost Construction Index. This increase began long before this period having increased threefold from the 1960s to the 1980s ( Brooks and Liscow ) ; these increases are partly driven by increased regulation ( see box ) Labor regulations can also increase the overall cost of building infrastructure. For example the Davis-Bacon Act requires the Federal Government to pay wages to construction workers that are no less than what they would earn working on similar projects in that area known as locally prevailing wages. This regulation can artificially increase labor costs which can result in a nonoptimal allocation of capital. Although this was a Great Depression era attempt to raise wages Davis-Bacon also increases the burden of regulation which discriminates against small firms. Reform could ensure that such regulations are achieving an appropriate balance between competing policy priorities In addition to the National Environmental Act in other environmentally focused legislation has increased the difficulty of developing on public lands such as the Endangered Species Act and the Clean Water Act Citizen organizations and environmental nonprofits have also increased since the 1970s often opposing some development projects. Environmental impact reviews can delay projects or force developers to take expensive routes to fulfill the project increasing overall costs ( Brooks and Liscow ) While ensuring that new investment does not steal from the public by despoiling public goods is crucial a rapid and transparent approval process could ensure that the capital is not tied up but if rejected can be repurposed for alternate more environmentally friendly projects Another factor in rising infrastructure costs is a lack of transparency and competitive processes. This limits public oversight and leads to wasteful and corrupt spending which reduces the return on investment. For example the Long Island Rail Road project has paid $ billion for each mile of track a rate seven times the world average. Schwartz and others ( ) estimate that percent of advanced economy infrastructure investment is lost to waste The Critical Importance of User Fees Certain goods have characteristics that are not amenable to pricing and therefore must be financed by general revenues. Clean air for example can not be priced for use because there is no practical way to exclude those who do not pay from breathing it. Moreover there is no cost from additional consumption as one s breathing it does not reduce another s ability to do so by a notable amount. Economists refer to such goods as nonexcludable and nonrivalrous. | Chapter Box Reforming the NEPA Process The National Environmental Policy Act ( NEPA ) which was signed into law in requires Federal agencies to assess the environmental effects of their proposed actions and prepare an environmental impact statement ( EIS ) for actions that will significantly affect the quality of the human environment For such actions agencies must consider ways to minimize significant effects through reasonable alternatives or mitigation. The lead Federal agency must also solicit and consider public comments on potential environmental effects and alternatives. If it is completed the entire EIS process takes about four and half years to complete on average and averages over pages in length The Council on Environmental Quality ( CEQ ) finalized reforms in to modernize its NEPA regulations and reduce delays in the environmental review and decisionmaking process. Changes include establishing a presumptive two-year time limit for the process clarifying definitions and procedural requirements codifying efficient agency practices to reduce unnecessary paperwork and delays and updating the regulations to reflect current technologies. CEQ s updated NEPA regulations also include aspects of the Administration s One Federal Decision policy established by Executive Order which addresses major infrastructure projects that require multiple agencies to approve permits. The One Federal Decision Executive Order which is codified in the updated regulations requires agencies issuing multiple permits for a project to develop a joint permitting schedule develop one EIS and then issue a joint record of decision for the project By reducing the time for completing NEPA reviews from to years the CEA estimates that these policies will lead to $ billion in benefits from infrastructure projects over the next years. The benefits come from earlier completion and lower costs of financing projects leading to improved infrastructure and amenities. The CEA bases the estimate on the $ trillion in roads airports waterways pipelines and utility investments that are needed to modernize infrastructure in the next years ( American Society of Civil Engineers ) Though it is not clear that all these projects would require review under NEPA or preparation of an EIS the CEA estimate is conservative in assuming that delays under the current NEPA permitting process are only years rather than years. Research by the CEA has shown that public infrastructure investments provide a marginal product to society at a rate of percent a year Accordingly the value of moving the benefits of $ trillion in investments forward two years is $ billion. An additional benefit of the reduced delay in the permitting process is that developers of this infrastructure do not need to hold loans for as many years incurring interest on the principal loaned to undertake the project. The estimated reduction in financing costs is $ billion for loans made on a principal of $ trillion or the difference in interest payments on a 4-year versus a 2-year loan. If the decision is made Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | to not approve a proposed project those resources can more quickly be reallocated to a more beneficial use The benefits from reform could be even larger than we have estimated because some permits are not just delayed by some years but instead are never issued at all because the company requesting them moves into financial hardship while awaiting a response. Bear Lodge mine in Wyoming is one example. Rare Element Resources attempted to open a mine for rare earth minerals which have been designated as a critical mineral on U.S. Forest Service ( USFS ) land. The company submitted its plan of operations to the USFS in November In September the USFS accepted the initial plan and started the process of finding a contractor to undertake the EIS. In January Rare Element Resources suspended permitting efforts because the company had run out of money waiting for the project to be approved With so much attention being paid to reshoring critical industries ( see chapter ) simply capitalizing domestic natural resources responsibly would ensure access to many key commodities improving the U.S. trade balance mitigating U.S. reliance on vulnerable commodity supply chains and ensuring that resources are extracted and used in a sustainable way This would allow for more sustainable trading partnerships without imposing distortionary trade barriers that disrupt supply chains and impose costs on American consumers. It would also allow commodities to be produced in a more sustainable way than is often done in other countries However when it is possible to exclude users and when additional consumption imposes costs on others setting a price on a good can efficiently internalize the costs associated with its use. Roads canals and bridges are examples of goods that are both excludable and rivalrous and therefore would benefit from pricing plans As detailed in the Economic Report of the President it is optimal when the users of a public good are those who pay for it. This prevents overconsumption of public goods by ensuring that the costs of using them are borne by the users and provides a source of funding for the maintenance and upkeep of these goods. Without a clear and sustainable funding stream infrastructure can become a burden on future generations Although Federal gasoline taxes partly fund Federal infrastructure projects and so partly align the users with the costs of use most of these projects are financed through general revenues. Because drivers are not bearing the costs of driving on public roads and bridges they do not have any incentive to economize their use of them leading to congestion and high maintenance costs. User fees such as tolls or fees based on vehicle miles traveled ( with both scaled to the damage the use does to the infrastructure ) reduce congestion and help provide a stable source of funding for infrastructure. Expanding | Chapter their use and other forms of congestion pricing would yield further economic benefits The Federal Government has implemented several kinds of user fees over many decades to finance public infrastructure although these have not adequately addressed the problems of depreciation and congestion. The Federal Government passed a gasoline tax in initially set at cents a gallon which then was roughly percent of the price of gasoline. The Federal Highway Act and Highway Revenue Act of attached user fees explicitly to the Interstate Highway System. These included taxes on gasoline diesel fuel tires and heavy vehicle use though the vast majority of the Highway Trust Fund revenues depend on fuel taxes. However these taxes are not pegged to inflation and the Federal gasoline tax in particular has not been raised since October although the general price level ( price index for GDP ) has increased by a multiple of The gasoline tax is now cents a gallon which was percent of the cost of gasoline in and is currently roughly half that In addition higher-mileage vehicles including electric vehicles render the gasoline tax an incomplete and flawed user fee. Higher-mileage vehicles depreciate physical assets such as roads and bridges as much as lowermileage vehicles of equivalent mass but pay less per mile when fuel taxes are utilized as a user fee. Though a gasoline tax may generate ancillary benefits by reducing pollution and greenhouse gas emissions dependence on this tax to fund the maintenance of Federal roads and bridges is inadvisable Alternatively Federal State and local governments could consider increasing their use of toll roads to finance public infrastructure and reduce congestion. These toll roads could vary their charges based on the vehicle type One example of these is high-occupancy toll ( HOT lanes ) HOT lanes charge low occupancy vehicles a fee while buses and emergency vehicles can use the lanes free of change. Currently there are HOT lanes operating across States. Some academics and government officials have advocated converting high-occupancy vehicle ( HOV ) lanes which restrict use to only qualifying vehicles to HOT lanes to increase usage and reduce congestion in other lanes Research on the effectiveness of HOT lanes has been mixed however. If the toll is set too low a HOT lane may actually reduce the incentive to carpool and therefore generate more congestion given that single occupants may be content to simply pay the toll to access the lane ( Burris et al. ; Konishi and Mun ) In HOV lanes these single-occupant vehicles would typically have been excluded. However toll prices that are set optimally can reduce congestion and finance the maintenance of the public asset Governments could also consider varying toll prices based on the time of day. Variable tolls as opposed to flat-rate tolls charge drivers more during peak travel hours to reduce congestion. In Fort Myers Florida a percent discount on the toll was offered on the Midpoint and Cape Coral bridges for a Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | short period before and after the rush hours. Survey data revealed that among those eligible for the discount there was an increase in traffic of as much as percent during the discount period before the morning rush hour with corresponding drops in the rush hour itself A handful of cities and countries have embraced cordon pricing which charges drivers for entering certain areas. Instead of traditional tollbooths vehicles are charged through transponders that are scanned by overhead antennas to detect entry. Currently to percent of toll fees are collected this way in the United States. In Germany highway authorities use Global Positioning System technology to administer truck tolls on its autobahns. An in-vehicle device records all the charges based on the location of the vehicle and then the owner of the vehicle uploads the charge to a processing center The costs of such systems are as much as $ per vehicle in Germany but their presence reduces the need for roadside equipment and labor for toll collection Cordon pricing has had considerable effects on congestion. Table details the cities and countries that have embraced this form of congestion pricing and summarizes the economic effects. In the year after implementation traffic congestion fell in London by percent. Bus service increased by percent due to improved reliability and reduced travel times. Of the thousands of car trips that no longer traveled into the cordon zone percent shifted to public transit percent were diverted to other parts outside the cordon area and the remainder shifted to carpooling walking biking and traveling outside peak hours. These results have been sustained over time despite nearly percent population growth in London since The city has also achieved concomitant public health benefits as carbon dioxide emissions declined percent from to In Stockholm traffic in the cordon area has fallen percent and carbon dioxide emissions have fallen percent Singapore s road pricing plan reduced congestion by percent from to and generated revenues that were nearly nine times the costs of investment. When Singapore switched to its current electronic road pricing system in this reduced congestion even further despite strong population growth since then. Congestion in the inner city has fallen by percent while average speeds have increased by more than percent and bus and train usage have increased by percent. Revenues have been used to support public transit ; street safety ; and bus rail and bicycle infrastructure projects However Singapore also introduced stringent measures to restrict car ownership requiring the purchase of a certificate that can cost as much as $ that must be recertified every years. Since Singapore has required new drivers to bid on existing certificates as it will not allow any increase in car ownership Although most economists agree that congestion pricing would make the average person better off many States and localities are reluctant to adopt such pricing mechanisms because of the system s perceived inequities. As of | Chapter Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity |     $ '  )   $ ) "  *     * -&   $ /4   0/ * (  / $   / * ' ' $ ) "   /  (  $ )  ) /-4  * $ ) /.  / *  $ ) )   $ /4    ' $    /2 )    (   )    (  Monday Friday varying based * )   (  )    '  /    $ '4   #  "   ' $  / *   $  ) / $ ) "  / #   $ /4   /2 )    (   )    (   $  ) /.  ( +/  ! *  ! $ -./   ) /- $  / # )         #  "   '  /- $    )   #  $      ( +/    $   '  $  $ ) "   # (    % 0./.  / *   * ) " ./ $ * )  ' '.  $ )   '  / $ (  ! * (    (  (  Monday   /urday  # $  '  $   $ / #    #  *     $   ./ * $ ) "  !      * ) # $   -/ $ ! $   /  ' $ ( $ /     )   * ./        .4./ (  '-      ! *   $  "   )   /0 ) ) '  / * ' 's  #  "  # $  '  ) / $ ) "    ) #  //  )  * 0/ #  * !  / #   /- /      $ /.  ! *  $  ) /.   ) $ ) "  '  / #  )    ) )  ''4 )     $ / $ * )  / *  $ ./ $ ) "   * ) " ./ $ * )  !  ! *  /  $ and rideshares square miles inside the city s Inner Ring Road    ! ! $     (     +/0-  ' $  )  '  /  ) (   * )  ) /-4 $ /    $ / # $ )  ) 3/      '  /    $ '4  !  ! * (    (  (   onday  riday  0/ * (  / $   / * ' ' $ ) "   /  (  $ )  ) /-4  * $ ) /.  / *  $ ) )   $ /4    ' $    /2 )    (   )    (  Monday Friday   $ ) "      * )   (  )    * ' $  $   * /     * -&   $ /4   * ) " ./ $ * )  $  $ ) "  '  )    ./ $ ' '  / ) /  / $   *    $  /  /    ) * -/  / $ * )    (  $ " )   *  )   * ( ( $ $ * )  New York Times  Bloomberg CityLab      / *  & # * ' (   * / # )  "    )      ( ' ( ) /   * )  * )   $ /4     '    * ) " ./ $ * )   $  $ ) "  ) $ / $  / $   * '  $    ) )  '  *  / $ ) "   * ./ ) /  )    ( $ ' ' $ * )   ( $ ' ' $ * )   $ )    /-  ! ! $   $ )  $ ) )   $ /4  have  *     ) /   ) # *  "   ( $ $ * )  $ )   *  * )           ) /  *  / #  )    ) /    / $ * )  $ )  /-  ! ! $     ) /   *  $ )   '   &     * )  ( $ $ * )   ) )  '  *  / $ ) "   * ./ ) /  )   ( $ ' ' $ * )  &- * )    $ ' ' $ * )  &- * )     ! ! $    '          ) /    ) /  $  ) /  * * $ / $ * )     ! /    ! '  $ ' * /   $ / $ )  * /   / *  &  (  ) ) /    ! ! $     ' $ )     ) /   $ ) "   #  "   # *    ' $   /-  ) $ /   % (     ) /  ! *   * ( ( 0/   ) )  '  *  / $ ) "   * ./ ) /  )   ( $ ' ' $ * )  ( $ ' ' $ * )    ) /    / $ * )  $ )  /-  ! ! $    * ) " ./ $ * )    $  # $    #     # $ " #  $ )   (   /  Box Digital Infrastructure The COVID-19 crisis has revealed inadequacies in medical information systems with some officials relying on fax machines to relay critically important health data ( Kliff and Sanger-Katz ) Box above details the digital infrastructure investment made in response to this need. As the American public suffered job losses of unprecedented scope dated computer software was overwhelmed by skyrocketing State Unemployment Insurance claims Government agencies could be better served by modernizing data storage. For example the Department of Veterans Affairs ( VA ) began creating an in-house records system amid the advent of personal computing in the 1970s. Though state-of-the-art in its prime the VA s system continues to draw criticism from lawmakers concerned about maintenance costs and security issues related to commercially tested software alternatives. As currently implemented despite several modernization attempts and billions of dollars in annual spending the VA s information technology fails to adequately support its services and protect against security threats. However a recent change in policy will allow veterans to have more access to private healthcare which will require the VA to coordinate with other healthcare providers and reinforces the necessity of updating its outdated IT systems ( Steinhauer ) Without modernization critical infrastructure like regional power grids and hospital medical records remain at risk for potentially catastrophic cyberattacks ( GAO ) In alone Federal executive branch civilian agencies reported more than security incidents ranging from email phishing to malicious software installations. The Government Accountability Office finds that legacy systems at the Department of Homeland Security pose highor critical-risk network vulnerabilities ( GAO ) In many cases foreign intelligence agencies spearhead such intrusions. As recently as October the Department of Justice indicted six Russian military officials for disrupting the French elections and the PyeongChang Winter Olympics among other attacks ( DOJ ) Standardized data storage and streamlined information-sharing processes would foster more efficient interagency collaboration on governmentwide initiatives like coronavirus relief. In addition providing information for public use once it has been scrubbed of identifying characteristics would significantly benefit scientific research. Academics argue that providing direct access to administrative data can further strengthen the position of the United States on the forefront of academic progress ( Card et al. ) New digital infrastructure will also be needed in cutting edge sectors such as the autonomous vehicles industry. The Federal Government can ease the entry of new players in such sectors thereby supporting competition by supporting infrastructure investment. For the autonomous vehicles industry this will involve ensuring that localities have the infrastructure in place to support autonomous vehicle technology for passenger cars long-haul trucking and short-range drones in a consistent and universal manner. Investing in | Chapter unmanned traffic management systems and streamlining regulatory approval for engineers seeking airspace to test their inventions will be a major step toward a future of half-hour package deliveries and decongested roadways Federal intervention can facilitate the development of robust national-scale systems instead of a State-by-State patchwork Altogether advances in digital infrastructure could generate tremendous economic gains for the United States. The autonomous vehicle industry alone is expected to increase output by $ trillion or roughly $ per person ( Clements and Kockelman ) A Virginia Tech study found in a cross-sectional analysis of three large U.S. cities that drone delivery could produce $ million in total time savings for consumers each year in those cities ( Lyon-Hill et al. ) only percent of roads in the United States used some type of congestion pricing beyond traditional tollroads. However the Federal Government could incentivize State and local governments to adopt such policies by offering to match infrastructure investments if such pricing is adopted or offer Federal support to help compensate low-income populations that might be adversely affected by congestion pricing An additional area in which government and private interests alike could benefit from increased Federal investment is in digital infrastructure. Relevant projects involving improved data gathering enhanced security and revolutionized computing efficiency. These public goods will increase the productivity of private industry and the well-being of the American citizenry ( box ) Investing in Port Infrastructure America s seaports serve as our economy s gateways to the vast maritime network that transports more than percent of global trade tonnage. These American ports facilitate more than percent of America s international trade by weight and nearly percent by value. They are absolutely vital for American prosperity and economic security. However America s ports now lag far behind the competitiveness and productivity of the world s leading ports As a result increased transportation costs place American companies at a significant disadvantage effectively locking the U.S. economy out of the world s lowest-cost trade routes. Over time the poor state of the Nation s ports has taken a significant toll on America s position in global trade and manufacturing and has adversely affected net exports. Because maritime commerce is the dominant global trade mode competing nations have prioritized enhancements to their seaports to improve the flow of trade. Increasing the efficiency and productivity of ports decreases transportation costs and expands trade opportunities. Capital investment to modernize American ports is long overdue and would yield substantial returns for the Nation s trade and manufacturing Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | competitiveness by supporting net exports as high-quality port infrastructure benefits exports more than imports through supply chain interactions Container ships spend less time making port in Taiwan ( day ) China ( day ) Japan ( day ) Spain ( day ) and Norway ( day ) than in the United States where it takes a full day on average. U.S. ports take longer than the world average in five out of six market segments ( UNCTAD ) Deep channels round-the-clock automated cargo handling and constant competitive improvement enable nearly frictionless trade. Ports with these features serve allowing tremendous economies of scale and complex supply chains to flourish. Low transportation costs are pivotal for the production of goods that require the movement of many players. For large parts and bulk goods such as those required in aerospace automotive and industrial production waterborne commerce often offers a transportation mode for intermediate inputs Conversely higher transportation costs resulting from poor maritime infrastructure relegate host nation economies to favor less complex supply chains the exporting of primary goods and the importing of intermediate and finished goods. Over time this can have the effect of deindustrializing a nation. Poor maritime logistics ( including the absence of entire classes of bulk transportation legs ) leads to situations where hog farmers in North Carolina import feed grain from Brazil instead of America. The United States also leads the world in exporting scrap metal because the existing water transportation modes can not move this cheap and abundant domestic strategic commodity to American minimills Half of all goods by value entered the U.S. in through maritime ports and the Federal Maritime Commission estimates that these ports generated nearly $ trillion in economic activity in Increased investment in infrastructure at U.S. seaports would speed the flow of goods expand trade and increase U.S. GDP. For example the World Bank ( ) gives the United States a rating of out of on its port infrastructure and ranks the Netherlands number with a rating. Extrapolating from an analysis by Munim and Schramm ( ) the CEA finds that increasing the United States port infrastructure by point ( to out of ) would increase U.S. real GDP by percent ( $ billion ) In of the busiest seaports in the world were located in the United States ( figure ) By contrast were located in China and of these were busier than the United States busiest port Los Angeles. Whereas U.S. ports processed an average of million 20-foot equivalent units of container traffic annually Chinese ports averaged million units Infrastructure investment plays a role in this discrepancy. The average service life of U.S. airports and seaports is years below the global average and the required port investment forecast through is percent higher than current port investment trends according to a analysis by Oxford Economics which concluded that the United States gap between needed | Chapter  $ "    (   * !    * -/.     * ) /-4 a ( * ) "  / #   *    $ ./    * -/.  $ )  / #   * '   Quantity of ports  # $ )  European Union    *    * '    # $ $ ) "   * )  $ '  * / The b0. $ ./   * -/.  are   (      / * ) )  " and actual investment is one of the highest in the world. Over the last decade increased trade volume has led to busier maritime ports and increased congestion. In the top three container ports alone accounted for nearly half of all containerized trade in the United States. The slower throughput caused by congestion has started to affect the performance of U.S. ports relative to other countries ports and has begun to divert trade away from American ports through increasingly competitive Canadian and Mexican ports. Figure shows the tonnage shipped out of the Port of Seattle against that shipped from the Port of Prince Rupert ( one of the main ports on the West Coast of Canada ) Although the Port of Seattle has seen increased traffic over the last four years the growth in the Port of Prince Rupert s traffic is almost double that of Seattle The Federal Maritime Commission estimates that if trade volumes at maritime ports continued to grow between and percent annually the average growth rates for the East Coast and Gulf Coast ports since port capacity would need to double in the next decade to accommodate this growth The depth of shipping channels plays a significant role in the volumes and rates of the trade a port can facilitate. If a waterway is too shallow large vessels benefiting from low unit transportation costs will be unable access the foreland infrastructure through the adjacent port. Many American ports are too shallow to facilitate trade with the large ships regularly used in the lowest cost trade routes internationally. Overall due to inadequate dredging and Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity |  $ "    " *   * '0 (  * !  the  * -/  * !    // '   * (    with the   * -/  * !   $ )    -/  Index ( = )  * -/  * !   $ )    -/  * -/  * !    // '  *    $ )    -/   * -/   0/ # * $ /4  U.S.   -/ ( ) /  * !    ) * -/  / $ * )       '  '  / $ * ) insufficient port depth the U.S. likely forgoes $ billion in trade annually according to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ( ) This has become a major challenge for American energy producers in particular. Increased oil production in the United States has elevated the demand for oil transportation services via very large crude carriers ( VLCCs ) across Gulf Coast ports. However all but one American oil export terminal have insufficient depth to handle VLCCs. As a result Gulf Coast ports need to use smaller tankers to carry out costly and inefficient ship-to-ship oil transfers thus loading VLCCs in open water many miles offshore. Russian and Saudi producers are able to load VLCCs directly reducing their oil s price per barrel and dramatically increasing their pace of exporting to market. This inefficient method of loading American oil exports generally adds several extra days and $ million to shipping costs for each shipment of American oil exported from the Gulf Coast. This inefficiency translates into an additional $ to $ cost per barrel for American oil ( Huchzermeyer ; Miller ) Updating and upgrading U.S. maritime laws to ensure adequate dredging capacity could therefore generate substantial economic gains Improving American trade competitiveness can be accelerated by leveraging the Nation s unique comparative advantages. The United States has rapidly emerged as the world s leading producer of natural gas and is becoming one of the world s top liquefied natural gas ( LNG ) exporters. Concurrently the global deep-sea shipping industry has begun a seismic shift toward LNG | Chapter as a marine propulsion fuel. Because fuel costs are typically the leading driver of operating expenses for vessel owners the percent reduction in costs realized by shifting from fuel oil to LNG has become a superior alternative. In addition to fuel conversions dual-fuel- and LNG-powered vessels are becoming increasingly ubiquitous. This shift toward LNG as a marine fuel has not been matched with investment in the bunkering infrastructure that is necessary to fuel LNG-powered vessels except in the most modern competitive ports in Asia and Europe. Investing in U.S. port infrastructure to enable LNG refueling terminals would make American ports more attractive Other Federal regulations have exacerbated congestion at the ports. One of the largest amplifiers of this situation is the shortage of trailer truck beds or chassis. Once the goods arrive at maritime ports trucks are typically used to transport the goods to other destinations. Stricter Federal safety requirements introduced in were factors in creating a situation in which providing a chassis is too cost-prohibitive for ocean carriers. Known as the roadability rule this regulation placed the burden of the safety inspection of a chassis on drivers increasing regulatory compliance costs. As a result many of the carriers sold their chassis to third-party leasing companies which now provide the majority of chassis at ports. Truckers must now make multiple trips to pick up and return chassis leading to delays in the availability of chassis at any one time. This limits the amount of goods truckers can move in a timely manner For example in January chassis shortages led to large backlogs at the Los Angeles and Long Beach terminals Research demonstrates that improving port infrastructure increases trade. Countries that enhance their seaport efficiency can decrease shipping costs by up to percent leading to increased trade ( Clark Dollar and Micco ) Cheaper shipping both increases firm sales and helps spread new technology ( Lakshmanan ) These outcomes allow firms to scale up their activities and increase domestic output which has positive spillover effects into the labor market and the rest of the economy There is also evidence that port infrastructure investment not only boosts total trade but also provides a larger boost to exports than imports Improved port infrastructure increases exports by $ for every $ increase in imports ( Wilson Mann and Otsuki ; Korinek and Sourdin ) Physical infrastructure has an even higher positive effect on exports as income grows ( Portugal-Perez and Wilson ) Improved port efficiency has increased incomes in communities around ports by up to percent ( Brooks GendronCarrier and Rua ) Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | Generating a More Skilled and Resilient Workforce As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic an unprecedented fall in economic activity occurred in Although this was met by a rapid and massive policy response that focused on maintaining the social capital of employee-employer relationships there is still work to be done. Improving the productivity of the U.S. workforce is more important than ever as the country recovers from the pandemic-induced recession. This section outlines two ways in which this can be done : increasing the skills of the immigrants who contribute to this country and improving the institutions of higher-learning that equip millions of Americans for the labor market Points-Based Immigration In contrast to other developed countries such as Canada Australia and Japan the United States immigration system limits the ability of high-skilled workers to immigrate to the United States if they do not have existing family relationships. Under current U.S. law immigrants obtain lawful permanent resident ( LPR ) status ( i.e. green cards ) through immigration categories for familial relations employment the diversity lottery and the refugee and asylum programs. Table shows the distribution of those receiving LPR status in fiscal year The U.S. distribution of immigrant visas diverges significantly from countries with merit-based points systems where over half of permanent immigration visas were granted based on the employment or skills of the applicants ( figure ) Points-based immigration systems select their employment-based immigrants by awarding points based on factors such as age education and earnings that are associated with positive outcomes. For example Canada s merit-based immigrants earn more than other Canadian immigrants. Abbott and Beach ( ) find that the median 10-year average earnings of Canada s merit-based immigrants are to percent above the median 10-year average earnings of all immigrants in the most recent cohort they consider. The CEA s estimates which are discussed below and a review of the economic literature suggest that there is strong evidence that shifting the U.S. immigration system toward a merit-based system would lead to benefits for the U.S economy increasing growth wages and tax revenue Estimated Economic Benefits In this subsection the CEA estimates the economic and fiscal benefits if the United States prioritized the highest-skilled workers within the applicant pool and allocated percent of green cards to high-skilled applicants thereby putting the U.S. in line with the average percentage of employment-based visas offered by Japan Australia and Canada. In this modeling it is assumed that | Chapter    '    ! '   (  ) ) /   $  ) /      /  /0.    /  $ )      *     '   * !    ( $ $ * )   $   '        *     '   * !    ( $ $ * )   (   * !       ) /  "  * !     ( (  $  /  '  / $  * !      $ / $ )       ( $ '4 * ) *   ! )       ( ' * ( ) /     ! )       $ $ /4      ! "         '   ' '  o/ #      * /  '      *        -/ ( ) /  * !  * ( '  )     $ /4        '  '  / $ * )  Figure Share of Permanent Legal Immigration Based on Employment South Korea Switzerland Finland United States Germany Mexico Spain Luxembourg Netherlands Japan New Zealand Ireland Percent Sources : OECD International Migration Outlook ; CEA calculations Note : Data are for calendar year Employment base includes accompanying family members on work visas. Totals exclude permanent immigration from free movements immigrants receiving new high-skilled green cards would bring their spouse and dependent children and that these dependents would count against the total number of green cards. The total amount of immigration would remain consistent with the current flow Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | The characteristics of recent immigrants to the United States are identified using data from the three most recent years of the American Community Survey from the Census Bureau from through as provided by the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series ( known as IPUMS ) database ( Ruggles et al. ) Figure shows the educational characteristics of recent immigrants under the current system among those admitted as new high-skilled workers and among the anticipated composition resulting from a policy shift. Two assumptions are made. First it is assumed that immigrants below the 85th percentile of wage earners continue to have the same characteristics despite their percentage of the overall immigration flow being smaller. Second it is assumed that new immigrants on merit-based green cards match the characteristics of immigrants whose earnings are above 85th percentile in the American Community Survey Although percent of recent immigrants have less than a bachelor s degree increasing the share of green cards awarded to high-skilled immigrants suggests that the share with less than a bachelor s degree would fall to percent ( figure ) By allocating a larger share of visas based on employment and skill the employment rates of recent immigrants would also increase. Even including those arriving on non-skills-based visas along with the spouses of new employment-based visas who may not be working the employment rate of new immigrants rises by percentage points from current rates ( from percent to percent ) and the average wage of employed recent immigrants increases from $ to $ To estimate the effect of increased high-skilled immigration on national income and national income per capita over the next years the CEA approximated the contribution to national income of immigrant workers to the economy as their total compensation. For the subset of visas converted to high-skilled green cards the existing employment and earnings rates are compared with those projected. Among new high-skilled recipients and their families additional increases in employment rates in future years is not assumed Having determined the total wages of recent immigrants under the current system and in the new system total compensation is estimated based on the Bureau of Labor Statistics Employer Costs for Employee Compensation survey. The employer share of payroll taxes and fringe benefits ( insurance retirement benefits and legally required benefits ) represent over percent of compensation. Thus dividing wages by leads to an estimate of total compensation. The change in total compensation from the introduction of additional high-skilled workers represents our estimate of national income growth in a single year. To project the contributions of immigrants in future years it is assumed that the nominal compensation of new and recent immigrants grows by percent a year which is consistent with recent overall wage growth trends from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Employment Statistics | Chapter Figure Estimated Educational Attainment of Recent Immigrants Age Years and Older High school degree or less Some college or associate degree Bachelor s degree Advanced degree Current system High skilled New composition Percent Sources : American Community Survey ; Integrated Public Use Microdata Series database ; CEA calculations Note : Estimates assume that the total visas issued remain at current levels. Estimates for recent immigrants are based on noncitizens who have been in the United States between one and three years Given that shifting toward high-skilled immigrants increases both innovation and the productivity of the existing U.S. workforce and capital additional increases in national income are expected. While recognizing that there is substantial uncertainty about the magnitude of these productivity gains the same percent long-run increase in the productivity of domestic workers ( about percent increase a year ) is included in the analysis of wage gains given above. This effect is slightly more than half the long-term productivity gains estimated by the CBO for the Border Security Economic Opportunity and Immigration Modernization Act Using this approach the total increase in nominal national income in would be about $ billion above the baseline ( pre-COVID-19 ) forecast under the current immigration system. Relative to the baseline national income growth projections this reflects an increase in national income growth of about percentage point a year. In addition using the baseline population forecast and recognizing that the exercise does not change the total number of immigrants arriving legally in the United States this increases nominal national income per capita by about $ in ( table ) If instead these new immigrants have average characteristics that match those of the top percent of recent immigrants as opposed to the top percent national income per capita would still be nearly $ above the baseline forecast. The Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity |    '     / $ * )  '  )  * (  )    ! * (     $ /      ( ( $ "  / $ * )   4./ (      )    $ )       "   )    $ )      / $ * )  '  )  * (   * 2/ #       / $ * )  '  )  * (     ) /  "  * $ ) /.    * %  /    #  ) "       $ /     * ' '       )    $ )     / $ * )  '   )  * (   $ ' ' $ * )  * !      * ' '       *    ( $   )   * ( ( ) $ /4     ) / "  /     ' $      $  *   /    $    /            '  '  / $ * )    * /   #         / #  ./ $ (  /  * )       )  / $ * )  '  $ )  * (  * %  / $ * )   #  ./ $ (  /  * !  )  / $ * )  '  $ )  * (     $ /   $  * )    / *  / #  )  ./    " " "  /  )  / $ * )  '  $ )  * (  ./ $ (  /    * )    / *  / #  )  ./    $ ' ' $ * )   average growth of national income per year would be percentage point and the total increase in nominal national income in would be $ billion above the baseline national income growth projection Estimated Effects on the Wages of Domestic Workers Through this shift to a merit-based immigration system low- and middleskilled existing U.S. workers would face less competition from substitutable foreign workers for employment. As of December there were million people age and older in the labor force with a high school degree or less million with some college or an associate degree and million with a bachelor s degree. The shift in the makeup of the immigrant population along with the emigration of to percent of recently arrived immigrants each year ( based on estimates from Schwabish ) means that after years there would be roughly fewer permanent adult immigrants in the labor force with a high school degree or less. There would be fewer immigrants with some college or an associate degree and million more immigrants with at least a bachelor s degree. These changes represent a decline in the size of the labor force with less than a high school degree and with some college of about percent and percent respectively whereas the size of the workforce with at least a bachelor s degree would increase by about percent Using de Brauw and Russell s ( ) updated elasticity from Borjas ( ) as the upper end of the likely wage elasticity from immigration and using Longhi Nijkamp and Poot s ( ) estimate of the lower end of the likely range wage effects before capital adjustments and any long-run productivity gains are estimated. The result is that the revised immigrant flows from this exercise would increase wages for those with some college by up to percent and for those with a high-school degree or less by up to percent. The reform would reduce the wages of existing U.S. workers with at least a bachelor s degree by between and percent after a decade indicating that there | Chapter would be some redistribution from highly educated workers to less educated workers as a result An alternative approach to estimate the change in relative wages between workers at different levels of education is to consider the effects on relative wages from a shift in relative supplies of labor. Based on the estimates by Katz and Murphy ( ) that log relative wages increase by about percent for a percent decline in relative supply there would be a percent decline in wages for workers with at least a bachelor s degree a percent increase in wages for workers with a high school degree or less and a percent increase in wages for workers with some college or an associate degree These estimates are within the range of short-run relative wage changes using the wage elasticities from the immigration literature The CEA anticipates productivity gains once capital has adjusted resulting in additional wage gains for individuals at all education levels. This is consistent with the estimates of the CBO ( ) finding that wage gains from changes in immigrant flows increase once capital adjusts to the number of workers. In its analysis of the Border Security Economic Opportunity and Immigration Modernization Act which substantially increased both highskilled and low-skilled immigration the CBO ( ) projected that the proposal would increase productivity and result in a long-run increase in wages of percentage point. These productivity gains would consequently mitigate and possibly reverse any shorter-run wage declines among high-skilled domestic workers while further increasing the wage gains for low- and middle-skilled domestic workers. The CEA estimates that the productivity gains would be just over half of those estimated by the CBO for the larger changes in immigration flows in the Border Security Economic Opportunity and Immigration Modernization Act and it is assumed that these productivity gains are distributed equally throughout the distribution causing overall wages to increase by percent The CEA expects the overall effect on wages for those with a bachelor s degree or above to be between a percent decline and a percent increase Wages of those with a high school degree or less would increase by to percent and wages of those with some college would increase by to percent. For a typical high school graduate working full time this would result in an additional $ to $ per year of earnings. Furthermore consistent with the observations by Moretti ( ) and Borjas ( ) that shifting toward high-skilled immigration would likely lead to a reduction in income inequality this distribution of wage gains would reduce wage inequality among current U.S. workers These estimates are also broadly consistent with the long-run wage effects found by Chassamboulli and Peri ( ) from a shift in the composition of immigration flows toward high-skilled employment-based immigrants In addition to these wage effects they also find that the shift toward skilled Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity |    '       /   ) /    '0  * !   $   '   ) ! $ /.  ! * (   * *    #  ) "  / *  / #   (  ) ) /  "  '  ( ( $ "  / $ * )   4./ (   $ ' ' $ * )  * !   * ' '    * %  /    #  ) "     '   ) ! $ /.   /  /   )   *   '   ) ! $ /.   * /  '    *     / $ * )  '      ( y  * !    $ )    ) " $ ) $ ) "   )     $  $ )    ( $   )   * ( ( ) $ /4     ) / "  /     ' $      $  *   /    $    /           '  '  / $ * )    * /   ./ $ (  /   (  / #  /  / #  / * /  '  $   $   (  $ )   /   ) /  ' '.   ./ $ (  /    * )    / *  / #  )  ./    $ ' ' $ * )   immigration will decrease the unemployment rate for native workers at all skill levels. This suggests an even more positive effect on the outcomes for U.S. citizens than is seen through wages alone and one that is especially important in light of high unemployment rates resulting from the economic consequences of COVID-19 Estimated Effects on Government Revenue and Expenditures The CEA estimates that tax revenues would rise and outlays for social welfare programs would fall as a result of these wage productivity and employment gains. Using average tax rates ( JCT ) the proposed changes could increase tax revenues by $ billion in the CEA s primary forecast and by $ billion in the conservative forecast. These estimates do not include potential gains for domestic worker productivity and they are broadly consistent with those that would be derived by multiplying the total increase in national income over the 10-year budget window from the higher-skilled immigrants by the percent revenue-to-GDP ratio in However the actual revenue gains are larger once the progressivity of the U.S. tax system is accounted for which means that the higher-income immigrants would pay a higher share of their income in taxes than the lower-income immigrants who arrive in the United States under the current system To estimate the long-run fiscal effects of this new composition the CEA uses the average 75-year fiscal benefits of immigrants by education level as estimated by the National Academy of Sciences ( ) This approach is similar to that taken by Borjas ( ) to illustrate the substantial increase in U.S. wealth that would result from increasing the education profile of the immigrant population. Although changes in the education levels of parents arriving in the United States will likely also increase the education levels of children arriving with them only the long-run fiscal costs and benefits of adult immigrants age to and those are included. Based on these estimates shifting the composition of permanent immigration toward more highly educated and younger individuals will after years result in a net present value of between $ billion and $ trillion of fiscal benefits from immigration for the Federal Government ( table ) In addition it will result in a further $ billion to $ billion in fiscal benefits for State and local governments | Chapter  $ "    ( ' * ( ) /        / $ * )  '  //  $ ) ( ) / Composition ( percent )    # ' *   "  *  # $ " #  * (   * ' ' " '  / #  )     # ' *   " $ " #   # * * '  "    /  / #  )  # $ " #   # * * '  *     * !    *   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * )  Improving Postsecondary Education and Skill Development Postsecondary education and skill development are integral to the health of the U.S. economy. As shown in figure an estimated percent of all jobs require a postsecondary education of which percent require at least a bachelor s degree and an additional percent require an associate degree or some form of higher education less than a bachelor s degree. In comparison in only percent of all jobs required a postsecondary education Wage premiums and job security often accompany education and skills attainment ; however the rising cost of college and increases in student loan balances erode the overall return that accompanies a college degree. Through the Higher Education Act of and subsequent reauthorizations since that time the Federal Government has taken action to address the costs of higher education by subsidizing both students and educational institutions. Figure shows the growth in the average level of student aid from Federal and other sources awarded to undergraduate students since As shown in figure above this took place during a time of stagnant productivity Improved allocation of human capital investments could generate an increase in productivity and may be hindered due to distorted decisionmaking at higher education institutions Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity |  $ "     "     '   /  /  *   '  ) ./ $ /0/ $ * )  '  *   / #   *   * !    ) /   $        / *   )  "    /   /0  ) /.  Dollars ( current )  *     / $ * )  '   ) /  ! *      / $ * )   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * )  * /   # $  $ )  '0   four   ' $    )   $  /  ) * n+- * ! $ /  ) $ $ / $  Federal regulatory reforms of higher education could better hold institutions accountable for the economic return that they provide to students as well as assist students and families to make more informed decisions regarding their educational options. This section explains how this could be done by increasing incentives for schools to improve the economic return to students and by improving Federal support for educational programs that directly help more Americans secure well-paying jobs. This section also highlights the success of Historically Black Colleges and Universities ( HBCUs ) and illustrates the lessons of their experiences for the higher education system as a whole Increasing Incentives for Schools to Improve the Economic Gains of Students Increased institutional accountability could improve the economic return to students. Investing in higher education generally provides substantial value for students and taxpayers. However when an institution fails to deliver the type of high-quality education that enables students to repay their Federal student loans this institution is not held responsible for losses. Instead taxpayers are left to foot the bill. Institutions that lack a focus on generating positive value for their students exacerbate an increased rate of student loan default and stress throughout a student s career | Chapter As currently configured the credit risk associated with student loans is not efficiently distributed between all parties related to the transaction that is borrowers ( students and parents ) taxpayers and the higher education institutions. The burden of repayment currently rests solely with the borrowers who may face daunting loan payments if the expected education premium underdelivers and with taxpayers who foot the bill when the borrowers default or the loan is forgiven. Institutions of higher education bear none of the direct expenses of such failed outcomes and thus have limited incentive to assist students in optimizing educational skill development and career paths. The U.S Department of Education ( ) provides useful institution-level data such as annual costs average earnings and graduation rates to help students avoid making poor investments in education. However better accountability by the institutions themselves could further limit failed outcomes A reformed system could require postsecondary institutions that accept taxpayer funds to share in the financial responsibility associated with student loans. Such a risk-sharing arrangement could require postsecondary institutions to pay a small percentage of the value of the loans on which their former students have defaulted or alternatively require institutions with worse repayment outcomes to pay fees. Such fees could be adjusted to account for variation in the composition of student intake so as to align institutions interests with their students and incentivize them to improve repayment outcomes but without disproportionately penalizing institutions serving higher-risk students There have been three major pieces of Federal legislation pertaining to risk-sharing on Federal student loans in recent years. A bipartisan bill the Student Protection and Success Act first introduced in would create a program where institutions are responsible for paying a percentage of the cohort nonrepayment balance percent in the version of the bill for loans that had not paid down at least $ of principal in three years. The legislation factors in the national unemployment rate and includes a list of exceptions for loans in deferment and mandatory forbearance. A Republican-sponsored bill the PROSPER Act introduced in would make changes to provisions for repayment of Federal student aid if a student withdraws from an institution of higher education shifting percent of the repayment responsibility to the institution ( U.S. House of Representatives ) A Democratic-sponsored bill the Protect Student Borrowers Act first introduced in would require covered institutions to make risk-sharing payments on defaulted loans on a sliding scale based on the default rates of their students As shown in figure education expenses have grown faster than inflation with expenses for academic and institutional support ( which includes expenses associated with noninstructional activities such as admissions student activities libraries administrative activities and executive activities ) growing faster than expenses for instruction and research. This trend may be driven by instances of mismanagement such as those uncovered in a Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity |  $ "    * 2/ # $ )  Four      ' $    )    $  /  Universities  )     '  /     / " *  Index ( = )     ( $    )   $ ) ./ $ /0/ $ * )  '  * -/ ) ./-0  / $ * )   )     #  *      *     / $ * )  '   ) / ! *      / $ * )   /  / $ ./ $      * !    *   /  / $ ./ $         '  '  / $ * ) Note : Core CPI-U = Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers State audit of the University of California ( ) The audit found that the university s Office of the President had spent over $ million on meeting and entertainment costs over five years and had awarded salaries and benefits to personnel far higher than salaries awarded for other comparable positions. As measured by the AAUP Faculty Compensation Survey the salary for the average category I chief academic officer was $ compared with $ for a full-time professor.8 The quantity of these hires has increased as well. Administrative hires increased percent faster than classroom instructors between and Improving Support for Educational Programs That Promote Skill Development The Federal Government could also improve outcomes for students by better aligning education with the needs of today s workforce. The higher education system has been slow to adapt to the changing nature of work. In recent years millions of jobs have remained unfilled in part due to a lack of Americans with appropriate skills. Federal policy could better align higher education with the needs of today s workforce in multiple ways This includes institutions that grant or more doctoral-level degrees annually from at least three distinct programs. See AAUP ( n.d. ) | Chapter Box Historically Black Colleges and Universities One example of higher education institutions delivering a high return for their students is that of Historically Black Colleges and Universities. HBCUs have played a crucial role in expanding educational opportunity for all students especially for the African American students who make up percent of their student populations. As of there were accredited HBCUs across the United States. HBCUs enroll over students including around non African Americans ( National Center for Education Statistics ) According to a economic impact report produced by the United Negro College Fund HBCUs generated an employment contribution of jobs work-life earnings of $ billion for HBCU students and a total economic contribution to the U.S. economy of $ billion HBCUs historically have served distinct student populations. HBCU students are largely low-income first-generation-college students ( nearly three in five students ) and over a quarter of HBCUs are open admission Open admission enrollment implies that all qualifying students ( students with a high school degree or general education development certificate ) are welcome to apply and enter the program without additional qualifications or performance benchmarks. This appeal to low- and moderate-income first-generation students suggests that HBCUs have lower barriers to entry ( e.g. costs of attendance required test scores ) than many comparable non-  $ "  iv  * ( * $ / $ * )  * !   /0  ) /   *    * '  / $ * )    )  * (   $ ) / $ ' HBCUs Composition ( percent ) Non-HBCUs Income quintile  *     / # ) * )    (  *    )     (  )  Note : HBCUs = Historically Black Colleges and Universities Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | Figure 11-v. Comparative Rates of Return for a Four-Year Degree Annual rate of return on degree ( percent ) HBCUs Non-HBCUs Years Sources : Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System ; CEA calculations Note : Based on the most recent institution-level data as of June HBCUs = Historically Black Colleges and Universities HBCU institutions. HBCUs draw percent of their student body s population from the lowest percent of incomes. By this measure HBCUs serve more economically disadvantaged populations than non-HBCU institutions which are composed of only percent of students in the bottom percent Although HBCUs account for a mere percent of the African American college student population in they represented percent of bachelor s degrees and percent of STEM ( science technology engineering and mathematics ) degrees earned by African Americans. From to the top eight institutions where African Americans earned PhDs in science and engineering were HBCUs Here the CEA estimates the rates of return on an education from the HBCU system. The estimates use traditional approaches and are in keeping with the work of Mincer ( ) Schultz ( ) and Becker ( ) on differences in earnings across persons resulting from levels of human capital accumulated primarily through education and training. Using institutionallevel data obtained from the U.S. Department of Education s ( ) College Scorecard and the Federal Reserve s Survey of Consumer Finance the CEA estimates the comparative rates of return over years for graduates of four-year HBCUs and comparable non-HBCU institutions ( figure 11-iv ) Comparable institutions are located within the same commuting zone of at | Chapter least one of these HBCUs and are of similar institutional selectivity according to the Barron s Selectivity Index. The long-term rates of return for graduates receiving a college education at an HBCU are significantly positive and track those of graduates from a non-HBCU school. Short-term rates of return for students of HBCUs and non-HBCUs are significantly negative and vary largely to the extent that forgone income for non-HBCU graduates tends to be larger than it is for HBCU graduates. However as time passes both cohorts experience income growth and thus see an increase in their rates of return Although non-HBCU graduates initially benefit on average from higher incomes than do HBCU students HBCU graduates tend on average to experience greater annual growth in income than non-HBCU graduates ( figure 11-v ) Thus over the long run alumni of HBCUs will tend to experience rates of return comparable to those for non-HBCU alumni. This shows that from a productivity standpoint HBCUs can deliver comparable returns at a lower cost. HBCUs have a slightly lower level of earnings which is attributable to the different student composition ( e.g. the presence of first-generation students and the selection of college majors ) Figure 11-vi shows that graduates of HBCUs also track closely with graduates of non-HBCUs in cumulative earnings over time Figure 11-vi. Comparison of Real Cumulative Median Net Earnings Dollars ( thousands ) HBCUs Non-HBCUs Years Sources : Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System ; CEA calculations Note : Based on the most recent institution-level data as of June HBCUs = Historically Black Colleges and Universities Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | One approach would be for Congress to expand Pell Grant eligibility to include high-quality short-term programs that provide students with a credential certification or license in a high-demand field and that demonstrate strong employment and earnings outcomes. Pell Grants are typically used to support students in traditional two- or four-year degree programs. Though some certificate programs are eligible for Pell Grants programs must cover at least weeks of instruction. Expanding support to shorter-term programs designed to teach skills specific to well-paying jobs could better meet the needs of students with near-term employment goals Federal program requirements could also encourage rather than limit partnerships between higher education providers and employers. Employers are most aware of the skills needed to succeed in the workplace. Congress could reform the Federal Work Study program to support workforce- and career-oriented opportunities for low-income undergraduate students. Workbased learning improves students chances of developing important workplace skills yet the Federal Work Study rules favor campus-based jobs Building on the successes of the National Council for the American Worker ( NCAW ) could promote multiple pathways to career success. Since January the NCAW has enrolled more than apprentices ; has modernized the Perkins Career and Technical Education Act to increase dual enrollment work-based learning and employer engagement ; and has encouraged more than companies to commit to providing million employees with the training reskilling and career opportunities needed to increase productivity Improving the four-year degree to generate greater skill increases for students as well as providing alternative paths for human capital accumulation can avoid a one-size-fits-all approach that leaves individuals and groups behind. Apprenticeships training programs and four-year degrees are all paths to a more productive workforce and a higher quality of life for millions of Americans. Historically Black Colleges and Universities ( HBCU ) demonstrate how large gains from a high-quality education can be successfully provided to underserved groups ( see box ) Conclusion In this final chapter of the Economic Report of the President the Council has identified various challenges for the American economy that not only were exacerbated by the pandemic but also extend beyond the COVID-19 crisis into the postpandemic future. The policy ideas discussed here to potentially address these challenges can lead to a more resilient and prosperous economy for all Americans We have examined workers connections to the labor force relationships that COVID-19 strained and in millions of instances severed during the economic crisis and how provisions of the tax code may discourage and | Chapter disrupt these connections and their reconstitution. Reforming the provisions that disproportionally place the tax burden on second-earners and low-income earners could rebuild employees relationships with their employers and therefore strengthen the current economic recovery In addition we have discussed the importance of paid leave and childcare not only in the context of the global health crisis but also as a way to support a stronger workforce after the pandemic abates. These provisions have become especially relevant during the COVID-19 crisis as sick family members have required care at home and children have attended virtual school from home creating barriers for working parents to return to their jobs Although the Federal Government has passed temporary measures to mitigate the lack of access to paid leave and childcare during this crisis this chapter demonstrates that permanent policies to provide such access would increase labor force participation and earnings beyond the current pandemic recession Furthermore we have analyzed the effects of negotiating reciprocal trade agreements on consumers and manufacturers access to the international market and how deepening trade integration with like-minded U.S. allies can allow for future flexibility in negotiations and can assist the Nation in achieving its trade goals. In working to preserve America s economic interests on the world stage the economy can achieve real gains from trade while protecting the economic security of American enterprise We have illustrated the strain COVID-19 has placed on the U.S. healthcare system in this Report. Historic financial relief from the Federal Government alleviated the worst of the crisis for hospitals and patients. Nevertheless the COVID-19 pandemic has revealed persisting issues within the healthcare system that create distortions in the healthcare market. This chapter has examined how to increase the supply of healthcare and remove opaque pricing structures which will provide patients and doctors alike with benefits We have also highlighted the Federal Government s role in participating in the creation and maintenance of a world-class infrastructure system Fostering public-private partnerships to lower taxpayer costs targeting funds to high-productivity areas such as ports and reforming the country s evermore-important digital infrastructure have all been explored in this chapter Investing in infrastructure projects would not only increase the productivity of the American economy in and of itself but would also have spillover benefits for all sectors of the economy Finally we have showed that the American economy could support a more resilient workforce by shifting the U.S. immigration system toward a merit-based system for higher-skilled immigrants and by realigning the goals of higher education institutions to better equip students seeking nontraditional career paths. This would lead to increases in economic growth wages and tax revenue and thus to prosperity for all Americans Policies to Secure Enduring Prosperity | The policy reforms discussed in this chapter are designed to support the American economy and the American people long after the COVID-19 pandemic subsides. These policies would boost productivity for manufacturers increase investment in workers enhance labor force participation and grow families earnings. In accordance with its mandate to recommend national economic policy to promote employment production and purchasing power under free competitive enterprise the Council of Economic Advisers has used this chapter to analyze reforms that could provide substantial economic benefits for Americans in every walk of life. Solving the issues and challenges articulated in this chapter would aid in restoring the American economy to its prepandemic levels of prosperity and would offer a solid foundation upon which to build an even greater and more resilient economy for all Americans | Chapter x References Chapter Angrist J. and A. Krueger. Estimating the Payoff to Schooling Using the Vietnam-Era Draft Lottery. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Baqaee D. and E. Farhi. Nonlinear Production Networks with an Application to the COVID-19 Crisis. CEPR Discussion Paper DP14742. London : Centre for Economic Policy Research BEA ( Bureau of Economic Analysis ) Gross Domestic Product ( Third Estimate ) Corporate Profits ( Revised ) and GDP by Industry Second Quarter https : //www.bea.gov/news/2020/ gross-domestic-product-third-estimate-corporate-profits-revised-and-gdpindustry-annual Bernanke B. T. Geithner and H. Paulson Jr. with J. Liang. First Responders : Inside the U.S. Strategy for Fighting the Global Financial Crisis. New Haven CT : Yale University Press Bhuller M. M. Mogstad and K. Salvanes. Life-Cycle Earnings Education Premiums and Internal Rates of Return. Journal of Labor Economics no : Bhutta N. J. Bricker L. Dettling J. Kelliher and S. Laufer. Stress Testing Household Debt. Finance and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System BLS ( Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Public Workforce Programs during the Great Recession. https : //www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2014/article/public-workforceprograms-during-the-greatrecession.htm Burns A. D. van der Mensbrugghe and H. Timmer. Evaluating the Economic Consequences of Avian Influenza. World Bank. https : //web.worldbank.org/ archive/website01003/WEB/IMAGES/EVALUATI.PDF CDC ( Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ) 2020a. First Travel-Related Case of Novel Coronavirus Detected in United States. https : //www.cdc.gov/ media/releases/2020/p0121-novel-coronavirus-travel-case.html 2020b. CDC Confirms Possible Instance of Community Spread of COVID-19 in U.S. https : //www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2020/s0226-Covid-19-spread.html 2020c. Nonpharmaceutical Interventions ( NPIs ) https : //www.cdc.gov/ nonpharmaceutical-interventions/index.html CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Economic Report of the President Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office 2020a. Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office 2020b. Evaluating the Effect of the Economic Response to COVID-19. https : // www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Evaluating-the-Effectsof-the-Economic-Response-to-COVID-19.pdf Cronin C. and W. Evans. Private Precaution and Public Restrictions : What Drives Social Distancing and Industry Foot Traffic in the COVID-19 Era ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Crouzet N. and F. Gourio. Financial Positions of U.S. Public Corporations : Part Before the Pandemic. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Davis M. W. Larson S. Oliner and B. Smith. A Quarter Century of Mortgage Risk FHFA Working Paper Washington : Federal Housing Finance Agency Dharmasankar S. and B. Mazumder. Have Borrowers Recovered from Foreclosures during the Great Recession ? Chicago Fed Letter : El-Sibaie A. E. York G. Watson and T. LaJoie. FAQ on Federal Coronavirus Relief Law ( CARES Act ) Tax Foundation. https : //taxfoundation.org/federalcoronavirus-relief-bill-caresact/ # : ~ : text = Individuals % 20with % 20a % Social % 20Security ) % 2C % 20or % % % 2C500 % ( heads % 20of Emsellem M. and M. Evermore. Understanding the Unemployment Provisions of the Families First Coronavirus Response Act. National Employment Law Project. https : //www.nelp.org/publication/ understanding-the-unemployment-provisions-of-thefamilies-firstcoronavirus-response-act/ Federal Reserve. Financial Stability Report May https : //www federalreserve.gov/publications/2020-may-financial-stability-report-purpose htm Goger A. T. Loh and C. George. Unemployment Insurance Is Failing Workers during COVID-19. Here s How to Strengthen it. Brookings Institution. https : // www.brookings.edu/research/ unemployment-insurance-is-failing-workers-duringCOVID-19-heres-how-tostrengthen-it/ Goolsbee A. and C. Syverson. Fear Lockdown and Diversion : Comparing Drivers of Pandemic Economic Decline NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research IMF ( International Monetary Fund ) Global Financial Stability Report. Washington : IMF. https : //www.imf.org/en/Publications/GFSR/Issues/2019/03/27/ Global-Financial-StabilityReport-April-2019 Global Financial Stability Report. Washington : IMF. https : //www.imf.org/ en/Publications/GFSR/Issues/2020/04/14/ Global-Financial-StabilityReport-April-2020-49020 | References Jonas O. Pandemic Risk. Background paper World Bank. https : //www worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/HDN/Health/WDR14_bp_ Pa ndemic_Risk_Jonas.pdf Kilbourne E. Influenza Pandemics of the 20th Century. Emerging Infectious Diseases no. : Krueger A. Government Failures in Development. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research LCD News. U.S. Leveraged Loan Defaults Total $ 23B in Q2 the Most Since S&P Global July https : //www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/newsinsights/latest-newsheadlines/ us-leveraged-loan-defaults-total-23b-in-q2-the-most-since-2009-59301227 Marr C. S. Jacoby C. Huang S. Hingtgen A. Sherman and J. Beltr n. Future Stimulus Should Include Immigrants and Dependents Previously Left Out Mandate Automatic Payments. Center on Budget and Policy Priorities https : //www.cbpp.org/research/economy/ future-stimulus-should-include-immigrants-anddependents-previouslyleftout McKibbin W. The Swine Flu Outbreak and Its Global Economic Impact. https : // www.brookings.edu/on-the-record/ the-swine-flu-outbreak-and-its-global-economicimpact/ McKibbin W. and A. Sidorenko. Global Macroeconomic Consequences of Pandemic Influenza. Lowy Institute for International Policy. https : //www lowyinstitute.org/sites/default/files/pubfiles/McKibbin_Sidorenko % 2C_ Global_ macroeconomic_1.pdf Nunn R. and J. Shambaugh. Whose Wages Are Rising and Why ? Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/policy2020/votervital/ whose-wages-are-rising-and-why/ Patel A. D. Jernigan and 2019-nCov CDC Response Team. Initial Public Health Response and Interim Clinical Guidance for the Novel Coronavirus Outbreak United States December February Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report no. : Robertson J. Faster Wage Growth for the Lowest-Paid Workers. Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. https : //www.frbatlanta.org/blogs/macroblog/2019/12/16/ faster-wage-growth-for-the-lowest-paid-workers Tedeschi E. Pay Is Rising Fastest for Low Earners. One Reason ? Minimum Wages. New York Times January https : //www.nytimes.com/2020/01/03/ upshot/minimum-wage-boost-bottom-earners.html Tung I. Minimum Wage Increases Reverse Post-Recession Wage Declines for Workers in Lowest-Paid Jobs. National Employment Law Project. https : // www.nelp.org/publication/ minimum-wage-increases-reverse-post-recession-wage-declines-workerslowest-paid-jobs/ References | Van Dam A. and R. Siegel. Minimum Wage Increases Fueling Faster Wage Growth for Those at the Bottom. Washington Post January https : //www washingtonpost.com/business/2020/01/02 / minimum-wage-increases-fueling-faster-wage-growth-those-bottom/ Verikios G. M. Sullivan P. Stojanovski J. Giesecke and G. Woo. The Global Economic Effects of Pandemic Influenza. https : //static.rms.com/email/ documents/liferisks/papers/the-globaleconomic-effects-of-pandemicinfluenza.pdf White House. 2020a. Proclamation on Suspension of Entry as Immigrants and Nonimmigrants of Persons who Pose a Risk of Transmitting Novel Coronavirus. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/ proclamation-suspension-entry-immigrants-nonimmigrants-persons-poserisk-transmitting-2019-novel-coronavirus/ 2020b. Proclamation : Suspension of Entry as Immigrants and Nonimmigrants of Certain Additional Persons Who Pose a Risk of Transmitting Novel Coronavirus. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/ proclamation-suspension-entry-immigrants-nonimmigrants-certainadditional-persons-pose-risk-transmitting-2019-novel-coronavirus/ 2020c. Proclamation on Declaring a National Emergency Concerning the Novel Coronavirus Disease ( COVID-19 ) Outbreak. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ presidential-actions/ proclamation-declaring-national-emergency-concerning-novel-coronavirusdisease-covid-19-outbreak/ Chapter Altonji J. Z. Contractor L. Finamor R. Haygood I. Lindenlaub C. Meghir C. O Dea D Scott L. Wang and E. Washington. Employment Effects of Unemployment Insurance Generosity during the Pandemic. Manuscript Yale University July Autor D. D. Cho L. Crane M. Goldar B. Lutz J. Montes W. Peterman D. Ratner D Villar and A. Yildirmaz. An Evaluation of the Paycheck Protection Program Using Administrative Payroll Microdata. Working paper Massachusetts Institute of Technology Baker S. R. Farrokhnia S. Meyer M. Pagel and C. Yannelis. Income Liquidity and the Consumption Response to the Economic Stimulus Payments. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Bartik A. M. Bertrand F. Lin J. Rothstein and M. Unrath. Measuring the Labor Market at the Onset of the COVID-19 Crisis. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research CBO ( Congressional Budget Office ) Interim Economic Projections for and https : //www.cbo.gov/publication/56368 # _idTextAnchor027 | References CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Evaluating the Effects of the Economic Response to COVID-19. August. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2020/08/Evaluating-the-Effects-of-the-Economic-Response-toCOVID-19.pdf Chetty R. J. Friedman N. Hendren M. Stepner and Opportunity Insights Team. How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment ? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Federal Reserve Board of Governors. 2020a. Net Worth by All Families. Survey of Consumer Finances https : //www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scf/ dataviz/scf/chart/ # series : Net_Worth ; demographic : all ; population : all ; units : me dian 2020b. Net Worth by Percentile of Net Worth. Survey of Consumer Finances https : //www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scf/dataviz/scf/ chart/ # series : Net_Worth ; demographic : nwcat ; population : ; units : mean 2020c. Net Worth by Race or Ethnicity. Survey of Consumer Finances https : //www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scf/dataviz/scf/ chart/ # series : Net_Worth ; demographic : racecl4 ; population : all ; units : median 2020d. Primary Residence by All Families. Survey of Consumer Finances https : //www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scf/dataviz/scf/ chart/ # series : Primary_Residence ; demographic : all ; population : ; units : have Forsythe E. L. Kahn F. Lange and D. Wiczer. Labor Demand in the Time of COVID19 : Evidence from Vacancy Postings and UI Claims. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Fox Z. B. Yang A. Sikander and B. Scheid. As Virus Crisis Persists PPP recipients Lay Off Thousands. S&P Global Market Intelligence July https : //www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-newsheadlines/as-virus-crisis-persists-ppp-recipients-lay-off-thousands-59602815 Ganong P. P. Noel and J. Vavra. U.S. Unemployment Insurance Replacement Rates During the Pandemic. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Goodspeed T. and P. Navarro. The White House Favors a Bridge to Recovery. Wall Street Journal December https : //www.wsj.com/articles/ the-white-house-favors-a-bridge-to-recovery-11606950989 Granja J. C. Makridis C. Yannelis and E. Zwick. Did the Paycheck Protection Program Hit the Target ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Green D. and E. Loualiche. State and Local Government Employment in the COVID-19 Crisis. HBS Working Paper Cambridge MA : Harvard Business School. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm ? abstract_id = References | Han J. B. Meyer and J. Sullivan. Income and Poverty in the COVID-19 Pandemic NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w27729 Hepburn P. R. Louis and M. Desmond. Eviction Tracking System : Version Princeton University. www.evictionlab.org JCT ( Joint Committee on Taxation ) Description of the Tax Provisions of Public Law the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security ( CARES ) Act. JCX-12R-20 April https : //www.jct.gov/publications/2020/jcx-12r-20/ Marinescu I. D. Skandalis and D. Zhao. Job Search Job Posting and Unemployment Insurance During the COVID-19 Crisis. Working paper Meyer B. and J. Sullivan. Percent Below Federal Poverty Line or Multiple of the Federal Poverty Line Basic Monthly CPS January to Date. Near Real Time COVID-19 Income and Poverty Dashboard Poverty Measurement. http : // povertymeasurement.org/covid-19-poverty-dashboard/ National Multifamily Housing Council. NMHC Rent Payment Tracker Finds Percent of Apartment Households Paid Rent as of October https : //www nmhc.org/research-insight/nmhc-rent-payment-tracker/ Parolin Z. M. Curran and C. Wimer. The CARES Act and Poverty in the COVID-19 Crisis. Poverty and Social Policy Brief no. Ruhle S. L. Miranda and M. Capetta. PPP Likely Saved Million Jobs Says JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon. NBC News August https : //www nbcnews.com/business/economy/ ppp-likely-saved-35-million-jobs-says-jpmorgan-chase-ceo-n1236341 White House. 2020a. Executive Order on Fighting the Spread of COVID-19 by Providing Assistance to Renters and Homeowners. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ presidential-actions/ executive-order-fighting-spread-covid-19-providing-assistance-rentershomeowners/ 2020b. Memorandum on Authorizing the Other Needs Assistance Program for Major Disaster Declarations Related to Coronavirus Disease https : // www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/ memorandum-authorizing-needs-assistance-program-major-disasterdeclarations-related-coronavirus-disease-2019/ 2020c. Memorandum on Continued Student Loan Payment Relief During the COVID-19 Pandemic. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/ memorandum-continued-student-loan-payment-relief-covid-19-pandemic/ 2020d. Memorandum on Deferring Payroll Tax Obligations in Light of the Ongoing COVID-19 Disaster. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/presidentialactions/ memorandum-deferring-payroll-tax-obligations-light-ongoing-covid-19disaster/ | References Chapter Autor D. D. Cho L. Crane M. Goldar B. Lutz J. Montes W. Peterman D. Ratner D Villar and A. Yildirmaz. An Evaluation of the Paycheck Protection Program Using Administrative Payroll Microdata. Working paper Massachusetts Institute of Technology Baker S. R. Farrokhnia S. Meyer M. Pagel and C. Yannelis. Income Liquidity and the Consumption Response to the Economic Stimulus Payments. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Bartik A. Z. Cullen E. Glaeser M. Luca C. Stanton and A. Sunderam. The Targeting and Impact of Paycheck Protection Program Loans to Small Businesses. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Chetty R. J. Friedman N. Hendren and M. Stepner. How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment ? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data. Working Paper Cambridge MA : Opportunity Insights Cox J. D. Greenwald and S. Ludvigson. What Explains the COVID-19 Stock Market ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Crane L. R. Decker A. Flaaen A. Hamins-Puertolas and C. Kurz. Business Exit during the COVID-19 Pandemic : Non-Traditional Measures in Historical Context Finance and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Elenev V. T. Landvoigt and S. Van Nieuwerburgh. Can the Covid Bailouts Save the Economy ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Federal Reserve. Financial Stability Report May Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/ publications/files/financial-stability-report-20200515.pdf Fox Z. B. Yung A. Sikander and B. Scheid. As Virus Crisis Persists PPP Recipients Lay Off Thousands. S&P Global Market Intelligence July https : //www.spglobal.com/marketintelligence/en/news-insights/latest-newsheadlines/as-virus-crisis-persists-ppp-recipients-lay-off-thousands-59602815 Granja J C. Makridis C. Yannelis and E. Zwick. Did the Paycheck Protection Program Hit the Target ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Gilchrist S. B. Wei V. Yue and E. Zakrajsek. The Fed Takes on Corporate Credit Risk : An Analysis of the Efficacy of the SMCCF. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research References | Haddad V. A. Moreira and T. Muir. When Selling Becomes Viral : Disruptions in Debt Markets in the COVID-19 Crisis and the Fed s Response. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Hamilton S. From Survival to Revival : How to Help Small Businesses through the COVID-19 Crisis. Hamilton Project. https : //www.hamiltonproject.org/ assets/files/PP_Hamilton_Final.pdf Keshner A. Coronavirus Has Rocked America s Economy and It s Had a Surprising Effect on Bankruptcy Filings. MarketWatch May https : //www marketwatch.com/story/ the-coronavirus-has-rocked-americas-economy-but-its-had-a-surprisingeffect-on-bankruptcy-filings-2020-05-05 Li L. P. Strahan and S. Zhang. Banks as Lenders of First Resort : Evidence from the COVID-19 Crisis. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Ruhle S. L. Miranda and M. Cappetta. PPP Likely Saved Million Jobs Says JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon. NBC News August https : //www nbcnews.com/business/economy/ ppp-likely-saved-35-million-jobs-says-jpmorgan-chase-ceo-n1236341 Tett G. Swamped Bankruptcy Courts Threaten U.S. Recovery. Financial Times May https : //www.ft.com/ content/14b07c0e-95e3-11ea-af4b-499244625ac4 Chapter Andr F. How the Research-Based Industry Approaches Vaccine Development and Establishes Priorities. Developmental Biology : Berndt E. I. Cockburn and Z. Griliches. Pharmaceutical Innovations and Market Dynamics : Tracking Effects on Price Indices for Antidepressant Drugs. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Microeconomics no. : https : // www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/1996/01/1996_bpeamicro_berndt pdf Bestsennyy O. G. Gilbert A. Harris and J. Rost. Telehealth : A Quarter-TrillionDollar Post COVID-19 Reality ? McKinsey & Company. https : //www.mckinsey com/industries/healthcare-systems-and-services/our-insights/ telehealth-a-quarter-trillion-dollar-post-covid-19-reality Bynum A. C. Irwin C. Cranford and G. Denny. The Impact of Telemedicine on Patients Cost Savings : Some Preliminary Findings. Telemedicine Journal and e-Health no. : https : //doi.org/10.1089/153056203772744680 Caves R. M. Whinston and M. Hurwitz. Patent Expiration Entry and Competition in the U.S. Pharmaceutical Industry. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Microeconomics no. : https : //www.brookings.edu/ wp-content/uploads/1991/01/1991_bpeamicro_caves.pdf | References CBO ( Congressional Budget Office ) Research and Development in the Pharmaceutical Industry. https : //www.cbo.gov/sites/default/files/109thcongress-2005-2006/reports/10-02-drugr-d.pdf Federal Subsidies for Health Insurance Coverage for People Under : to https : //www.cbo.gov/publication/56650 CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Mitigating the Impact of a Pandemic Influenza through Vaccine Innovation. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2019/09/Mitigating-the-Impact-of-Pandemic-Influenzathrough-Vaccine-Innovation.pdf Chauhan V. S. Galwankar B. Arquilla M. Garg S. Di Somma A. El-Menyar V. Krishnan J. Gerber R. Holland and S. Stawicki. Novel Coronavirus ( COVID-19 ) : Leveraging Telemedicine to Optimize Care While Minimizing Exposures and Viral Transmission. Journal of Emergencies Trauma and Shock no. : https : //doi.org/10.4103/JETS.JETS_32_20 DiMasi J. H. Grabowski and R. Hansen. Innovation in the Pharmaceutical industry : New Estimates of R&D Costs. Journal of Health Economics : https : //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/ S0167629616000291 FDA ( U.S. Food and Drug Administration ) In Vitro Diagnostic EUAs. https : // www.fda.gov/medical-devices/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19emergency-use-authorizations-medical-devices/vitro-diagnostics-euas Garfield R. G. Claxton A. Damico and L. Levitt. Eligibility for ACA Health Coverage Following Job Loss. Kaiser Family Foundation. https : //www.kff org/coronavirus-covid-19/issue-brief/ eligibility-for-aca-health-coverage-following-job-loss/ Grabowski H. and J. Vernon. Brand Loyalty Entry and Price Competition in Pharmaceuticals after the Drug Act. Journal of Law and Economics : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/725543 Grady C. S. Shah F. Miller M. Danis M. Nicolini J. Ochoa Holly T. Dave W. and A. Rid So Much at Stake : Ethical Tradeoffs in Accelerating SARSCoV-2 Vaccine Development. Vaccine no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j vaccine.2020.08.017 Ivanov A. Barriers to the Introduction of New Medical Diagnostic Tests. Laboratory Medicine no. : e132 e136. https : //doi.org/10.1309/ LMMHGYKY7LIUEEQ6 Kennedy J. How to Ensure That America s Life-Sciences Sector Remains Globally Competitive. Information Technology and Innovation Foundation https : //itif.org/publications/2018/03/26/ how-ensure-americas-life-sciences-sector-remains-globally-competitive Kleiner M. A. Marier K. Park and C. Wing. Relaxing Occupational Licensing Requirements : Analyzing Wages and Prices for a Medical Service. Journal of Law and Economics no. https : //doi.org/10.1086/688093 References | Lenz E. M. Mundinger R. Kane S. Hopkins and S. Lin. Primary Care Outcomes in Patients Treated by Nurse Practitioners or Physicians : Two Year Follow Up. Medical Care Research and Review no. : https : //journals.sagepub com/doi/abs/10.1177/1077558704266821 Lichtenberg F. The Impact of Pharmaceutical Innovation on Disability Days and the Use of Medical Services in the United States Journal of Human Capital no. : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/679110 Mann D. J. Chen R. Chunara P. Testa and O. Nov. COVID-19 Transforms Health Care through Telemedicine : Evidence from the Field. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association no. : https : //doi org/10.1093/jamia/ocaa072 Martin-Misener R. P. Harbman F. Donald K. Reid K. Kilpatrick N. Carter D. BryantLukosius et al. Cost-Effectiveness of Nurse Practitioners in Primary and Specialized Ambulatory Care : Systematic Review. BMJ Open. https : // bmjopen.bmj.com/content/5/6/e007167 Milken Institute. COVID Tracker. https : //airtable.com/shrSAi6t5WFwqo3GM/ tblEzPQS5fnc0FHYR/viweyymxOAtNvo7yH Mullard A. COVID-19 Vaccine Development Pipeline Gears Up. The Lancet no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736 ( ) Mundinger M. R. Kane E. Lenz A. Totten W. Tsai P. Cleary W. Friedewald A. Siu and M. Shelanski. Primary Care Outcomes in Patients Treated by Nurse Practitioners or Physicians : A Randomized Trial. JAMA no. : https : //doi.org/10.1001/jama.283.1.59 Oliver G. L. Pennington S. Revelle and M. Rantz. Impact of Nurse Practitioners on Health Outcomes of Medicare and Medicaid Patients. Nursing Outlook no. : https : //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/ S002965541400150X Ortiz J. R. Hofler A. Bushy Y. Lin A. Khanijahani and A. Bitney. Impact of Nurse Practitioner Practice Regulations on Rural Population Health Outcomes. Healthcare no. : https : //doi.org/10.3390/healthcare6020065 Perloff J. S. Clarke C. DesRoches M. O Reilly-Jacob and P. Buerhaus. Association of State-Level Restrictions in Nurse Practitioner Scope of Practice with the Quality of Primary Care Provided to Medicare Beneficiaries. Medical Care Research and Review no. : https : //doi org/10.1177/1077558717732402 Philipson T. E. Berndt A. Gottschalk and E. Sun. Cost-Benefit Analysis of the FDA : The Case of the Prescription Drug User Fee Acts. Journal of Public Economics nos : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2007.09.010 Philipson T. and A. Jena. Who Benefits from New Medical Technologies ? Estimates of Consumer and Producer Surpluses for HIV/AIDS Drugs. Forum for Health Economics & Policy no. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w11810 | References Philipson T. E. Sun D. Goldman and A. Jena. A Reexamination of the Costs of Medical R&D Regulation. Forum for Health Economics & Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1515/fhep-2012-0020 Plotkin S. J. Robinson G. Cunningham R. Iqbal and S. Larsen. The Complexity and Cost of Vaccine Manufacturing : An Overview. Vaccine no. : https : //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5518734/ Poghosyan L. E. Timmons C. Abraham and G. Martsolf. The Economic Impact of Nurse Practitioner Scope of Practice for Medicaid. Journal of Nursing Regulation no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/S2155-8256 ( ) 30078-X Pronker E. T. Weenen H. Commandeur E. Claassen and A. Osterhaus. Risk in Vaccine Research and Development Quantified. Plos One no. : e57755 https : //doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0057755 Qureshi Z. E. Seoane-Vazquez R. Rodriguez-Monguio K. Stevenson and S. Szeinbach Market Withdrawal of New Molecular Entities Approved in the United States from to Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety no. : https : //doi.org/10.1002/pds.2155 Roebuck M. J. Liberman M. Gemmill-Toyama and T. Brennan. Medication Adherence Leads to Lower Health Care Use and Costs Despite Increased Drug Spending. Health Affairs no. https : //doi.org/10.1377.hlthaff.2009.1087 Rosenblatt R. and L. Hart. Physicians and Rural America. West Journal of Medicine no. : https : //doi.org/10.1136/ewjm.173.5.348 Shi L. and M. Samuels. Practice Environment and the Employment of Nurse Practitioners Physician Assistants and Certified Nurse Midwives by Community Health Centers. Journal of Allied Health no. : PMID : https : //pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9358300/ Spetz J. S. Parente R. Town and D. Bazarko. Scope-of-Practice Laws Far Nurse Practitioners Limit Cost Savings That Can Be Achieved in Retail Clinics. Health Affairs no. https : //www.healthaffairs.org/doi/full/10.1377/ hlthaff.2013.0544 Spoont M. N. Greer J. Su P. Fitzgerald I. Rutks and T. Wilt. Rural vs. Urban Ambulatory Health Care : A Systematic Review. Washington : U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. https : //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK56147/ Stanik-Hutt J. R. Newhouse K. White M. Johantgen E. Bass G. Zangaro R. Wilson et al. The Quality and Effectiveness of Care Provided by Nurse Practitioners. Journal of Nurse Practitioners no. : https : //doi org/10.1016/j.nurpra.2013.07.004 Verma S. Early Impact of CMS Expansion of Medicare Telehealth during COVID19. Health Affairs Blog. https : //www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377/ hblog20200715.454789/full/ References | Chapter Abravanel M. N. Pindus B. Theodos K. Bertumen R. Brash and Z. McDade. New Markets Tax Credit NNMTC Program Evaluation Final Report. Urban Institute. https : //www.urban.org/sites/default/files/ publication/24211/412958-New-Markets-Tax-Credit-NMTC-ProgramEvaluation.PDF Arefeva A. M. Davis A. Ghent and M. Park. Job Growth from Opportunity Zones. Working paper Bauguess S. R. Gullapalli and V. Ivanov. Capital Raising in the U.S. : An Analysis of the Market for Unregistered Securities Offerings Securities Exchange Commission White Paper. https : //www.sec.gov/files/DERA % white % 20paper_Regulation % 20D_082018.pdf Bernstein J. and K. Hassett. Unlocking Private Capital to Facilitate Economic Growth in Distressed Areas. Economic Innovation Group. https : //eig.org/ wp-content/uploads/2015/04/Unlocking-Private-Capital-to-Facilitate-Growth pdf Bloom D. and C. Michalopoulos. How Welfare and Work Policies Affect Employment and Income : A Synthesis of Research. MDRC. https : //www mdrc.org/publication/ how-welfare-and-work-policies-affect-employment-and-income Brummet Q. and D. Reed. The Effects of Gentrification on the Well-Being and Opportunity of Original Resident Adults and Children. Working Paper WP Philadelphia : Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. https : //www philadelphiafed.org/-/media/research-and-data/publications/workingpapers/2019/wp19-30.pdf Busso M. J. Gregory and P. Kline. Assessing the Incidence and Efficiency of a Prominent Place Based Policy. American Economic Review no. : CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) The Growth Effects of Corporate Tax Reform and Implications for Wages. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse gov/files/images/Corporate % 20Tax % 20Reform % 20and % 20Growth % 20Final pdf Economic Report of the President. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2019/03/ERP-2019.pdf Chen J. E. Glaeser and D. Wessel. The ( Non- ) Effect of Opportunity Zones on Housing Prices. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research CRS ( Congressional Research Service ) Empowerment Zones Enterprise Communities and Renewal Communities : Comparative Overview and Analysis. https : //www.everycrsreport.com/files/20110214_R41639_ b18ae5bf0fbe93505d7b6c2b13b744b76124b9ed.pdf | References Dahlby B. The Marginal Cost of Public Funds : Theory and Applications. Cambridge MA : MIT Press Dragan K. Ellen I. and S. Glied. Does Gentrification Displace Poor Children ? New Evidence from New York City Medicaid Data. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Freedman M. Teaching New Markets Old Tricks : The Effects of Subsidized Investment on Low-Income Neighborhoods. Journal of Public Economics nos. : Gamper-Rabindran S. and C. Timmins. Does Cleanup of Hazardous Waste Sites Raise Housing Values ? Evidence of Spatially Localized Benefits. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management no. : GAO ( Government Accountability Office ) New Market Tax Credit. GAO-14-500 https : //www.gao.gov/assets/670/664717.pdf Grainger C. The Distributional Effects of Pollution Regulations : Do Renters Fully Pay for Cleaner Air ? Journal of Public Economics nos. : Ham J. C. Swenson A. Imrohoroglu and H. Song. Government Programs Can Improve Local Labor Markets : Evidence from State Enterprise Zones Federal Empowerment Zones and Federal Enterprise Community. Journal of Public Economics no. : Harger K. and A. Ross. Do Capital Tax Incentives Attract New Businesses ? Evidence Across Industries from the New Markets Tax Credit. Journal of Regional Science no. : Harger K. A. Ross and H. Stephens. What Matters the Most For Economic Development ? Evidence from the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund. Papers in Regional Science no. : Hoynes H. and D. Schanzenbach. Work Incentives and the Food Stamp Program. Journal of Public Economics nos. : Hula R. and M. Jordan. Private Investment and Public Redevelopment : The Case of New Markets Tax Credits. Poverty & Public Policy no. : Jacob B. and J. Ludwig. The Effects of Housing Assistance on Labor Supply : Evidence from a Voucher Lottery. American Economic Review no. : Koby Y. and K. Wolf. Aggregation in Heterogeneous-Firm Models : Theory and Measurement. https : //scholar.princeton.edu/sites/default/files/ckwolf/files/ hetfirms_agg.pdf Lowry S. and D. Marples. Tax Incentives for Opportunity Zones : In Brief. Congressional Research Service R45152 Markusen A. and A. Glasmeier Overhauling and Revitalizing Federal Economic Development Programs. Economic Development Quarterly no. : Nichols A. and Rothstein J. The Earned Income Tax Credit. In Economics of Means-Tested Transfer Programs in the United States Volume Chicago : University of Chicago Press References | Ohrn E. The Effect of Tax Incentives on U.S. Manufacturing : Evidence from State Accelerated Depreciation Policies. Journal of Public Economics article Sage A. M. Langen and A. Van de Minne. Where Is the Opportunity in Opportunity Zones ? Early Indicators of the Opportunity Zone Program s Impact on Commercial Property Prices. http : //dx.doi.org/10.2139/ ssrn.3385502 Tax Policy Center. What Is the New Market Tax Credit and How Does It Work ? https : //www.taxpolicycenter.org/briefing-book/ what-new-markets-tax-credit-and-how-does-it-work Theodos B. C. Stacy and H. Ho. Taking Stock of the Community Development Block Grant. Urban Institute. http : //www.urban.org/sites/default/files/ publication/89551/cdbg_brief.pdf Vardell R. The Land of Opportunity Zones : Deferring Taxable Capital Gains Through Investments in Low-Income Communities. Missouri Law Review no : article Chapter Anderson S. and J. Sallee. Using Loopholes to Reveal the Marginal Cost of Regulation : The Case of Fuel-Economy Standards. American Economic Review no. : Berry S. J. Levinsohn and A. Pakes. Differentiated Products Demand Systems from a Combination of Micro and Macro Data : The New Car Market. Journal of Political Economy no. ( ) : Bento A. M. Freedman and C. Lang. Who Benefits from Environmental Regulation ? Evidence from the Clean Air Act Amendments. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : Bento A. et al. Flawed Analyses of U.S. Auto Fuel Economy Standards. Science Magazine no. : CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) The Economic Effects of Federal Deregulation since January : An Interim Report. https : //www whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/The-Economic-Effects-ofFederal-Deregulation-Interim-Report.pdf Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office Chambers D. C. Collins and A. Krause. How Do Federal Regulations Affect Consumer Prices ? An Analysis of the Regressive Effects of Regulation. Public Choice no. : Coffey B. P. McLaughlin and P. Peretto. The Cumulative Cost of Regulations. Review of Economic Dynamics : Crain M. and N. Crain. The Cost of Federal Regulation to the U.S. Economy Manufacturing and Small Business. National Association of Manufacturers | References Crews W. Mapping Washington s Lawlessness ; An Inventory of Regulatory Dark Matter. Competitive Enterprise Institute. https : //cei.org/sites/default/files/ Wayne % 20Crews % % 20Mapping % 20Washington % 27s % Lawlessness % 202017.pdf The E.O. Guidance Document Portal : An Exercise in Utility. https : // cei.org/blog/eo-13891-guidance-document-portal-exercise-utility Duclos J. Horizontal and Vertical Equity. In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. https : //link.springer.com/referenceworkentry/10.105 % 2F978-1-349-95121-5_1961-1 Dynan K. J. Skinner and S. Zeldes. Do the Rich Save More ? Journal of Political Economy no. : EPA ( Environmental Protection Agency ) Proposed Determination on the Appropriateness of the Model Year Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emissions Standards under the Midterm Evaluation : Technical Support Document. https : //nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.cgi ? Dockey = P100Q3L4.pdf The EPA Automotive Trends Report : Greenhouse Gas Emissions Fuel Economy and Technology since https : //nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF cgi/P100W5C2.PDF ? Dockey = P100W5C2.PDF EPA/DOT ( U.S. Environmental Protection Agency / U.S. Department of Transportation ) Final Rulemaking for Light-Duty Vehicle Greenhouse Gas Emission Standards and Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standards. https : //nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.cgi/P100EZI1.PDF ? Dockey = P100EZI1.PDF The Safer Affordable Fuel-Efficient ( SAFE ) Vehicles Rule for Model Years Passenger Cars and Light Trucks. Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis. https : //www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.dot.gov/files/documents/ld_ cafe_my2021-26_pria_0.pdf The Safer Affordable Fuel-Efficient ( SAFE ) Vehicles Rule for Model Years Passenger Cars and Light Trucks. Final Regulatory Impact Analysis. https : //www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.dot.gov/files/documents/final_ safe_fria_web_version_200701.pdf Figueroa E. and S. Waxman. Which States Tax the Sale of Food for Home Consumption in ? Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. http : //www cbpp.org/research/state-budget-and-tax/ which-states-tax-the-sale-of-food-for-home-consumption-in-2017 Forbes. Tesla s Lucrative ZEV Credits May Not Be Sustainable. https : //www forbes.com/sites/greatspeculations/2017/09/01/ teslas-lucrative-zev-credits-may-not-be-sustainable/ ? sh = 16b653416ed5 Garicano L. C. LeLarge and J. Van Reenen. Firm Size Distortions and the Productivity Distribution : Evidence from France. American Economic Review no. : Jacobsen M. Evaluating U.S. Fuel Economy Standards in a Model with Producer and Household Heterogeneity. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : References | Leard B. and V. McConnell. New Markets for Credit Trading under U.S Automobile Greenhouse Gas and Fuel Economy Standards. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy no. : Levinson A. Energy Efficiency Standards Are More Regressive Than Energy Taxes : Theory and Evidence. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists no. S1 : S7 S36 Mulligan C. and T. Philipson. Merit Motives and Government Intervention : Public Finance in Reverse. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Stigler G. The Theory of Economic Regulation. Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science no. : Thomas D. Regressive Effects of Regulation. Arlington VA : Mercatus Center at George Mason University Chapter Abdulkadiro lu A. P. Pathak A. Roth and T. S nmez. Changing the Boston School Choice Mechanism. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Abdulkadiro lu A. P. Pathak and C. Walters. Free to Choose : Can School Choice Reduce Student Achievement ? American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : Anderson K. Evidence on Charter School Practices Related to Student Enrollment and Retention. Journal of School Choice no. : Angrist J. S. Cohodes S. Dynarski P. Pathak and C. Walters. Stand and Deliver : Effects of Boston s Charter High Schools on College Preparation Entry and Choice. Journal of Labor Economics no. Ayscue J. R. Levy G. Siegel-Hawley and B. Woodward. Choices Worth Making : Creating Sustaining and Expanding Diverse Magnet Schools. Civil Rights Project / Proyecto Derechos Civiles Baude P. M. Casey E. Hanushek G. Phelan and S. Rivkin. The Evolution of Charter School Quality. Economica no. : Bifulco R. and R. Reback. Fiscal Impacts of Charter Schools : Lessons from New York. Education Finance and Policy no. : Booker K. T. Sass and R. Zimmer. The Effects of Charter High Schools on Educational Attainment. Journal of Labor Economics no. : Boston School Finder. What Is the Home-Based Assignment Policy ( HBAP ) ? https : //www.bostonschoolfinder.org/home-based-assignment-policy-hbap Buerger C. and R. Bifulco. The Effect of Charter Schools on Districts Student Composition Costs and Efficiency : The Case of New York State. Economics of Education Review : | References Butler J. D. Carr E. Toma and R. Zimmer. Choice in a World of New School Types. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) The Impact of Opportunity Zones : An Initial Assessment. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/ The-Impact-of-Opportunity-Zones-An-Initial-Assessment.pdf Chakrabarti R. Can Increasing Private School Participation and Monetary Loss in a Voucher Program Affect Public School Performance ? Evidence from Milwaukee. Journal of Public Economics nos. : Chakrabarti R. and J. Roy. The Economics of Parental Choice. Economics of Education : Chingos M. and P. Peterson. Experimentally Estimated Impacts of School Vouchers on College Enrollment and Degree Attainment. Journal of Public Economics : Cohodes S. E. Setren and C. Walters. Can Successful Schools Replicate ? Scaling Up Boston s Charter School Sector. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research CREDO ( Center for Research on Education Outcomes ) Multiple Choice : Charter School Performance in States. Stanford University National Charter School Study. Stanford University. https : //credo stanford.edu/sites/g/files/sbiybj6481/f/ncss_2013_final_draft.pdf CRS ( Congressional Research Service ) Higher Education Tax Benefits : Brief Overview and Budgetary Effects. https : //files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED593609 pdf District of Columbia Opportunity Scholarship Program ( DC OSP ) : Overview Implementation and Issues. https : //fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R45581 pdf David R. National Charter School Management Overview. National Alliance for Public Charter Schools. https : //www.publiccharters.org/sites/default/files/ documents/2019-06/napcs_management_report_web_06172019.pdf DeAngelis C. and P. Wolf. Will Democracy Endure Private School Choice ? The Effect of the Milwaukee Parental Choice Program on Adult Voting Behavior. Journal of Private Enterprise Private School Choice and Character : More Evidence from Milwaukee. Journal of Private Enterprise DeAngelis C. P. Wolf L. Maloney and J. May. Charter School Funding : ( More ) Inequity in the City. November. School Choice Demonstration Project Dobbie W. and R. Fryer. The Medium-Term Impacts of High-Achieving Charter Schools. Journal of Political Economy no. : DCPCSB ( D.C. Public Charter School Board ) Student Enrollment. https : // dcpcsb.org/student-enrollment ECS ( Education Commission of the States ) Open Enrollment Quick Guide. https : //www.ecs.org/wp-content/uploads/Open-Enrollment-Quick-Guide.pdf References | EdChoice. Fast Facts on School Choice. https : //www.edchoice.org/engage/ fast-facts/ 2020a. The ABCs of School Choice. https : //www.edchoice.org/wp-content/ uploads/2020/01/2020-ABCs-of-School-Choice-WEB-OPTIMIZED-REVISED.pdf 2020b. Types of School Choice. https : //www.edchoice.org/school-choice/ types-of-school-choice/ 2020c. Wisconsin Milwaukee Parental Choice Program. https : //www edchoice.org/school-choice/programs/ wisconsin-milwaukee-parental-choice-program/ EdSurge. What s the Plan ? How K-12 School Districts Are Preparing to Resume and Reopen. https : //www.edsurge.com/research/guides/ what-s-the-plan-how-k-12-school-districts-are-preparing-to-resume-andreopen Egalite A. J. Mills and P. Wolf. The Impact of Targeted School Vouchers on Racial Stratification in Louisiana Schools. Education and Urban Society no. : Epple D. and R. Romano. Educational Vouchers and Cream Skimming. International Economic Review no. : Epple D. R. Romano and M. Urquiola. School Vouchers : A Survey of the Economic Literature. Journal of Economic Literature no. : Epple D. R. Romano and R. Zimmer. Chapter : Charter Schools A Survey of Research on Their Characteristics and Effectiveness. In Handbook of the Economics of Education ed. G. Bulman and R.W. Fairlie. Amsterdam : Elsevier Vol. Figlio D. and C. Hart. Competitive Effects of Means-Tested School Vouchers. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : Figlio D. C. Hart and K. Karbownik. Effects of Scaling Up Private School Choice Programs on Public School Students. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Florida Department of Education. 2019a. School Choice. http : //www.fldoe.org/ schools/school-choice/ 2019b. Florida s Charter Schools. http : //www.fldoe.org/core/fileparse php/7696/urlt/Charter-Sept-2019.pdf 2019c. Fact Sheet : Florida Tax Credit Scholarship Program. http : //www.fldoe org/core/fileparse.php/5606/urlt/FTC-Sept-2019-line.pdf Friedman M. The Role of Government in Education. In Economics and the Public Interest. New Brunswick NJ : Rutgers University Press Gilraine M. U. Petronijevic and J. Singleton. Horizontal Differentiation and the Policy Effect of Charter Schools. EdWorkingPaper https : // edworkingpapers.com/sites/default/files/ai19-80.pdf Grube L. and D. Anderson. School Choice and Charter Schools in Review : What Have We Learned ? Journal of Private Enterprise no. : | References Harris D. and M. Larsen. What Effect Did the New Orleans School Reforms Have on Student Achievement High School Graduation and College Outcomes ? Education Research Alliance for New Orleans. July https : // educationresearchalliancenola.org/files/publications/071518-Harris-LarsenWhat-Effect-Did-the-New-Orleans-School-Reforms-Have-on-StudentAchievement-High-School-Graduation-and-College-Outcomes.pdf Hitt C. M. McShane and P. Wolf. Do Impacts on Test Scores Even Matter ? Lessons from Long-Run Outcomes in School Choice Research. American Enterprise Institute. https : //www.aei.org/research-products/report/ do-impacts-on-test-scores-even-matter-lessons-from-long-run-outcomes-inschool-choice-research/ Hoxby C. Chapter : School Choice and School Productivity : Could School Choice Be a Tide That Lifts All Boats ? In The Economics of School Choice ed C. Hoxby. Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research JEC ( Joint Economic Committee ) Zoned Out : How School and Residential Zoning Limit Educational Opportunity. SCP Report Kaplan L. and W. Owings. Funding School Choice : Implications for American Education. Journal of Education Finance no. : Ladd H. and J. Singleton. The Fiscal Externalities of Charter Schools : Evidence from North Carolina. Education Finance and Policy no. : Leuken M. Fiscal Effects of School Vouchers : Examining the Savings and Costs of America s Private School Voucher Programs. Indianapolis : EdChoice Massachusetts Department of Elementary and Secondary Education. Enrollment Policy and Practice Frequently Asked Questions. http : //www doe.mass.edu/charter/guidance/2016-3-faq.html Massachusetts Charter School Waitlist Initial Report for ( FY20 ) March http : //www.doe.mass.edu/charter/enrollment/fy2020/ waitlist.html # : ~ : text = % 20out % 20of % % 20charter,waitlists % 2C % representing % % 2C743 % 20unique % 20students Mayer D. P. Peterson D. Myers C. Tuttle and W. Howell. School Choice in New York City after Three Years : An Evaluation of the School Choice Scholarships Program. Mathematica Policy Research McShane M. The School Choice Now Act and the Fate of Private Schools. Forbes July https : //www.forbes.com/sites/mikemcshane/2020/07/23/ the-school-choice-now-act-and-the-fate-of-private-schools/ # 2db492ef7278 National Association of Realtors. Profile of Home Buyers and Sellers. https : //nationalmortgageprofessional.com/sites/default/files/NAR_ HBS_2018_10_29_18.pdf NCES ( National Center for Education Statistics ) 2019a. Table Number and Enrollment of Public Elementary and Secondary Schools by School Level Type and Charter Magnet and Virtual Status : Selected Years through https : //nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d19/tables/ dt19_216.20.asp ? current = yes References | 2019b. School Choice in the United States : https : //nces.ed.gov/ programs/schoolchoice/ind_02.asp 2019c. Table : Revenues for Public Elementary and Secondary Schools by Source of Funds and State or Jurisdiction : https : //nces ed.gov/programs/digest/d19/tables/dt19_235.20.asp ? current = yes 2019d. Table : Number and Percentage Distribution of Public Elementary and Secondary Students and Schools by Traditional or Charter School Status and Selected Characteristics : Selected Years through https : //nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d19/tables/dt19_216.30 asp ? current = yes 2020a. Public School Revenue Sources. https : //nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/ indicator_cma.asp 2020b. Revenues and Expenditures for Public Elementary and Secondary Education : FY https : //nces.ed.gov/pubs2020/2020303.pdf Office of Senator Ted Cruz. Sen. Cruz Introduces Education Freedom Scholarships and Opportunity Act. February https : //www.cruz.senate gov/ ? p = press_release&id = OII ( Office of Innovation and Improvement ) Creating Successful Magnet School Programs. U.S. Department of Education. https : //www2.ed.gov/admins/ comm/choice/magnet/report.pdf Ridley M. and C. Terrier. Fiscal and Education Spillovers from Charter School Expansion. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Rothstein J. Good Principals or Good Peers ? Parental Valuation of School Characteristics Tiebout Equilibrium and the Incentive Effects of Competition among Jurisdictions. American Economic Review no. : Sass T. R. Zimmer B. Gill and T. Booker. Charter High School s Effect on LongTerm Attainment and Earnings. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : Supreme Court of the United States. Espinoza et al. v. Montana Department of Revenue. https : //www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/19pdf/18-1195_g314 pdf # page = Teach New Orleans. Nola by the Numbers. https : //teachneworleans.net/nolaby-the-numbers/ # : ~ : text = % % 20of % 20students % 20attend % charter,create % 20its % 20own % 20unique % 20culture Tiebout C. A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures. Journal of Political Economy : Urquiola M. Does School Choice Lead to Sorting ? Evidence from Tiebout Variation. American Economic Review no. : U.S. Department of Education. Welcome to ED s Charter Schools Program. https : //www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oii/csp/index.html | References The Federal Role in Education. https : //www2.ed.gov/about/overview/ fed/role.html 2019a. School Choice Improvement Programs. https : //oese.ed.gov/offices/ office-of-discretionary-grants-support-services/ school-choice-improvement-programs/ 2019b. The U.S. Department of Education s Charter Schools Program Overview. https : //oese.ed.gov/files/2019/12/CSP-Data-OverviewWestEd-7.22.2019.pdf 2019c. How Education Freedom Scholarships Can Expand Private and Home Education Options. https : //sites.ed.gov/freedom/2019/09/26/ how-education-freedom-scholarships-can-expand-private-and-homeeducation-options/ 2020a. Magnet Schools Assistance Program. https : //oese.ed.gov/offices/officeof-discretionary-grants-support-services/ school-choice-improvement-programs-assistance-program-msap/ 2020b. Secretary DeVos Awards $ Million to Create and Expand Public Charter Schools in Areas of Greatest Need. https : //www.ed.gov/news/pressreleases/ secretary-devos-awards-65-million-create-and-expand-public-charterschools-areas-greatest-need Walters C. The Demand for Effective Charter Schools. Journal of Political Economy no. : Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction. Charter School Enrollment. https : //dpi.wi.gov/sms/charter-schools/current Witte J. The Milwaukee Voucher Experiment. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis no. : Wolf P. B. Gutmann M. Puma B. Kisida L. Rizzo N. Eissa. and M. Carr. Evaluation of the DC Opportunity Scholarship Program. National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance. https : //ies.ed.gov/ncee/ pubs/20104018/pdf/20104018.pdf Wolf P. B. Kisida B. Gutmann M. Puma N. Eissa and L. Rizzo. School Vouchers and Student Outcomes : Experimental Evidence from Washington DC. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : Zimmer R. B. Gill K. Booker S. Lavertu T. Sass and J. Witte. Charter Schools in Eight States : Effects on Achievement Attainment Integration and Competition. RAND Corporation Chapter Acemoglu D. S. Johnson and J. Robinson. The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development : An Empirical Investigation. American Economic Review no : References | Alston E. and S. Smith. Development Derailed : Uncertain Property Rights and Asset-Specific Investment. Mountain West Economic History Conference Barton S. and H. Recht. The Massive Prize Luring Miners to the Stars. Bloomberg March https : //www.bloomberg.com/ graphics/2018-asteroid-mining/ Barzel Y. Economic Analysis of Property Rights. New York : Cambridge University Press Bohn H. and R. Deacon. Ownership Risk Investment and the Use of Natural Resources. American Economic Review no. : Butow S. T. Cooley E. Felt and J. Mozer. State of the Space Industrial Base : A Time for Action to Sustain US Economic & Military Leadership in Space. http : //aerospace.csis.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/State-of-theSpace-Industrial-Base-2020-Report_July-2020_FINAL.pdf CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Expanding Educational Opportunity through Choice and Competition. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2020/10/Expanding-Education-through-Choice.pdf Cust J. and T. Harding. Institutions and the Location of Oil Exploration. Journal of the European Economic Association no. : Demsetz H. Toward a Theory of Property Rights. American Economic Review no. : DIA ( Defense Intelligence Agency ) Challenges to Security in Space. https : // www.dia.mil/Portals/27/Documents/News/Military % 20Power % Publications/Space_Threat_V14_020119_sm.pdf Ferreira S. Deforestation Property Rights and International Trade. Land Economics no. : Galiani S. and E. Schargrodsky. Property Rights for the Poor : Effects of Land Titling. Journal of Public Economics nos. : Grainger C. and C. Costello. Capitalizing Property Rights Insecurity in Natural Resource Assets. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management no. : Hertzfeld H. and F. von der Dunk. Bringing Space Law into the Commercial World : Property Rights without Sovereignty. Chicago Journal of International Law no. : Hornbeck R. Barbed Wire : Property Rights and Agricultural Development. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Kemal M. and I. Lange. Changes in Institutional Design and Extraction Paths. Environmental and Development Economics no. : Leonard B. and G. Libecap. Collective Action by Contract : Prior Appropriation and the Development of Irrigation in the Western United States. Journal of Law and Economics no. : Libecap G. Economic Variables and the Development of Law : The Case of Western Mineral Rights. Journal of Economic History no. : | References Libecap G. and J. Smith. The Economic Evolution of Petroleum Property Rights in the United States. Journal of Legal Studies no. S2 : S589 S608 Llin s C. Pretending to Be Liberian and Panamanian ; Flags of Convenience and the Weakening of the Nation-State on the High Seas. Journal of Maritime Law & Commerce no. : North D. Institutions. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : O Connor A. M. Gallaher K. Clark-Sutton D. Lapidus Z. Oliver T. Scott D. Wood M Gonzalez E. Brown and J. Fletcher. Economic Benefits of the Global Positioning System ( GPS ) Research Triangle Park NC : RTI International https : //www.space.commerce.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019-08-gpspresentation.pdf Pace S. G. Frost I. Lachow D. Frelinger D. Fossum D. Wassem and M. Pinto. The Global Positioning System : Assessing National Priorities. Santa Monica CA : RAND Corporation Pence M. Mike Pence : It s Time for Congress to Establish the Space Force. Washington Post March https : //www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/mikepence-its-time-for-congress-to-establish-the-spaceforce/2019/03/01/50820a58-3c4e-11e9-a06c-3ec8ed509d15_story.html Taghdiri A. Flags of Convenience and the Commercial Space Flight Industry : The Inadequacy of Current International Law to Address the Opportune Registration of Space Vehicles in Flag States. Journal of Science and Technology Law no. : USSF ( U.S. Space Force ) About the United States Space Force. https : //www spaceforce.mil/About-Us/About-Space-Force Weinzierl M. Space the Final Economic Frontier. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : Chapter Abraham K. and M. Kearney. Explaining the Decline in the US Employment-toPopulation Ratio : A Review of the Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature no. : Anthony C. et al. The Costs of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict. Santa Monica CA : RAND Corporation Autor D. D. Dorn and G. Hanson. The China Syndrome : Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States. American Economic Review no. : When Work Disappears : Manufacturing Decline and the Falling Marriage Market Value of Young Men. American Economic Review : Insights no. : Baldwin R. and E. Tomiura. Thinking Ahead About the Trade Impact of COVID19. In Economics in the Time of COVID-19 ed. R. Baldwin and B. di Mauro London : Centre for Economic Policy Research References | Bank of America. 2020a. Tectonic Shifts in Global Supply Chains. February Bank of America Global Research. https : //www.bofaml.com/content/dam/ boamlimages/documents/articles/ID20_0147/Tectonic_Shifts_in_Global_ Supply_Chains.pdf 2020b. The Cost of Remaking Supply Chains : Significant but not Prohibitive. July Bank of America Global Research. https : //www.bofaml.com/content/ dam/boamlimages/documents/articles/ID20_0734/cost_of_remaking_ supply_chains.pdf Case A. and A. Deaton. Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. casetextsp17bpea.pdf CDC ( U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ) No Sail Order and Suspension of Further Embarkation. Federal Register. https : //www federalregister.gov/documents/2020/03/24/2020-06166/ no-sail-order-and-suspension-of-further-embarkation CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Economic Report of the President Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office CRS ( Congressional Research Service ) U.S.-South Korea ( KORUS ) FTA. https : // fas.org/sgp/crs/row/IF10733.pdf Stage One U.S.-Japan Trade Agreements. https : //fas.org/sgp/crs/row/ R46140.pdf 2020a. USMCA : Intellectual Property Rights ( IPR ) https : //crsreports.congress gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11314 # : ~ : text = Geographical % 20Indications % ( GIs ) ,-GIs % 20are % 20geographical&text = USMCA % 20contains % 20due % process % 20procedures,GI % 20protection % 20in % 20international % agreements 2020b. U.S.-Brazil Trade Relations. https : //crsreports.congress.gov/product/ pdf/IF/IF10447 Cui Y. J. Meng and C. Lu. Recent Developments in China s Labor Market : Labor Shortage Rising Wages and Their Implications. Review of Development Economics no. : DOJ ( U.S. Department of Justice ) Statement of John C. Demers Before the Committee on the Judiciary United States Senate. https : //www.justice.gov/ sites/default/files/testimonies/witnesses/ attachments/2018/12/18/12-05-2018_john_c._demers_testimony_re_china_ non-traditional_espionage_against_the_united_states_the_threat_and_ potential_policy_responses.pdf Elliott L. and R. Mason. U.K. to Impose Tax on Tech Giants but Risks U.S. Tariffs on Car Exports. Guardian January https : //www.theguardian.com/ business/2020/jan/22/ uk-to-impose-tax-on-tech-giants-but-risks-us-tariffs-on-car-exports Goodman M. D. Gerstel N. Szechenyi and M. Green. The U.S.-Japan Trade Deal. Center for Strategic and International Studies. https : //www.csis.org/ analysis/us-japan-trade-deal | References GPO ( U.S. Government Publishing Office ) Public Law Oct. : Normal Trade Relations for the People s Republic of China. https : //www congress.gov/106/plaws/publ286/PLAW-106publ286.pdf Grossman G. and E. Rossi-Hansberg. Trading Tasks : A Simple Theory of Offshoring. American Economic Review no. : Henley J. J. Rankin and L. O Carroll. Brexit Explained : How It Happened and What Comes Next. Guardian January https : //ustr.gov/countries-regions/ europe-middle-east/europe/united-kingdom/ us-uk-trade-agreement-negotiations ILO ( International Labor Organization ) Informal Employment in Mexico : Current Situation Policies and Challenges. https : //www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/ public/---americas/---ro-lima/documents/publication/wcms_245889.pdf Isaac A. U.K. Scrambles for Legal Route to Hit Back on U.S. Airbus Tariffs. Politico December https : //www.politico.eu/article/ uk-scrambles-for-legal-route-to-hit-back-on-us-airbus-tariffs/ Kearney. Trade War Spurs Sharp Reversal in Reshoring Index Foreshadowing COVID-19 Test of Supply Chain Relience. https : //www kearney.com/operations-performance-transformation/us-reshoring-index/ full-report Luo S. and K. Tsang. China and World Output Impact of the Hubei Lockdown During the Coronavirus Outbreak. Contemporary Economic Policy forthcoming Lund S. et al. Risk Resilience and Rebalancing in Global Value Chains. McKinsey Global Institute August https : //www.mckinsey.com/businessfunctions/operations/our-insights/ risk-resilience-and-rebalancing-in-global-value-chains McBride J. and A. Chatzky. Is Made in China a Threat to Global Trade ? Council on Foreign Relations. https : //www.cfr.org/backgrounder/ made-china-2025-threat-global-trade MOF ( Ministry of Finance of the People s Republic of China ) Announcement of the Customs Tariff Commission of the State Council on Adjusting Measures to Impose Tariffs on Certain Imported Commodities Originating in the United States. http : //gss.mof.gov.cn/gzdt/zhengcefabu/202002/t20200206_3466540 htm Mojtehedzadeh S. Inside Mexico s Ghost Unions. Toronto Star May https : // www.thestar.com/news/gta/2016/05/22/inside-mexicos-ghost-unions.html OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) Trade in Fake Goods Is Now % of World Trade and Rising. https : //www.oecd.org/ newsroom/trade-in-fake-goods-is-now-33-of-world-trade-and-rising.htm Overby T. S. Snyder T. Stangarone and E. Swicord. Stabilizing the U.S.-Korea Trade Agenda Under Trump and Moon. Washington : Council on Foreign Relations. https : //efile.fara.gov/docs/3327-InformationalMaterials-20200318-108.pdf References | Packard C. Trump and Johnson Can Quickly Strike a Trade Deal If They Avoid the Pitfalls. Foreign Policy March https : //foreignpolicy.com/2020/03/11/ trump-johnson-us-britain-trade-agreement-fta/ Pierce J. and P. Schott. The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing Employment. American Economic Review no. : Trade Liberalization and Mortality : Evidence from U.S. Counties. American Economic Review : Insights no. : Schlesinger J. How the Coronavirus Will Reshape World Trade. Wall Street Journal June https : //www.wsj.com/articles/ how-the-coronavirus-will-reshape-world-trade-11592592995 Schott J. Reinventing the Wheel : Phase One of the U.S.-Japan Trade Pact. Peterson Institute for International Economics. https : //www.piie.com/blogs/ trade-and-investment-policy-watch/ reinventing-wheel-phase-one-us-japan-trade-pact Tankersley J. Trump Signs Revised Korean Trade Deal. New York Times September https : //www.nytimes.com/2018/09/24/us/politics/southkorea-trump-trade-deal.html UBS. Supply Chains Are Shifting : How Much and Where ? UBS Evidence Lab https : //www.ubs.com/global/en/investment-bank/in-focus/covid-19/2020/ supply-chains-are-shifting.html UN Comtrade. Classification by Broad Economic Categories Rev.5. https : // unstats.un.org/unsd/trade/classifications/Manual % 20of % 20the % 20Fifth % Revision % 20of % 20the % 20BEC % ( Unedited ) .pdf USITC ( U.S. International Trade Commission ) U.S.-Mexico-Canada Trade Agreement : Likely Impact on the U.S. Economy and on Specific Industry Sectors. https : //www.usitc.gov/publications/332/pub4889.pdf USTR ( Office of the United States Trade Representative ) 2018a. Section Investigation Fact Sheet. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/pressoffice/fact-sheets/2018/june/section-301-investigation-fact-sheet 2018b. United States Japan Trade Agreement ( USJTA ) Negotiations : Summary of Specific Negotiating Objectives. https : //ustr.gov/sites/default/ files/2018.12.21_Summary_of_U.S.- Japan_Negotiating_Objectives.pdf 2018c. United States Mexico Canada Trade Fact Sheet : Modernizing NAFTA into a 21st Century Trade Agreement. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/policyoffices/press-office/fact-sheets/2018/october/united-states % E2 % % 93mexi co % E2 % % 93canada-trade-fa-1 2018d. New U.S. Trade Policy and National Security Outcomes with the Republic of Korea. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/factsheets/2018/march/new-us-trade-policy-and-national 2018e. Fact Sheet on U.S.-Korea Free Trade Agreement Outcomes. https : //ustr gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/fact-sheets/2018/september/ fact-sheet-us-korea-free-trade | References 2019a. National Trade Estimate Report on Foreign Trade Barriers. https : // ustr.gov/sites/default/files/2019_National_Trade_Estimate_Report.pdf 2019b. United States and China Reach Phase One Trade Agreement. https : // ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2019/december/ united-states-and-china-reach 2019c. U.S.-Japan Trade Agreement Text. https : //ustr.gov/countries-regions/ japan-korea-apec/japan/us-japan-trade-agreement-negotiations/ us-japan-trade-agreement-text 2019d. U.S.-Japan Digital Trade Agreement Text. https : //ustr.gov/countriesregions/japan-korea-apec/japan/us-japan-trade-agreement-negotiations/ us-japan-digital-trade-agreement-text 2020a. United States Mexico Canada Agreement. https : //ustr.gov/tradeagreements/free-trade-agreements/united-states-mexico-canada-agreement 2020b. Economic and Trade Agreement between the United States of America and the People s Republic of China. https : //ustr.gov/sites/default/files/files/ agreements/phase % 20one % 20agreement/Economic_And_Trade_ Agreement_Between_The_United_States_And_China_Text.pdf 2020c. USTR and USDA Release Report on Agricultural Trade between the United States and China. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/pressoffice/press-releases/2020/october/ ustr-and-usda-release-report-agricultural-trade-between-united-states-andchina 2020d. Statement on Call between the United States and China. https : //ustr gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2020/august/ statement-call-between-united-states-and-china 2020e. Fact Sheet on the National Trade Estimate : Removing Barriers to U.S. Exports Worldwide. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/pressoffice/fact-sheets/2020/march/ fact-sheet-2020-national-trade-estimate-removing-barriers-us-exportsworldwide 2020f. U.S.-U.K. Trade Agreement Negotiations. https : //ustr.gov/countriesregions/europe-middle-east/europe/united-kingdom/ us-uk-trade-agreement-negotiations Vaswani K. U.S.-China Trade Deal : Five Things That Aren t in It. BBC News January https : //www.bbc.com/news/business-51130434 White House. 2020a. Remarks by President Trump at Signing of the U.S.-China Phase One Trade Agreement. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/ remarks-president-trump-signing-u-s-china-phase-one-trade-agreement-2/ 2020b. Proclamation on Suspension of Entry as Immigrants and Nonimmigrants of Persons Who Pose a Risk of Transmitting Novel Coronavirus. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/ proclamation-suspension-entry-immigrants-nonimmigrants-persons-poserisk-transmitting-2019-novel-coronavirus/ References | 2020c. Proclamation Suspension of Entry as Immigrants and Nonimmigrants of Certain Additional Persons Who Pose a Risk of Transmitting Novel Coronavirus. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/ proclamation-suspension-entry-immigrants-nonimmigrants-certainadditional-persons-pose-risk-transmitting-2019-novel-coronavirus/ World Bank. World Development Report : Trading for Development in the Age of Global Value Chains. Washington : World Bank. https : //www.worldbank.org/ en/publication/wdr2020 WTO ( World Trade Organization ) The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade ( GATT ) https : //www.wto.org/english/docs_e/legal_e/gatt47_01_e.htm Wu D. TSMC Scores Subsidies and Picks Site for $ Billion U.S. Plant. Bloomberg June https : //www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-06-09/ tsmc-confident-of-replacing-any-huawei-orders-lost-to-u-s-curbs Xie E. Build-up to Coronavirus Lockdown : Inside China s Decision to Close Wuhan. South China Morning Post April https : //www.scmp.com/news/ china/society/article/3078189/ build-coronavirus-lockdown-inside-chinas-decision-close-wuhan Chapter BBC ( British Broadcasting Corporation ) U.S. Oil Prices Turn Negative as Demand Dries Up. https : //www.bbc.com/news/business-52350082 Bernanke B. Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depression. American Economic Review no. : Bordo M. and J. Haubrich. Deep Recessions Fast Recoveries and Financial Crises : Evidence from the American Record. Economic Inquiry : CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Economic Report of the President Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office Economic Report of the President. Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office Chen Y. A. Ebenstein M. Greenstone and H. Li. Evidence on the Impact of Sustained Exposure to Air Pollution on Life Expectancy from China s Huai River Policy. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. : Coibion O. Y. Gorodnichenko and M. Weber. Labor Markets during the COVID-19 Crisis : A Preliminary View. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Crust E. M. Daly and B. Hobijn. The Illusion of Wage Growth. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter | References Deschenes O. M. Greenstone and J. Shapiro. Defensive Investments and the Demand for Air Quality : Evidence from the NOx Budget Program. American Economic Review no. : EIA ( Energy Information Administration ) Short-Term Energy Outlook. December https : //www.eia.gov/outlooks/steo/ Fern ndez-Villaverde J. and C. Jones. Macroeconomic Outcomes and COVID-19 : A Progress Report. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Gascon C. and J. Haas. The Impact of COVID-19 on the Residential Real Estate Market. Federal Reserve Bank of Saint Louis Gicheva D. Student Loans or Marriage ? A Look at the Highly Educated. Economics of Education Review : Gicheva D. and J. Thompson. The Effects of Student Loans on Long-Term Household Financial Stability. In Student Loans and the Dynamics of Debt edited by B. Hershbein and K. Hollenbeck. Kalamazoo : W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research Goodspeed T. and P. Navarro. The White House Favors a Bridge to Recovery. Wall Street Journal December https : //www.wsj.com/articles/ the-white-house-favors-a-bridge-to-recovery-11606950989 Hall R. and M. Kudlyak. Why Has the U.S. Economy Recovered So Consistently from Every Recession in the Past Years ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Hamermesh D. What Do We Know About Worker Displacement in the U.S. ? Industrial Relations : A Journal of Economy and Society no. : He J. H. Liu and A. Salvo. Severe Air Pollution and Labor Productivity : Evidence from Industrial Towns in China. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : Hedlund A. Failure to Launch : Housing Debt Overhang and the Inflation Option. American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics no. : IMF ( International Monetary Fund ) 2020a. World Economic Outlook : A Long and Difficult Ascent. Washington : IMF. https : //www.imf.org/-/media/Files/Publications/ WEO/2020/October/English/text.ashx 2020b. World Economic Outlook Update : A Crisis Like No Other An Uncertain Recovery. Washington : IMF. https : //www.imf.org/-/media/Files/Publications/ WEO/2020/Update/June/English/WEOENG202006.ashx Kozlowski J. L. Veldkamp and V. Venkateswaran. Scarring Body and Mind : The Long-Term Belief-Scarring Effects of COVID-19. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Mezza A. D. Ringo S. Sherlund and K. Sommer. Student Loans and Homeownership. Journal of Labor Economics no. : OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) OECD Economic Outlook. Vol. Issue https : //www.oecd-ilibrary.org/ References | deliver/39a88ab1-en.pdf ? itemId = % 2Fcontent % 2Fpublication % 2F39a 88ab1-en&mimeType = pdf O Hara M. and A. Zhou. Anatomy of a Liquidity Crisis : Corporate Bonds in the COVID-19 Crisis. Journal of Financial Economics forthcoming Pierce J. and P. Schott. Trade Liberalization and Mortality : Evidence from U.S Counties. American Economic Review : Insights no. : Rothstein J. and C. Rouse. Constrained after College : Student Loans and EarlyCareer Occupational Choices. Journal of Public Economics nos. : Ruhm C. Are Workers Permanently Scarred By Job Displacements ? American Economic Review no. : Sharpe S. and X. Zhou The Corporate Bond Market Crises and the Government Response. FEDS Notes Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System World Bank. Reversals of Fortune : Poverty and Shared Prosperity https : // openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/34496/9781464816 024.pdf Chapter AASHTO ( American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ) and TRIP. Rough Roads Ahead : Fix Them Now or Pay For It Later. Road Information Program. https : //t2.unh.edu/sites/t2.unh.edu/files/documents/ publications/RoughRoads_FullReport.pdf AAUP ( American Association of University Professors ) Faculty Compensation Survey Results. https : //www.aaup org/2019-20-faculty-compensation-survey-results No date. Explanation of Statistical Data. https : //www.aaup.org/ explanation-statistical-data-6 Abbott M. and C. Beach. Do Admission Criteria and Economic Recessions Affect Immigrant Earnings ? Institute for Research on Public Policy Working Paper https : //irpp.org/research-studies/ do-admission-criteria-and-economic-recessions-affect-immigrant-earnings/ Abraham K. and M. Kearney. Explaining the Decline in the U.S. Employment-toPopulation Ratio : A Review of the Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature no. : Acemoglu D. U. Akcigit H. Alp N. Bloom and W. Kerr. Innovation Realocation and Growth. American Economic Review no. : Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Physician Burnout. https : //www.ahrq.gov/prevention/clinician/ahrq-works/burnout/index.htm Aguirre D. L. Hoteit C. Rupp and K. Sabbagh. Empowering the Third Billion Women and the World of Work in Booz and Company. https : //www | References hrtoday.ch/sites/hrtoday.ch/files/article_inline_images/BoozCo_ Empowering-the-Third-Billion_Full-Report.pdf Altig D A. Auerbach L. Kotlikoff E. Ilin and V. Ye. Marginal Net Taxation of Americans Labor Supply. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research American Society of Civil Engineers. Failure to Act : Closing the Infrastructure Investment Gap for America s Economic Future. Boston : Economic Development Research Group Arezki R P. Bolton S. Peters F. Samama and J. Stiglitz. From Global Savings Glut to Financing Infrastructure. Economic Policy no. : Astebro T. S. Braguinsky and Y. Ding. Declining Business Dynamism among Our Best Opportunities : The Role of the Burden of Knowledge. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w27787/w27787.pdf Bailey M. T. Byker E. Patel and S. Ramnath. The Long-Term Effects of California s Paid Family Leave Act on Women s Careers : Evidence from U.S. Tax Data NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Baldwin R. Failure of the WTO Ministerial Conference at Cancun : Reasons and Remedies. World Economy no. : Bartel A. S. Kim J. Nam M. Rossin-Slater C. Ruhm and J. Waldfogel. Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Access to and Use of Paid Family and Medical Leave : Evidence from Four Nationally Representative Datasets. Monthly Labor Review January Becker G. Investment in Human Capital : A Theoretical Analysis. Journal of Political Economy no. : Bick A. and N. Fuchs-Sch ndeln. Quantifying the Disincentive Effects of Joint Taxation on Married Women s Labor Supply. American Economic Review no. : Blau F. and L. Kahn. Female Labor Supply : Why Is the United States Falling Behind ? American Economic Review : Papers and Proceedings no. : Bloom N. C. Jones J. Van Reenen and M. Webb. Are Idea Getting Harder to Find ? American Economic Review no. : Borella M. M. De Nardi and F. Yang. 2019a. Are Marriage-Related Taxes and Social Security Benefits Holding Back Female Labor Supply ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www nber.org/papers/w26097 2019b. Marriage-Related Taxes and Social Security Benefits Are Holding Back Women s Labour Supply in the U.S. Vox EU and Centre for Economic Policy Research. https : //voxeu.org/article/ marriage-related-taxes-social-security-benefits-and-women-s-laboursupply-us References | Borjas G. The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping : Reexamining the Impact of Immigration on the Labor Market. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : Why Trump s New Immigration Bill Makes Sense ; Hey It Works in Canada. Politico August https : //www.politico.com/magazine/ story/2017/08/04/why-trumps-new-immigration-bill-makes-sense-215457 Immigration and Economic Growth. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research Bradford A. How International Institutions Evolve. Chicago Journal of International Law no. : Bronson M. and M. Mazzocco. Taxation and Household Decisions : An Intertemporal Analysis. https : //wpcarey.asu.edu/sites/default/files/taxation_ sep_2018.pdf Brooks L. N. Gendron-Carrier and G. Rua. The Local Impact of Containerization. Finance and Economics Discussion Series