economic re p ort of the president transmitted to congress | march together with the annual report of the council of economic advisers economic re p ort of the president transmitted to congress | march together with the annual report of the council of economic advisers Contents Economic Report of the President. The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers. Chapter : Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World. Chapter : The Year in Review and the Years Ahead. Chapter : Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships. Chapter : Investing in Young Children s Care and Education. Chapter : Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions.. Chapter : Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets. Chapter : Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics. Chapter : Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles.. Chapter : Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate. References.. Appendix A : Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers during Appendix B : Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production....................................................................427 ____________ * For a detailed table of contents of the Council s Report see page iii Economic Report of the President Economic Report of the President To the Congress of the United States : Our Nation has faced tremendous challenges in recent years. A deadly pandemic and unprovoked war in Ukraine have tested our economy unlike any time since the Great Depression. When I was sworn into office COVID-19 was raging and our economy was reeling. Millions of workers were out of a job through no fault of their own. Hundreds of thousands of businesses had closed our supply chains were snarled and many schools were still shuttered. Families across the country were feeling real pain Today two years later million Americans have been vaccinated and COVID no longer controls our lives. We have created a record million jobs which constitute the strongest two years of job gains on record Unemployment is at a more than 50-year low with near-record lows for Black and Latino workers and manufacturing jobs have recovered faster than in any business cycle since Growth is up wages are up and inflation is coming down. At the same time a record million Americans have applied to start small businesses each of their applications an act of hope More Americans have health insurance today than ever before in our history and real household wealth is percent above what it was before COVID It is safe to say : Our economic plan is working and American families are starting to have a little more breathing room It is important to remember however that the economic anxiety so many have felt did not start with the pandemic. For decades the backbone of America the middle class has been hollowed out. Too many American jobs have been shipped overseas. Unions have been weakened. Once-thriving cities and towns have become shadows of what they used to be robbing people of hard-earned pride and self-worth I ran for President to rebuild our economy from the bottom up and middle out not from the top down because when the middle class does well the poor have a ladder up and the wealthy still do well. We all do well. And that is what we have been working for. This past year we made critical investments to secure America s future. Together the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law the CHIPS and Science Act and the Inflation Reduction Act represent the biggest public investments in our history expected to draw more than $ trillion in public and private funding for infrastructure the digital economy and clean energy over the next decade First the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law is an investment in America and our competitiveness. You can not be the number one economy in the Economic Report of the President | world unless you have the best infrastructure in the world. That is why this once-in-a-generation law is finally rebuilding our roads bridges railroads ports airports and more to keep our people safe our goods moving and our economy growing. Families across the Nation will have safe drinking water and high-speed Internet. A network of electric vehicle charging stations will allow more of us to drive cleaner cars. To date we have funded over construction projects all across the country creating tens of thousands of well-paying new jobs. Americans everywhere can take pride in seeing shovels in the ground Second the CHIPS and Science Act which I signed in August will make sure that America once again leads the world in developing and manufacturing the semiconductors that power everything from cars to refrigerators to smartphones. The United States invented these chips ; it is time to again manufacture them at home and to make sure our economy never again relies so heavily on foreign chipmakers. Private companies have already announced more than $ billion in new investments in American manufacturing in the last two years many of them thanks to this law creating tens of thousands more jobs of the future in every corner of the country Third the Inflation Reduction Act also enacted last August takes on powerful special interests to cut costs for working families. It lowers health care and prescription drug costs for example capping insulin at $ a month for seniors on Medicare and capping drug costs at $ a year for seniors with Medicare Part D starting in It extends the Affordable Care Act s subsidies saving families an average of $ a year. It also makes the Nation s most significant investment ever in combating the existential threat of climate change investing in everything from climate-smart agriculture to more resilient electric grids. It builds a new clean energy economy creating thousands of green jobs in communities too often left behind while also lowering home energy bills for families Meanwhile my Administration has taken wide-ranging executive actions to help level the playing field and promote competition. From easing the burden of crippling student debt to providing relief to families at the gas pump to cracking down on unfair junk fees we are building an economy that gives everyone a fair shot and a little more breathing room Throughout we have shown that we can invest in our future and be fiscally responsible at the same time. We are helping to pay for these historic programs by finally making the wealthy and corporations pay their fair share without raising taxes on anyone making under $ a year. And we cut the deficit by $ trillion during my first two years in office the largest reduction in history with more to come I have often said that a job is about more than a paycheck ; it is about dignity and respect. This is why we are not only investing in record job growth ; we are also providing historic support for workers and unions at a | Economic Report of the President time of big shifts in our workforce. We plan to ban noncompete agreements for million workers who have been unfairly locked in their jobs giving them the right to be paid what they are worth. We have boosted pay and labor protections for Federal contractors we have pushed to extend these same protections to all workers and we have passed laws to ensure safe and fair workplaces including for pregnant and nursing workers and workers who face sexual assault and harassment on the job. We are investing in job-training programs and registered apprenticeships which give so many people a ladder up to well-paying jobs on which they can raise a family without a college degree Now it is time to finish the job. We have much more to do to build an economy that benefits everyone from cracking down on the deadly fentanyl epidemic and investing in mental health care and recovery to fighting for childcare and paid family leave for millions of working families struggling to care for their loved ones so no one ever again has to choose between the paycheck they need and the family they love Our Nation is at an inflection point that will determine our future for decades to come. But today because of the choices and investments we have made jobs are coming back pride is coming back and the United States of America is better positioned to lead than any other country on Earth Our blue-collar blueprint to rebuild America is proving that democracy can deliver building an economy that is fairer and stronger and leaves no one behind The White House March Economic Report of the President | The Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers Letter of Transmittal Council of Economic Advisers Washington March Mr. President : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits its Annual Report in accordance with the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely yours Cecilia Elena Rouse Chair Jared Bernstein Member Heather Boushey Member Contents Chapter : Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World. Investing in Production Drives Economic Growth. The United States Economic Growth Over Time.. The Inputs to U.S. Economic Growth Over Time. U.S. Economic Growth in Context. Sustaining Economic Growth in Today s Changing World.. Investing in Human Capital and the Labor Supply : Implications of More Women Participating in the Labor Force. Investing in Physical Capital : Adapting to the Increasing Effects of Climate Change.. Investing in the Economy s Productivity : The New World of Digital Markets. Conclusion. Chapter : The Year in Review and the Years Ahead. The Year in Review : The Continuing Recovery. Output in : A Return to Near Its Trend. The Historic Strength of Labor Markets in The Cooling of Financial Markets in Inflation in Factors That Had an Impact on Inflation in The Forecast for the Years Ahead The Near Term The Long Term Conclusion. Chapter : Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships. The United States International Trade and Investment in Pandemic-Related and Macroeconomic Trends Have Shaped Record Goods Imports. Geopolitical Shocks and Global Demand Have Shaped Record Goods Exports.. International Trade in Services and Digital Trade Have Been Resilient Continued Growth for Foreign Direct Investment Despite Elevated Uncertainty Global Economic Relations Are at a Turning Point. Imperatives of Economic Partnerships in the Changing Global Environment. Resilience during Global Supply Shocks. Responding to Geopolitical Challenges. Promoting Opportunity and Managing Risks in Digital Trade Conclusion. Chapter : Investing in Young Children s Care and Education. The Effectiveness of Early Childhood Investments. Benefits for Children and Society. Defining Quality in ECE. Benefits for Working Parents.. Challenges in the Market for Early Care and Education.. Workforce Challenges. The High Costs of High-Quality Care. ECE Pricing and Price-Sensitive Consumers. Business Model Fragility. Participation in and Availability of ECE. The Role of Subsidies in the Market for Care International Comparisons. Subsidies in the United States ECE Market. Conclusion. Chapter : Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions.. The U.S. Postsecondary Institutional Landscape.. | Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers Institutions Serve a Diverse Student Population.. Institutions Vary in Their Prices and Spending on Students.. Institutions Vary in Their Student Outcomes. Institutions Matter for Student Outcomes. The Rationale for and Delivery of Public Postsecondary Investment. The Economic Rationale for Public Sector Investment. How Public Funds Are Delivered : Student Aid and Institutional Support The Imperfect Market for Postsecondary Institutions. Geographic Constraints. Informational and Behavioral Constraints. College Expansion Constraints. Institution-Focused Policies That Promote Access to Postsecondary Value Supporting the Quality of Existing Colleges and Programs.. Institutional Accountability. Addressing Geographic Barriers to Access. Conclusion. Chapter : Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets. Labor Supply Fundamentals. Trends in U.S. Labor Market Participation. Why Worry About Slower Labor Supply Growth ? Causes of U.S. Labor Supply Challenges. Demographic Trends. Declining Labor Market Participation Among Men.. Female Labor Force Participation : The United States Falls Behind. The COVID-19 Pandemic s Lingering Effects on the Labor Supply. Options to Boost the U.S. Labor Supply. Increasing Immigration Drawing More Adults into the Labor Market Conclusion. Contents | Chapter : Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics. The Benefits of Digital Markets. Reducing Search Costs Increased Variety Free Products and Services. How Is Competition Different in Digital Markets ? Big Data. Network Effects. Multi-Homing. When Do Markets Tip ? The Role of Law and Regulation in the Digital Market. Network Effects Create a Competitive Moat.. The Challenge of Preserving Competition in Digital Markets. Preventing the Extension of Dominance into Adjacent Markets.. Preventing the Misuse of Consumer Data. Monitoring Pricing Algorithms and Collusion. Conclusion. Chapter : Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles.. The Perceived Appeal of Crypto Assets. Claim : Crypto Assets Could Be Investment Vehicles. Claim : Cryptocurrencies Could Offer Money-like Functions without Relying on a Single Authority Claim : Crypto Assets Could Enable Fast Digital Payments Claim : Crypto Assets Could Increase Financial Inclusion Claim : Crypto Assets Could Improve the United States Current Financial Technology Infrastructure. The Reality of Crypto Assets. Crypto Assets Are Mostly Speculative Investment Vehicles. Cryptocurrencies Generally Do Not Perform All the Functions of Money as Effectively as Sovereign Money such as the U.S. Dollar Stablecoins Can Be Subject to Run Risk. | Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers Crypto Assets Can Be Harmful to Consumers and Investors. There Have Been Limited Economic Benefits from DLT Technology The Risks of Financial Innovation. Other Risks from Crypto Assets. Investing in the Nation s Digital Financial Infrastructure. The FedNow Instant Payment System. Central Bank Digital Currencies. Conclusion. Chapter : Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate. Economic Principles of Adaptation Policy and Planning. The Economic Costs and Financial Risks of Climate Change in the United States. The Costs of Climate Change for the United States Well-Being and Prosperity.. Climate Change and Financial Stability.. The Federal Fiscal Implications of Physical Climate Risk. Risk Assumption.. Climate-Exposed Assets.. The Provision of National Public Goods The Programs of the Social Safety Net. Market Failures and Distortions That Slow Adaptive Adjustments and Policy Responses.. Imperfect Information on Physical Climate Risks. Information Asymmetries.. Externalities and Public Goods. Credit Constraints. Moral Hazard. Four Potential Pillars of the Federal Adaptation Strategy and Major Policy Opportunities. Producing and Disseminating Knowledge about Climate Risk.297 Long-Term Planning for the Climate Transition.. Ensuring the Accurate Pricing of Climate Risk. Contents | Protecting the Vulnerable. Conclusion. References.. A B | Appendixes Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers during Statistical Tables Relating to Income Employment and Production................................................................................... Figures Average Annual U.S. Real GDP Growth since by Decade and Contributor......................................................................26 Miles of U.S. Railroads U.S. Patents Issued Contributors to U.S. Real GDP Growth U.S. Secondary School Enrollment and Graduation Rates The U.S. Labor Force U.S. Residences with Electricity U.S. Capital Stock Total Factor Productivity Growth GDP per Capita for the United States Argentina and Singapore Woman s Labor Force Participation Rate Percentage of Postsecondary Degrees Received by Women Percentage of Households with a Child under That Have an Adult over Age Years Consumption of Nursing Home and Childcare Services and Women s Labor Force Participation Share of Private Industry Workers with Access to Benefits.............39 Nonparticipation in the Labor Force by Reason..............................41 Carbon Dioxide Levels Over Time....................................................42 Number of Billion-Dollar Natural Disasters in the United States Percentage of Adults Who Report Using the Internet Over Time.....45 The U.S. Economy Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers 2-i 2-ii 2-iii 3-i 3-ii 3-iii GDP and Trend GDP The Period Compared with Previous Business Cycles.....55 Job Openings per Unemployed Person The Beveridge Curve at Two Intervals..............................................60 Stock Market and Bond Prices Types of Consumer Price Inflation The Expectations-Augmented Phillips Curve at Two Intervals.......65 Decomposition of Inflation Global Measures of Consumer Price Inflation..................................67 Supply Chain Pressures and Producer Inflation Commodity Pressures and PCE Inflation Employment Cost Index and Inflation Nominal and Real Measures of the Policy Rate The Composition of the Federal Reserve s Balance Sheet The Fiscal Impulse and Inflation OMB s Primary Deficit Forecast Excess Savings and Inflation Consumer Goods-Services Rotation Actual and Expected Inflation The Evolution of the U.S. Population s Age Composition...............89 Age Labor Force Participation Rate Profiles in Real U.S. Trade in Goods and Services U.S. Trade Balance Real U.S. Services Trade Federal Reserve Board s Real Broad Dollar Index Top Sources of U.S. Goods Imports Top U.S. Goods Export Destinations Real Imports of Consumer Goods Real Imports of Capital Goods ( Excluding Automobiles ) Real Exports of Consumer Goods U.S. Exports of Liquefied Natural Gas and U.S. Exports of Crude Oil and U.S. Trade in Potentially ICT-Enabled Services Real U.S. Outward Foreign Direct Investment by Destination Contents | 3-iv 4-i 4-ii 4-iii 6-i 6-ii | Real U.S. Inward Foreign Direct Investment by Source Real Russian Foreign Direct Investment Net Inflows Return on Investment in Human Capital by Age...........................128 Food Insecurity among Households with Young Children Labor Force Participation Over Time by Maternal Status.............132 Percent Change in Maternal Employment.......................................135 Racial and Gender Breakdown of Employment..............................137 Formal ECE Consumption by Income Level.................................138 Average Annual Expenses for Formal ECE as a Proportion of Income by Income Level.................................................................139 Ratio of Young Children to Childcare Capacity in Ratio of Infants and Toddlers to Childcare Capacity in Excess Demand by Provider Type...................................................144 Reasons Households Face Difficulty Finding Care........................145 Distribution of Enrollment Across Institution Types by Student Characteristics.....................................................................156 Variation in Per-Student Expenditures.............................................157 Variation in Undergraduate Student Outcomes...............................159 Average Public Tuition and Fees and Percentage of Students Receiving Public Financial Aid Bachelor s Degree Programs Distance Between Home and College Per-Student State and Local Funding for Public Higher Education U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate Percentage of Total Projected Population That Is Prime Age Prime-Age versus Overall Labor Force Participation Sources of Annual Income for Prime-Age Workers by Sex and Labor Force Status Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation by Race Prime-Age Female Labor Force Participation Prime-Age Female Labor Force Participation Rate Percent Change in Teacher Employment Growth in Advertising Revenue by Digital Platform Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers 7-i 8-i 8-ii How Data Brokers Aggregate Data from Government Commercial and Publicly Available Sources to Build In-Depth Profiles of Consumers.......................................................219 Network Effects Are Present in Many Markets Not Just Online.........................................................................................221 Completed Acquisitions by Large Tech Firms................................229 A Taxonomy of Digital Assets and Central Bank Money..............239 Market Capitalization of Selected Crypto Assets Payment Types Used in the United States Over Time....................244 Examples of Hashed Output.............................................................247 Blockchain Blocks Linked by Hashed Values of Their Contents....250 Volatility of Crypto Assets versus Certain Traditional Assets Nominal Cyber Insurance Prices Over Time...................................266 Small Changes in Climate Can Greatly Increase the Probability of Extreme Weather Events...........................................276 Count of Policies under U.S. Residual Property Insurance Market with Geographic Breakdown for Governance of Climate Risk Is Complex and Multiscale..............297 Tables Real GDP Growth and Its Components Selected Legislative and Executive Actions in Economic Projections Evolution of Blue Chip Consensus Real GDP Forecast...................86 Supply Side Components of Forecasted Real Output Growth.........88 College Prices and Expenditures by Sector.....................................158 Student Outcomes by Sector............................................................160 Top Ten Crypto Derivative Platforms by Open Interest.................263 Ransomware and Downtime Costs by Country What Is an Aggregate Production Function ? Measures of Consumer Price Inflation..............................................63 The Phillips Curve and Other Models of Inflation...........................68 Aging and Growth..............................................................................89 Effects of the Strengthening U.S. Dollar on the U.S. Economy......96 The United States Top Goods Trading Partners...............................99 Rising Digital Trade and U.S. Labor Markets.................................107 Boxes Contents | | The United States New Approach to Economic Partnerships....... Coordination Has Been Critical for the Success of the Sanctions Policy toward Russia....................................................... The U.S.-EU Energy Partnership Diminishes Russia s Leverage.. U.S. Digital Trade Initiatives............................................................121 Nutrition Support in Early Childhood.............................................130 The American Rescue Plan and Support for Childcare..................135 Who Works in ECE ? Federal ECE Investments.................................................................148 New Data and New Methods to Inform Investments in Children...149 The Private and Public Benefits of College....................................164 International Comparison of Income-Driven Student Loan Repayment.........................................................................................168 Policies Focused on Direct Institutional Support............................175 Gainful Employment and Other Accountability Regulations.........177 Supporting Workforce Training Quality..........................................179 Labor Supply Terminology...............................................................185 Work and Leisure in the United States and Europe........................187 Deaths of Despair in the United States............................................188 On What Income Do Jobless Men Live ? The Missing Prime-Age Workers.....................................................200 A Critical Shortfall of Nurses and Physicians.................................202 Staffing Challenges in K-12 Education...........................................203 The Societal Implications of Digital Markets.................................216 Consumer Data as a Business Model..............................................219 Glossary for Describing Digital Markets.........................................222 International and Subnational Efforts at Regulatory Reform.........231 Artificial Intelligence and Digital Markets......................................232 What Are the Functions of Money ? How Does Bitcoin Work ? Crypto Asset Mining as a Risk to the Environment........................253 Proposed Uses of Distributed Ledger Technology..........................259 Adaptation and Resilience Investments of the Biden-Harris Administration...................................................................................278 Climate Change Will Most Likely Interact with and Exacerbate Existing Inequalities......................................................281 Disaster Insurance in the Changing Climate : Challenges and Opportunities for Reform..........................................................286 Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisers Chapter Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World Economists often tout the value of economic growth. They argue that as the size of the economic pie the value of all goods and services produced in a year increases everyone can get a larger slice of it making them better off. Of course growth is not the only economic goal a society may prioritize. Many societies also have notions of fairness and justice such as lower poverty and inequality so they are attentive to how the slices of the pie are shared. That said sustained economic growth is an important priority for most societies and over long swaths of history is an indispensable driver of improvement in human well-being Economic growth is constrained however when the size of the economy reaches what economists call potential gross domestic product ( GDP ) or capacity. An economy s long-run capacity depends on such factors as a growing and skilled labor force high-quality physical infrastructure and the efficiency of the production process. Actions that affect any of these factors can either constrain or enhance the capacity of the economy over time. Investing in increased economic capacity enables the economy to accommodate more demand in the medium to long run which can make it more resilient to economic shocks and minimize the risk of inflationary episodes. The core of the Biden-Harris Administration s economic agenda is building a foundation for steady sustainable and shared growth by increasing economic capacity Over the last years the United States social and economic context has changed leading to both opportunities and challenges for increasing economic capacity. This has been for a variety of reasons but three important ones are worth noting. First women have surpassed men in educational attainment and they joined the labor force in historic numbers through the late 1990s though there has been a slowdown in their labor force participation gains in recent years. Women s increased participation and thus an increase in the size of the labor force generally helped drive economic growth in the second half of the 20th century. At the same time a lack of public investment in care has challenged workers especially working women with caregiving responsibilities Second soaring carbon emissions in the second half of the 20th century have exacerbated global warming and the resulting climate change will increasingly become a barrier to economic growth without effective adaptation Interrelated with the climate crisis the damage to ecosystems continues to accelerate creating significant risks for businesses and the wider economy ( World Economic Forum ) Third computers have entered virtually all aspects of life and can now perform tasks that previously were thought not able to be automated. The Internet has changed how people find information learn do business and communicate with one another. These changes have spurred growth and helped some industries weather economic shocks like the COVID-19 pandemic better than they otherwise would have. But they have also raised important issues about how established economic policy can and should adapt to the new digital world To expand the potential growth of the U.S. economy policymakers need to adjust how the Nation invests in response to these kinds of changes. This year s Report highlights selected areas where the changing economic and social context calls for a new approach to increasing the capacity for economic growth. The Report discusses how the relevant context in these areas has changed analyzes pressing current challenges to sustained economic growth and highlights potential strategies to confront these challenges | Chapter Investing in Production Drives Economic Growth The inputs to sustained economic growth can be understood through the lens of an aggregate production function which is explained in box According to such a function an economy s output depends on its stock of human and physical capital as well as on a productivity factor that summarizes how efficiently workers machines and other types of inputs are put to use. Thus sustained output growth relies on continuing private and public investments in the economy s workforce physical capital and productivity ( Mankiw ) In general well-functioning markets incentivize households and firms to make investments that expand the economy even when these households and firms do not have the larger economy in mind as they make their individual decisions. For example a high school graduate who anticipates enhanced career opportunities from attaining a higher degree will likely pursue a college education. A firm that wants to grow but is having trouble hiring may invest in making its workplace more attractive to potential employees or pursue a management strategy to improve the efficiency of its existing workforce. These decisions are made independently throughout the economy without considering their effect on aggregate production yet they jointly increase total economic capacity and growth Unlike the private sector the public sector is designed to invest in the economy with explicit consideration of the aggregate context. This is reflected in the types of investments it should ideally make many of which are aimed at markets overall efficient functioning. The public sector operates the basic institutions that enforce the rule of law and property rights and thus enable households and firms to engage in the complex market system. It is also tasked with promoting competition and preventing socially destructive profit-seeking behavior ensuring the stability of the financial infrastructure that greases the economy and representing the interests of the U.S. economy in negotiating terms of trade with the rest of the world In addition when the private sector underinvests the public sector can step in to invest in human and physical capital. Private underinvestment occurs for various reasons but often entails some combination of coordination failure externalities and credit constraints. For example although virtually all firms benefit directly or indirectly from having functional roads running across the United States it would be nearly impossible for them to coordinate a plan of action to build them. Compared with what would be best for society firms tend to underinvest in the use of clean energy because they do not bear the full burden of the cost of pollution ( costs are externalized ) And information asymmetries in private credit markets can make it difficult for some entrepreneurs to access funding for upfront investments Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | Box What Is an Aggregate Production Function ? An aggregate production function summarizes the process whereby an economy transforms inputs into goods and services. Consider a tomato farmer. She needs the input of labor workers to run and maintain her farm ; the input of human capital the education training skills health and other valuable resources embodied in a person to know how to plant raise and harvest the tomatoes ; and the input of physical capital raw materials like seeds along with harvesting and hydration equipment The farmer uses these inputs to produce tomatoes as her output. Some of these tomatoes will be sold to consumers at the grocery store or at farmers markets as final goods ; others will themselves become inputs into different products like ketchup and pizza sauce. When all the individual production functions like this farmer s are combined in an economy the result is an aggregate production function which gives the aggregate output of the entire economy resulting from all its inputs Aggregate output increases when there are more workers with in-demand skills when these workers work more hours and when they have access to more and better facilities and equipment to help them effectively perform their jobs. Physical capital also captures the broader infrastructure of roads bridges and broadband that allows goods services and information to move throughout the economy ; note that this infrastructure is often public An economy also grows when it becomes more efficient at combining labor and capital to produce output that is when it can produce more output with the same amount of inputs. Economists call this total factor productivity. In the tomato farmer example agricultural innovations such as better farm management techniques including crop rotation have enabled farmers to grow tomatoes more easily When total factor productivity grows output increases even if an economy s inputs labor human capital and physical capital are kept constant because the economy becomes more efficient at using these inputs Economists tend to discuss total factor productivity in shorthand as technology ; but in reality total factor productivity has many different drivers and constraints beyond what one might typically think of as technology. For instance culture and norms can have a substantial impact on output ( Guiso Sapienza and Zingales ) And corruption holds back economic growth not just by disincentivizing investment in human and physical capital but also by decreasing the amount of economic growth that an economy sees from a given amount of human and physical capital ( Mauro ) Summarizing aggregate production as a function of physical capital human capital and total factor productivity is a useful abstraction that provides a framework to understand differences in economic | Chapter activity across time and countries. For certain questions it makes sense to extend the basic model. One increasingly relevant extension is explicitly to include natural capital the stock of water land air and renewable and nonrenewable resources as a distinct production factor in addition to built or produced physical capital. In the example given above factors such as soil quality and quantity climate irrigation water and the populations of insect pollinators provide important contributions to the tomato farmer s output production. As natural capital becomes an increasingly important driver of variation in economic activity due to climate change more questions will benefit from a direct inclusion of natural capital. Indeed the Biden-Harris Administration recently launched a multiyear effort to put nature on the nation s balance sheet for the first time ( White House ) in their businesses even when those investments promise private and social returns in the future resulting in credit constraints The United States Economic Growth Over Time The last two centuries have seen remarkable gains in material well-being around the world driven by rapid output growth. The United States is an excellent example of a country that has experienced this economic transformation Estimates of historical output suggest that in the United States was not even among the world s largest economies ( Groningen Growth and Development Centre n.d. ) But its rapid growth ever since averaging about percent a year between and has turned the United States into the world s largest economy in nominal terms. Figure decomposes U.S. economic growth since Total output can be mechanically separated into ( ) labor supply ( how many workers there are ) which in turn depends both on population size and labor force participation and ( ) how much average output these workers produce. Output per worker reflects the growth drivers other than labor supply mentioned above : human capital physical capital and total factor productivity This decomposition of economic growth highlights how the relative importance of the American workforce s size versus its productivity in driving growth has changed over time. Productivity-driven economic growth is ultimately what spurs sustained growth in output per capita which better reflects how growth translates into improved living standards for individuals. In the first half of the 19th century aggregate growth was driven mainly by the country s increasing population and by its larger workforce. This Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | Figure Average Annual U.S. Real GDP Growth since by Decade and Contributor Percent average annual growth over the period ( Note : Decomposition not available in the 1790s ) Post Civil War boom World War II / postwar boom Rise in women 's LFPR Output per worker Reflects human capital physical capital and TFP Total growth 1950s 1960s 1970s 1920s 1930s 1940s 1890s 1900s 1910s 1850s 1860s 1870s 1880s 1820s 1830s 1840s Civil War / Emancipation 1790s 1800s 1810s Population Aging of baby boomers 1980s 1990s 2000s Reflects labor supply Labor force participation Sources : Weiss ; Lebergott ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Census Bureau ; CEA calculations Note : LFPR = labor force participation rate ; TFP = total factor productivity implied comparatively more limited gains in material well-being for the average person. In contrast aggregate growth in the 20th century was driven mostly by an increasingly productive workforce and thus translated more directly into higher individual output and incomes Productivity-driven output growth in the United States has been the result of private and targeted public investment in the skills of its workforce its equipment and infrastructure and the technologies that enable its workers to most efficiently use their skills Two decades in particular the 1870s and 1940s stand out for having the highest average growth in American history. These decades serve as case studies for some of the factors that drive economic expansion Economic historians sometimes mark the 1870s as the start of a period of advancement called the Second Industrial Revolution ( e.g. DeLong ) Some of the investments during this decade were made to repair the infrastructure that had been damaged or destroyed during the Civil War. But investment in the 1870s went well beyond replacement. In on the eve of the Civil War there were about miles of railroads in operation in the United States. By this had increased to miles ; and by to miles ( see figure ) In Western Union operated about miles of telegraph wires and handled just under million messages annually. Ten years later it had doubled the mileage of its wires and was handling more than three times the number of telegraph messages ( Carter et al. series Dg and Dg11 ) And this surge in investment in the 1870s was not limited to physical infrastructure but also extended | Chapter Figure Miles of U.S. Railroads Miles operated thousands Source : Carter et al. series Df874 to ideas. The United States issued roughly patents for inventions between and ; the next decade it issued about ( see figure ) Moreover the Nation s labor supply grew strongly during the 1870s : the U.S. labor force was about percent larger in than it was in thanks both to natural population growth and immigration ( Migration Policy Institute n.d. ) In comparison the labor force grew by a total of percent between and The expansion of physical capital and ideas combined with the increasing labor force corresponded with strong growth in the 1870s and beyond Like the 1870s the 1940s came on the heels of a catastrophe in this case the Great Depression. However growth in the 1940s was less about an increase in the labor supply given that the labor force grew at about half the rate it did in the 1870s. Instead growth in the 1940s was driven by a combination of public investment and greater utilization of a labor force with a high unemployment rate at the start of the decade : although unemployment had fallen substantially from its peak of percent in it was still at an elevated rate of percent ( Carter et al. series Ba475 ) The United States entry into World War II accelerated this growth The number of active-duty military personnel grew from just over in to million by the war s end in ( National World War II This series treats workers participating in Federal emergency New Deal programs like the Works Progress Administration and Civilian Conservation Corps as employed ; official labor market statistics which were still in their infancy at the time classified these workers as unemployed. Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | Figure U.S. Patents Issued Patents issued for inventions thousands Source : Carter et al. series Cg30 Museum n.d. ) This mobilization in combination with increased private hiring ( driven itself in large part by wartime government orders ) pushed the unemployment rate down to percent by and expanded women s labor force participation ( Acemoglu Autor and Lyle ; Carter et al series Ba475 ; National Archives n.d. ) Public investment in physical capital also skyrocketed. The Federal Government s gross investment rose from $ billion in to $ billion in ( inflation-adjusted ) Growth in government consumption and investment was responsible for adding percentage points to real GDP growth in and an astounding percentage points in ( see figure ) The end of the war did not mean a return to the prewar economy of the 1930s that was characterized by high unemployment and depressed output Demobilization led to a mild recession in as the United States began shifting away from the wartime economy and the unemployment rate crept back up in the years after the war. But it did not return to its prewar levels of percent and above ( Carter et al. series Ba475 ) Even as Federal investment retreated in the years following World War II private investment picked up. Between and real Federal defense investment fell by $ billion ( in dollars ) But real private fixed investment rose by $ billion over that same period and real personal consumption was $ billion higher. Indeed increased private This is measured in inflation-adjusted dollars | Chapter Figure Contributors to U.S. Real GDP Growth Percentage points annual real GDP growth Personal consumption Private investment Net exports Government Total Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis investment and consumption were even able to substantially offset the massive 29-percentage-point deduction to GDP growth from the postwar demobilization in ( see figure ) Government investments during World War II helped pave the way for private investments that sustained renewed economic growth throughout the latter half of the 20th century ( Goodwin ) The Inputs to U.S. Economic Growth Over Time The economic growth of the United States over the last two centuries would not have happened without investments in the labor force the physical capital stock and total factor productivity. The previous pages of this section discussed what some of these investments looked like during two key rapid-growth decades : after the Civil War and around World War II This subsection steps back and considers each of these factors over a wider span of American history highlighting key public and private investments for each one and discussing selected available measures of how they have evolved over time The labor force. Over the past years both public and private actors have invested in the skills and size of the labor force. Consider the key input of education. For centuries the United States has been a world leader in public education. Beginning in the 1700s American communities began to establish publicly funded or free schools along with land grants Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | to support the creation and maintenance of schools ( Kober and Rentner ) Over time an array of private and nonprofit institutions including private schools universities and vocational training programs have also become integral to the U.S. educational landscape. Investments in education transformed the skills of American workers. In the first several decades of the 20th century the United States underwent what is now termed the high school movement ( see figure ) ; between and the share of those age years with a high school diploma ( from a private or public institution ) rose by over percentage points ( Goldin and Katz ) However progress has at times been uneven ; segregation and other forms of race and gender discrimination in the education system have presented barriers to educational attainment for women and people of color The U.S. labor force has also grown from roughly million workers in to over million today with particularly rapid growth in the second half of the 20th century although there has been a gradual decline in the growth rate since the 1980s ( see figure ) The physical capital stock. Investment has also focused on physical capital and productivity. This has included investments by the public sector such as under the Rural Electrification Act of which provided loans to farmers and investors to expand electricity to rural communities with remarkable results as depicted in figure ( Sablik ) Later in the 20th century the United States built out the Interstate Highway System which is often described as one of the greatest public works projects in history Figure U.S. Secondary School Enrollment and Graduation Rates Percent Enrollment Graduation Sources : U.S. Department of Education ; Goldin and Katz ; CEA calculations Note : Graduation data were reported every years before ; some years are missing after | Chapter ( Capka ; Pfeiffer ) In parallel with the public sector s investments the private sector has invested in physical capital such as by constructing Figure The U.S. Labor Force Millions Sources : Weiss ; Carter et al. series ba1-10 ; Census Bureau ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Figure U.S. Residences with Electricity Percent Rural Electrification Act Urban and rural nonfarm Farm Sources : U.S. Census Bureau table S ; Sablik Note : Data on the percentage of dwelling units with electric service in urban and rural nonfarm settings are only available every five years Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | factories farms and office buildings in gross private domestic investment exceeded $ trillion ( FRED ) Public and private investments have combined to facilitate the continued growth of the Nation s capital stock over the past century as highlighted in figure ( The capital stock includes physical capital ranging from trucks to houses to software to roads. ) Total factor productivity. As discussed above total factor productivity is the most amorphous input into economic growth. It captures many aspects from technological innovation to the quality of institutions that promote competition and the efficient allocation of scarce resources Consequently historical public and private investment in total factor productivity is multifaceted and not always straightforward to measure. For example one paper estimates that between and percent of growth in aggregate output per person in the United States between and can be explained by improved talent allocation brought on by reduced discrimination and changing preferences among Black and white women and Black men ( Hsieh et al. ) The Civil Rights Act of likely contributed to this reduced discrimination and thus in addition to rectifying long-standing injustices it functioned as an investment in the economy. But this type of investment is difficult to quantify given that it is concurrent with broader social change Figure U.S. Capital Stock Trillions of dollars Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations | Chapter Other forms of investment are more tangible such as investments in research and development. The United States is consistently one of the top spenders on research and development ( OECD 2022a ) The majority of this spending comes from the private sector but the public sector also plays an important role especially in funding basic research ( Burke Okrent and Hale ) The information technology revolution exemplifies the complementary roles of public and private investment in the economy. The government played an essential role in developing groundbreaking technologies such as the Internet and the Global Positioning System. These early-stage investments were arguably too risky for any private firm to undertake ( Mazzucato ) But it was the private sector that transformed these base technologies into the market-oriented ones that have shaped the way people work and live Unlike the number of workers or the stock of physical capital the return on these investments can not be measured directly. However economists can infer that total factor productivity is changing when total output changes more or less than would be expected based on observed changes in the labor force and the physical capital stock. That is a greater-than-expected increase in total output suggests that total factor productivity has increased whereas a smaller-than-expected increase suggests that it has decreased Figure shows total factor productivity growth in the United States since In the short term productivity growth fluctuates considerably Figure Total Factor Productivity Growth Percent annual growth five-year moving average Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | partly because it can only be inferred from other measurements. Still there are some notable trends over time. The postwar decades were marked by relatively high productivity growth before a notable slowdown in the 1970s and through the mid-1990s. Productivity growth picked up again into the 2000s but it fell during the Great Recession. The decade of slow productivity growth in the 2010s was common to most advanced economies and it is still not fully understood ( Dieppe ) U.S. Economic Growth in Context Although economic growth in the United States over the past years has led to enormous gains in material well-being and life expectancy and has given the United States an economic and political leadership role on the global stage it can not be taken for granted. For example in the 1800s the United States GDP per capita was about percent larger than that of Argentina. But faster average U.S. GDP growth starting in the second half of the 20th century caused the two countries to diverge further and today U.S. GDP per capita is about three times as large as Argentina s ( figure ) Singapore conversely experienced slower growth for much of the 20th century before growing rapidly more quickly than the United States beginning in the 1960s ; the country s GDP per capita is now above that of the United States Figure GDP per Capita for the United States Argentina and Singapore Log scale real GDP per capita dollars United States Source : Groningen Growth and Development Centre n.d Note : Missing values are interpolated | Chapter Argentina Singapore Economies have diverged widely in modern history and though there have been various factors in this divergence both public and private institutions and economic policies are a central part of the story Indeed Argentina and Singapore are telling case studies in this regard The Argentine economy accelerated in the late 1800s thanks to immigration exports and foreign investment. However productivity and economic growth in the country stagnated in the 20th century in the context of the Great Depression and political instability beginning with the military coup in ( Spruk ) Singapore s economic growth conversely is generally considered an example of successful economic policy. The rapid rise of Singapore and the other East Asian Tigers has been attributed to a set of common market-friendly economic policies that targeted macroeconomic stability public infrastructure and education and export orientation ( World Bank ; Lee ) Sustaining Economic Growth in Today s Changing World The preceding discussion highlighted the importance of past and continued private and public investments in the U.S. economy. Many of these historical investments remain relevant today. The Nation must continue to make investments to ensure access to high-quality education from childhood through adulthood ; to maintain its physical infrastructure ; and to ensure that markets remain fair and competitive However these investments are not being made in a vacuum. They are influenced by changes in society and the economy that have an impact on the need for and value of different kinds of investments in human and physical capital as well as in total factor productivity. Sometimes the private sector adapts quickly and well to these changes ; other times the public sector needs to spur private investment and provide the necessary guardrails to protect individuals and the U.S. economic system Investing in Human Capital and the Labor Supply : Implications of More Women Participating in the Labor Force Millions of American women entered the labor force in the latter half of the 20th century with substantial implications for society economic growth and public policy. Between and U.S. women s labor force participation rose from roughly percent to percent ( figure ) Although this overall trend masks important differences in levels of participation by dimensions such as race age income and family status virtually all groups of women saw large participation gains over these decades This period has been termed the Quiet Revolution by the economist Claudia Goldin who has identified turning points in the late 1960s and early Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | Figure Women s Labor Force Participation Rate Percent Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics 1970s in the marriage age college graduation rate and extent of professional school enrollment for women along with the gradual lifting of some discriminatory barriers for women shifts in social norms for women s family and career decisions and factors accounting for women s life satisfaction ( Goldin ) Thus Goldin attributes the increase in women s labor force participation to many factors such as reduced labor market discrimination against women and women s increased choice in making reproductive decisions through the invention dissemination and legalization of the birth control pill In addition to women s labor force participation women s educational attainment increased drastically relative to men s. Today women earn the majority of bachelor s master s and doctoral degrees ( figure ) The economic consequences of these trends are significant. Using a methodology similar to the one used in the Economic Report of the President updated CEA calculations indicate that the U.S. economy was almost percent larger in than it would have been without the increase in women s employment and hours worked from to ( Council of Economic Advisers ) However starting in about women s labor force participation plateaued and began to decline. Men for their part have also seen a multidecade decline in participation although they continue to participate at a higher rate than women. Removing barriers to women s and men s participation and educational attainment would ease labor constraints on firms | Chapter Figure Percentage of Postsecondary Degrees Received by Women Percent Bachelor s Master s Doctoral Source : U.S. Department of Education National Center for Education Statistics Note : The dashed line indicates percent. Doctoral degrees include all doctoral degrees including M.D. J.D. and Ph.D that want to open or expand boost long-run economic growth and increase prosperity One factor affecting labor force participation particularly for women is household community and care responsibilities. Before entering the labor force in large numbers women had long provided a large share of unpaid work in their homes and communities including household maintenance tasks raising children caring for elder family members and volunteering for community projects work typically not captured in economic measures like GDP. Today women working outside the home continue to disproportionately undertake these tasks ; one recent study found that in heterosexual marriages even when women s wages are more than double those of their spouses women do percent more household work ( Siminski and Yetsenga ) At the same time in recent decades the aging of the so-called baby boom generation ( people born roughly between and ) and reduced fertility rates have increased the demand for senior care while constraining the supply of younger workers. The ratio of people age and above to the number of people age to sometimes called the old-age dependency ratio has more than doubled during the past seven decades. This has contributed to increased demand for care from adult children creating the so-called sandwich generation of people who have care responsibilities for both older Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | and younger family members ( figure ) In and more than million parents of children under also provided senior care including nearly million mothers ( BLS ) Women s shift into the labor force and demographic changes were associated with an increased demand for paid workers to provide what was previously unpaid labor particularly caring for young children and older or disabled adults ( figure ) These care workers are often paid very low wages and are disproportionately women particularly women of color To meet care needs in recent years multiple States and cities have passed legislation to provide paid family and medical leave for workers ( National Partnership ) Additionally private firms have increasingly provided paid family and medical leave remote work adjustments and other benefits to help workers balance their care and work responsibilities ( figure ) However the lack of a national paid family and medical leave program of adequate affordable child care and of Federal labor laws to guarantee flexibilities for workers with care responsibilities has limited the ability for caregivers especially women to remain in the labor force The actions of the private sector have not been enough to meet the scale of the problem. Inequality in who has access to these benefits means that workers in the top percent of the wage distribution are nearly eight times as likely as the lowest-paid workers to have access to paid family leave and more than four times as likely to have access to childcare through their work ( BLS 2022a ) Low-wage and hourly workers can particularly struggle to Figure Percentage of Households with a Child under That Have an Adult over Age Years Percent Sources : Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations | Chapter Figure Consumption of Nursing Home and Childcare Services and Women s Labor Force Participation Percentage of GDP Percent Consumption of nursing home and childcare services ( left axis ) Women s labor force participation ( right axis ) Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Figure Share of Private Industry Workers with Access to Benefits Percent Paid family leave Childcare Flexible workplace Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics manage work and care responsibilities due to limited workplace flexibilities such as fair and predictable scheduling. Although data are limited evidence suggests that the market and public sector underprovide both childcare and senior care. For example the CEA s analysis of the National Survey of Early Care and Education indicates that nearly three-quarters of childcare centers are experiencing excess demand ( i.e. have a waiting list or reject children due to limited capacity ) Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | There are many reasons that the care industry has not been able to evolve to meet current needs. Among other issues even as other service-providing industries have benefited from productivity-enhancing technological advances the care industry has not ; it still takes roughly as many people to watch children today as it did years ago and the cost of childcare has risen in part due to increases in provider wages ( although they are still quite low ) Between and the price of childcare rose by percent while the median household income rose by roughly percent. In addition because families face liquidity constraints like the inability to borrow against future income they are often unable to afford the childcare that best meets their needs These challenges have a negative impact on labor force participation particularly for women. In percent of women between the age of and said that they were not in the labor force because they were caring for their home or family representing roughly percent of all the primeage women not working. While some women may prefer providing family care to participating in the labor force research suggests that for others the cost of care limits their choices. Studies indicate that government policies that reduce the costs of care can strengthen participation particularly for women ( Morrissey ; Shen ) But relative to its peers the United States provides few policies that could help families meet these care needs such as paid family and medical leave and childcare investments an observation researchers often make when discussing trends in U.S. female labor force participation ( Blau and Kahn ) Whereas in the participation rate among women age to in the United States exceeded the rate in Canada the United Kingdom Japan Australia and the European Union in recent years the United States has experienced lower women s participation than Canada the United Kingdom Japan Australia and the European Union ( OECD 2022b ) Further care responsibilities affect men s participation in the economy along with women s particularly as gender norms evolve ( figure ) In percent of men between the age of and said they did not work due to home or family responsibilities up from percent in Subsidizing care for families while simultaneously investing in the supply of childcare would likely increase the overall number of workers who are able to enter the workforce and thus facilitate economic growth The Baumol-Bowen cost disease is what economists call this tendency for wages and costs to rise in industries that see smaller productivity gains in response to increases in wages and costs from industries that have seen larger productivity gains ( Maiello ) | Chapter Figure Nonparticipation in the Labor Force by Reason Percentage of prime-age people Men Disability Men Retirements School enrollment Women Home/family care Women Something else Sources : Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations Investing in Physical Capital : Adapting to the Increasing Effects of Climate Change Physical capital is the next important input for economic growth. The kinds and quantities of physical capital needed are in a constant state of flux. For much of human history infrastructure was designed around animal power such as horses. In the 19th century infrastructure began shifting to railroads while the 20th century saw rapid shifts toward infrastructure for automobiles and airplanes. Although much of the transportation infrastructure built in the 20th century remains useful today the 21st century has seen massive investments in network infrastructure to allow for faster and more reliable communications and Internet access At the same time the large and growing effects of climate change pose a significant broad-based risk for physical capital. Over the past century the level of carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) in the air has risen drastically ( figure ) In atmospheric CO2 concentration surpassed parts per million for the first time in recorded history ( Blunden ) In it averaged nearly parts per million ( Lan Tans and Thoning ) Climate models find that the increased level of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is in turn responsible for rising sea levels hotter weather and more common and severe extreme weather events trends that are predicted to continue even with an ambitious reduction of greenhouse gas emissions Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | Figure Carbon Dioxide Levels Over Time Parts per million level level Highest historical CO level Thousands of years relative to ( = ) Source : L thi et al. Note : Data come from reconstructions from ice cores The economic damage from climate change has already begun to accrue and have an impact on communities around the globe. Some of these types of damage emerge in human capital : beyond the effects on human health ( e.g. Carleton et al. ) researchers have documented the effects of climate change on migration flows ( Missirian and Schlenker ; Jessoe Manning and Taylor ) violent crime ( Ranson ) labor productivity ( Graff Zivin and Neidell ) and learning ( Park et al ; Park Behrer and Goodman ) However this damage has also been observed in physical capital. In the United States the damage from billion-dollar disasters ( see figure ) now averages roughly $ billion a year ( Smith ) Costs from rising extreme weather are being driven both by the changing climate and by rapid development in risky areas ( Climate Central and Zillow ; Iglesias et al. ) Climate change has been found to affect crop yields and agricultural productivity and increasingly frequent heat waves will likely exacerbate increasing strain on electrical grids ( Woetzel et al. ; Auffhammer Baylis and Hausman ) Instability due to climate change is expected to cause new systemic risks for financial markets ( Financial Stability Oversight Council ; Brunetti et al. ) In insurance markets extreme weather events are driving higher payouts which can raise premiums and reduce insurance availability ( Lara ; Botzen van den Bergh and Bouwer ) Large disasters could cause insurance companies to fail altogether as seen after Hurricane Andrew s $ billion in property damage in and along the Gulf | Chapter Figure Number of Billion-Dollar Natural Disasters in the United States Number of billion-dollar natural disasters Droughts Floods Tropical cyclones Severe storms Freezes Wildfires Winter storms Source : NCEI Note : Disaster costs are adjusted for inflation using the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers Coast after more recent hurricane strikes ( Gelzinis and Steele ; Elliott ) Even if markets continue to adapt to past experiences rising climate uncertainty may increase the risks of future failures as unanticipated costs rise for insurance companies These effects of climate change have important consequences for physical capital and will likely require adaptation by institutions from insurance and financial markets to construction firms energy producers and the government. To lessen the economic damage of climate change these institutions and many other actors throughout the global economy will need to quickly transition away from fossil fuels and emit fewer greenhouse gases ( known as mitigation ) They will also need to protect physical capital from damage ( adaptation ) such as by building resilient infrastructure employing nature-based solutions to improve resilience in the face of more frequent extreme weather events and shifting new investments away from high-risk areas. The scale and timing of climate change have led many researchers to conclude that both mitigation and adaptation are necessary ( IPCC ) Adaptation measures may range from actions on the individual level like raising the foundations of houses to accommodate rising sea levels and changing agricultural cropping practices to community-level actions like building seawalls and expanding reservoirs capacities to deal with more variable rainfall Climate change is also expected to alter the productivity and value of different forms of capital in complex ways. The existing infrastructure Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | which was designed for older climate conditions may underperform in these new conditions. For instance major hydropower dams in the Southwest may soon cease being able to produce electricity because of the decades-long drought ( Ramirez ; Partlow ; Kao et al. ) In contrast other forms of capital may become more valuable. Existing sea-walls and riverine flood defenses provide greater value in the face of the changing climate that is increasing coastal and inland flooding risks. Additionally with the rise of clean energy technologies some resources like the Sun and wind have acquired new value and have become important kinds of capital. For example though societies have used windmills for centuries wind has only become a widely used source of electric power in the last few decades as technological advances have met the energy needs in a changing climate Climate change is already reducing and will very likely continue to reduce growth in GDP ( Burke Hsiang and Miguel ; Newell Prest and Sexton ; Kalkuhl and Wenz ) ; this type of harm could be reduced with greater investment in adaptation. A recent summary of the literature from the Council of Economic Advisers and the Office of Management and Budget ( ) shows substantial variation in the estimates of the impact of global warming on U.S. GDP. For example the Congressional Budget Office estimates that climate change will reduce the average annual GDP growth rate by percentage point from to ( Herrnstadt and Dinan ) which implies that the level of U.S GDP would be just under percent lower by whereas a study by the Bank of England ( ) finds that climate damage could reduce U.S. GDP by over percent by in a worse-than-expected scenario. These estimates only capture a fraction of climate change costs however since many effects such as increasing mortality risk and ecosystem disruption are not fully reflected in market transactions or GDP estimates ( Rennert et al. ; Bastien-Olvera and Moore ) By one estimate more than half of global GDP is moderately or highly dependent on nature which is being lost or dramatically altered by human activity ( World Economic Forum ) Investing in the Economy s Productivity : The New World of Digital Markets Rapid advances in information technology in recent decades have had a substantial impact on how Americans work and live. Computer and information technology occupations now account for percent of all employment in the United States and the Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) projects that the number of these jobs will increase by percent over the next decade ( BLS 2022b ) Moreover other occupations that are not explicitly computerrelated increasingly also rely on strong digital skills ( Muro et al. ) | Chapter The spread of computer use is not limited to the workplace. In percent of households had a computer at home ; by this share had climbed to percent ( File ; U.S. Census Bureau ) More recently information technology has been applied to traditionally analog devices telephones cars watches and the like in what is sometimes referred to as the Internet of Things ( Armstrong ) Figure shows how rapidly Internet use has expanded in recent decades with almost all adults using the Internet in compared with just over half in New technology is changing the way people interact with each other both in markets and socially. Online sales now account for percent of total retail sales more than doubling their share over the last decade ( U.S. Census Bureau ) Most job seekers now look for jobs online ( Hernandez ) And people increasingly connect with each other on digital social media platforms to exchange ideas and information. The largest such platform Facebook counted billion monthly active users as of December ( U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ) Through the lens of the aggregate production function the contribution of recent technological advances to economic growth has been twofold First it has increased the physical capital stock of the American economy The fall in the cost of computing power and the more recent rise of machine learning and artificial intelligence have led to a proliferation of computers in workspaces and robots in factories which are helping workers specialize Figure Percentage of Adults Who Report Using the Internet Over Time Percent Source : Pew Research Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | in tasks for which they have the greatest comparative advantage like bigpicture strategizing designing products and interacting with consumers Second at least in theory recent technological advances have increased total factor productivity by enabling new production processes and making the allocation of resources more efficient. Indeed increased investments in computers and software arguably played a substantial role in the fast productivity growth of the late 1990s and early 2000s ( Weller ) The economic benefits of broadband Internet access for example have been widely accepted. One study comparing countries that belonged to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development between and found that a 10-percentage-point increase in broadband penetration increased per capita economic growth by to percentage points ( Czernich et al. ) In the United States specifically one study of the expansion of broadband access between and estimates that ubiquitous broadband access within a county would increase that county s employment rate by percentage points compared with no broadband access ( Atasoy ) And when the COVID-19 pandemic prevented many Americans from participating in in-person work and school new online technologies enabled people to continue learning and working The practical importance of the productivity effect of more recent developments in machine learning and artificial intelligence remains a topic of debate however especially because the last decade saw the slowest productivity growth in the post World War II era ( according to CEA calculations using BLS data ) One viewpoint is that recent innovations in technology have been more incremental and not as groundbreaking as previous technological changes ( Gordon ) Other scholars in contrast have argued that traditional output measures fail to capture the full value of these new innovations and that their productivity gains will materialize in time ( Brynjolfsson and Petropoulos ) In addition to the direct effects of those technological advances on output growth policymakers are paying increased attention to the more indirect ways that these advances are affecting the structure of the U.S. economy For example blockchain technology has fueled the rise of financially innovative digital assets that have proven to be highly volatile and subject to fraud ( White House ) The Internet and other new technologies have allowed for the provision of digital services increasing the ability of people to perform and access services remotely which affects trade given that technological advances make it easier for countries to import and export services than in the past. Additionally technological advances have raised distributional concerns both in terms of access and their usage. Black Hispanic and lower-income Americans are less likely to have home access to a computer and broadband and the opportunities that those technologies provide ( Pew Research Center 2021b 2021c ) And artificial intelligence | Chapter has been argued to deepen racial and economic inequities by perpetuating discrimination in areas such as housing the criminal justice system or mortgage lending ( ACLU ) Addressing these areas of concern often draws on the traditional tools of policymakers in new contexts. For example policymakers have focused on the high level of market concentration in the digital economy. Economic theory has long seen market power and monopolization as threats to productivity and output growth. The digital economy broadly capturing the platforms that facilitate the online exchange of goods and information is characterized by high levels of concentration where markets are often dominated by a small set of firms ( Digital Competition Expert Panel ) This concentration can be the result of the economic fundamentals of these platforms whose scale can produce value for participants. Inherently many of these markets exhibit some form of network externality. For example buyers and sellers on an e-commerce platform are generally better off when more sellers and buyers are on the same platform The economics underlying the susceptibility of digital markets to concentration is not new. But the scale of digital markets is amplified by the fact that they typically allow for a virtually unlimited number of participants without congestion. This implies that the winners in digital markets the small set of firms that dominate the market end up being larger and are of significantly greater importance for the overall economy. Because it is notoriously hard to define markets and there are many ways to measure concentration it is difficult to precisely quantify the degree of concentration in digital markets. Nevertheless big tech firms such as Amazon Alphabet and Meta have provided some of the most widely used services in recent years and generally have few direct competitors that come close to their size From a policy perspective these advances pose new challenges. The degree of concentration in digital markets raises long-standing concerns about whether dominant players in these markets leverage their market power to stifle competition and innovation. But unlike in some traditional markets much of the value of digital companies comes from network effects so antitrust actions may face greater challenges in preserving value for consumers while addressing problems associated with concentration. A world where digital technologies make services increasingly easy to trade requires adjustments to international trade policy. And digital assets require updating at least some regulations In the future the Internet and digital markets and further innovation will have the potential to drive continued increases in productivity However careful policymaking to address both the new and old challenges presented by these technologies will be necessary to ensure that productivity and output gains remain strong Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | Conclusion This year s Report sheds light on these and other changes in the United States economic and social systems and how they challenge established economic thinking and policymaking Chapter summarizes the Nation s economy during the past year characterizing how the continuing recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact of Russia s invasion of Ukraine have shaped the economy and how sustained demand imbalances supply chain delays and pandemic policies have affected growth inflation and unemployment. It also presents the macroeconomic forecast underpinning the Biden-Harris Administration s Fiscal Year Budget Chapter describes trends in international trade and investment in and characterizes how shifts over past decades in global interconnectedness have led to new challenges and opportunities for the United States There is a need to balance the considerable benefits of globalization through economic linkages with the risks for economic and national security that international economic interconnectedness can entail. Working in concert with U.S. allies and partners can enable the Nation to effectively address shared challenges and take advantage of new opportunities in the changing global environment Chapters and point to shortcomings in respectively the supply of care the supply of higher education and the supply of labor and highlight their significance for economic prosperity. Chapter illustrates the significance of early childhood care and education for economic wellbeing and prosperity focusing on the effects of childcare on children and families as well as the broader societal benefits. The chapter characterizes gaps in access and availability and it details how challenges in the childcare industry including the high cost of providing care prevent the market from delivering childcare of an optimal quantity or quality. The chapter explains how policies that address these challenges by supporting families accessing care and providers supplying care can have substantial long-run economic benefits Chapter highlights the importance of higher education in this context with a particular focus on the role that postsecondary institutions play in creating the skilled workforce. The chapter notes that various features of the higher education market suggest that promising institution-focused policies and programs could meaningfully improve student outcomes and ensure that all students have access to a college degree of value The recovery from the COVID-19 global pandemic has highlighted the importance of the labor supply for the economy. Chapter shows that current labor supply shortfalls in the United States are not merely a lingering effect of the pandemic but are also due to population aging and long-run | Chapter declines in labor force participation. Policies to draw more adults into the labor force will be needed without which the labor supply is likely to be constrained for the foreseeable future Chapter describes the significance of digital markets in the modern U.S. economy and the tension for this market environment s regulators between promoting competition and enabling economies of scale. Digital markets have grown rapidly and high levels of consolidation suggest that the government has a role in protecting consumers and promoting innovation through antitrust action. The importance of network effects means that regulatory interventions in the digital economy have nuanced effects Chapter explores recent developments in digital assets along with their opportunities and risks. Although advocates often claim that digital assets particularly crypto assets are a revolutionary innovation the design of these assets frequently reflects an ignorance of basic economic principles that have been learned in economics and finance over centuries and this inadequate design is often detrimental to consumers and investors Finally chapter describes the physical risks that the changing climate poses for U.S. economic production the well-being of U.S. communities and the fiscal position of the Federal Government as well as opportunities to manage and reduce these risks. International and domestic climate policy has historically focused on policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions which are critical for mitigating the worst effects of climate change. However the effects of climate change are already being felt across the United States and even with ambitious emission reductions will continue to increase until net global emissions fall to zero. Policies that enable households businesses and communities to plan for the changing climate and to manage evolving weather risks are an important complement to emission reductions in reducing the costs of climate change. Chapter thus describes the economic foundations of these adaptation policies and outlines four pillars that could inform the Federal adaptation strategy Pursuing Growth-Enhancing Policies in Today s Changing World | Chapter The Year in Review and the Years Ahead The U.S. economy in continued to navigate an unprecedented global pandemic and weathered an additional price shock to energy and food caused by Russia s unprovoked invasion of Ukraine. Despite these and other challenges the economy remained resilient with moderate output growth strong employment growth and inflation that peaked and then started to moderate late in the year ( figure ) In the face of supply constraints and changes in the composition of demand the primary goal of fiscal and monetary policy in was to restore balance to supply and demand fight inflation and return the economy to a path of stable steady growth Russia s invasion of Ukraine in February created acute supply constraints to energy food and other commodities that raised inflation globally. In Figure The U.S. Economy A. Real GDP B. Unemployment rate dollars ( trillions ) Percent 4-quarter percent change C. Core PCE inflation Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : Nominal GDP was converted to dollars using the GDP Price Index. PCE = Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index. Core PCE inflation excludes volatile food and energy inflation. All values are seasonally adjusted addition in the first half of the year the COVID-19 virus continued to weigh on economies across the world in the same ways if to a different extent as it had in ( Chetty et al. ) especially when its Omicron variant caused cases and fatalities to surge in the United States and abroad. Due to pandemic-related disruptions global supply chains were stressed. To support the U.S. economy the Federal Reserve kept the target range for the Federal Funds Rate near zero until March. Although the majority of direct household relief funds from the CARES Act the American Rescue Plan and related legislation had been dispersed by the end of many of these funds had not been spent by households and Americans entered with historically elevated savings Recessions can leave lasting scars but thanks to the fiscal and monetary support provided in and the United States real gross domestic product ( GDP ) in was close to what it had been forecasted before the pandemic ( CBO ) to be in After muted growth for much of the previous two years growth in real consumer spending on services was particularly strong during the four quarters of as spending patterns started to return to normal. By most measures the labor market was extraordinarily tight in creating some of the most favorable conditions for job seekers in decades As this chapter shows the government s comprehensive response to the pandemic helped achieve the solid positive outcomes of At the same time the combination and interaction of numerous factors exacerbated the elevated inflation. Although it is difficult to determine the relative importance of each factor the pandemic and responses to it had substantial effects on both the supply and demand sides of the economy. Specific factors of note include pandemic-induced supply disruptions shifts in consumer demand the accumulation of excess savings and stimulative fiscal and monetary support throughout and | Chapter In monetary policy turned to fighting inflation and fiscal policy focused on strategies to complement that fight while also working to guide the economy to stable and steady growth in and in the future. Even before the year began government spending and deficits fell closer to prepandemic trends. In March the Federal Reserve began to reverse its asset purchase program and started what became a swift series of interest rate hikes ; stock markets and residential investment declined quickly. President Biden authorized a drawdown of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve to lower gasoline prices after Russia s invasion of Ukraine. In July and August major pieces of legislation were passed to boost the economy s long-term supply side. Some measures of labor market tightness and inflation began to moderate with inflation showing an easing at the end of the year. The fight against inflation is expected to continue into resulting in a near-term outlook of below-trend GDP growth a modestly rising unemployment rate and falling inflation This chapter begins with a review of the economy in first examining the recovery of GDP and its subcomponents and then summarizing the conditions of labor markets and financial markets. Next the chapter describes inflation in discussing possible causes along with the government s response. Finally the chapter presents the forecast underpinning the President s Fiscal Year Budget and summaries of the near-term and long-term outlooks The Year in Review : The Continuing Recovery This section summarizes the U.S. economy in By many measures the economy had recovered from the recession induced by the COVID-19pandemic by the end of ; by a few measures the economy had not. For example real GDP was near the level it would have been if it had continued to grow at its average pace from its prepandemic peak in : Q4 The unemployment rate was near its prepandemic low for most of the year and other labor market indicators showed more tightness than they had in : Q4. On average wages adjusted for inflation declined over the year though they saw growth in the second half. The stock market started the The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | year at a record high but fell over the year partly due to rising inflation and tighter monetary policy. By most measures and especially compared with recoveries from previous recessions the economy in was healthy Output in : A Return to Near Its Trend Real GDP grew by percent during the four quarters of a deceleration from its percent pace during After a rapid decline in and a large bounce-back in the level of GDP in was roughly at its prepandemic trend. But GDP growth in was uneven negative in the first half and positive in the second half. Some components increased and others contracted reflecting the ongoing adjustment back to normal and away from the atypical spending and investment patterns seen over the past three years As shown in figure real GDP in had rebounded to a level that was at or above a log-linear trend extrapolated from preceding years of GDP growth an important achievement. In some previous economic cycles including the recovery from the Great Recession of the economy took much longer to return to its extrapolated trend meaning that workers and consumers suffered negative consequences for a longer period. ( See figure panel H for a comparison of this recovery with other recoveries. ) The longer-run trend level of GDP is a simple estimate of what is sometimes called potential GDP which is a measure of what the economy can produce at full capacity at a particular point in time. Recessions can cause output to Figure GDP and Trend GDP dollars ( trillions log scale ) GDP trend : : Q1 : Q4 GDP trend : : Q1 : Q4 Actual GDP Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : GDP trend lines were calculated by regressing the log of real GDP on time for the specified intervals and plotting predicted values from that regression. Nominal GDP was converted to dollars using the GDP Price Index. All values are seasonally adjusted | Chapter Figure The Period Compared with Previous Business Cycles Index = at business-cycle peak ; cycle peak is : Q4 B. Total spending on services A. Total spending on goods Businesscycle peak Quarters from businesscycle peak C. Business fixed investment D. Structures investment E. Exports F. Imports G. State and local purchases H. Gross domestic product ( GDP ) Minimum of previous cycles Maximum of previous cycles cycle Sources : Bureau of Economic Analayis ; CEA calculations Note : Panels A and B include spending on goods and services by consumers businesses government and as part of international trade as defined in table in the National Income and Product Accounts. Panel D includes business residential and government structures investment also from table All values are seasonally adjusted run below its trend which may be followed by faster growth that returns the level of output toward its trend. Growth can also be so fast that the level of output rises above its trend a situation that may lead to high inflation as aggregate demand outstrips the capacity of the economy to produce the desired level of goods and services ; this is often referred to as an overheated economy. Usually high inflation provokes a policy response for example The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | an interest rate hike by the Federal Reserve that cools the economy and returns output to its trend.1 Estimating the trend of GDP is not straightforward. Figure plots two log-linear trend lines estimated over different intervals. The longer estimation interval suggests that the United States output was above its trend in while the shorter one suggests that output was below it. Many other measures suggest the economy was running above its trend in including signals of tight labor markets the elevated inflation rate and the growth of consumption without corresponding growth in investment or imports. Further given the turmoil associated with the pandemic lower labor force participation demand shifts for specific skilled labor categories and population movement and the elevated inflation rate there is ample reason to expect that the productive capacity of the economy was temporarily below its usual position in The position of the economy matters for the interpretation of growth in and has implications for the nearterm economic outlook. If GDP was above trend the slowdown of growth in influenced by the Federal Reserve s rate hikes would mean the economy was returning to its trend and may also presage continued slow growth in the near term To illustrate the strength of the economic recovery in and relative to previous recoveries figure consists of eight butterfly charts that plot the evolution of various components of real GDP before and after the post World War II business-cycle peaks in the United States as determined by the National Bureau of Economic Research. To construct these charts each highlighted component of GDP was normalized to equal in the quarter at the peak of each business cycle. The orange lines in the figure show the maximum paths of each component during the business cycles before the current cycle ; the light blue lines show the minimum paths ; and the gray areas show the range of historical variation. The dark blue lines plot the postpandemic recession recovery. If to the right of the green vertical line a dark blue line is closer to an orange line than to a light blue line this means that relative to previous recessions the recovery was stronger for that component As can be seen in panel A of figure the cumulative growth of real spending on all goods since the previous business cycle peak in : Q4 through was at the top of historical experience. Conversely in panel B of figure real spending on all services was far below the range of historical experience at the end and growth through was only enough for it to recover to the lower historical bound by the end of As shown in panels C and D of figure though real business fixed investment remained at the middle of its historical range real investment in residential While higher GDP is generally beneficial high inflation poses costs to the economy. It is these costs that the policy responses seek to avoid | Chapter Table Real GDP Growth and Its Components Component Q4/Q4 Growth ( percent ) ( ) Contribution to Q4/Q4 GDP Growth ( percentage points ) ( ) Contribution to the Deviation of : Q4 GDP from Its Trend ( percentage points ) ( ) Total Consumer spending Goods Durables Motor vehicles and parts Nondurables Services Investment Business fixed investment Nonresidential equipment Nonresidential structures Intellectual property Housing investment Change in private inventories Net exports Exports Imports Government Federal Defense Nondefense State and local Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : Column lists the contribution of each component to the annual rate of growth of real GDP. These may not precisely sum to totals because of approximations to the formulas used in the National Income and Product Accounts. Column shows that that GDP was percent below prepandemic trend in : Q4 and how much each component of GDP contributed negatively or positively to this deviation from trend. It was calculated by regressing the log of each real GDP component on time from to calculating the percent difference of the : Q4 level predicted by that regression from the actual : Q4 level of each component and multiplying by the importance of that component to overall GDP ( the average of the : Q4 and : Q4 ratios of that nominal component of GDP to total nominal GDP ) and other structures fell in and its recovery has remained near the bottom of its historical range Table breaks down real GDP growth into its subcomponents. The first column lists the four-quarter growth rate for each component over The second column lists the contributions of each category to overall real GDP growth over those quarters. Contributions can be negative or positive For example because real exports grew percent during the four quarters of the year and constituted about percent of GDP its contribution to real GDP growth was percentage point. The first row of the third column compares the : Q4 level of real GDP with what it would have been if it had followed its log-linear trend ( the light blue line in figure ) ; all other rows show the approximate contribution of that real GDP The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | component to this deviation. The major sectors that grew noticeably faster than overall GDP in include consumer spending on services equipment investment intellectual property investment and exports. Imports also experienced relatively fast growth but these reduce GDP. Expenditure categories that grew slower than overall GDP include consumer spending on goods nonresidential and residential investment Federal Government purchases and inventory investment. State and local expenditures grew but only slowly Consumer spending. The nominal goods-to-services consumer spending ratio which had been in a long-term decline increased during and reaching its highest level since Real consumer spending on services fell sharply when the pandemic hit as in-person activities such as dining out and traveling became more difficult. In contrast real goods spending after initially falling during the first two pandemic quarters rebounded and spiked above its prepandemic level as people stuck at home spent a larger share of their total real consumption on goods like furniture appliances and sporting equipment and a smaller share on services During the goods-to-services spending ratio started to normalize ; real goods spending fell percent during the four quarters of while real consumer services spending grew percent. Even so this ratio remained well above prepandemic norms. Overall real consumer spending grew modestly during the four quarters of at a percent annual rate with all of that growth accounted for by services Investment. Real business fixed investment increased percent during the four quarters of continuing its steady recovery from its pandemic-induced low. Investment growth was particularly strong in intellectual property as it has been for the last decade. But investment by businesses in structures fell percent during the four quarters of the year with declines in investment in commercial and health care structures and power and communication structures. Investment increased in manufacturing and petroleum and natural gas mining structures Increases in business fixed investment were offset by declines in fixed investment in residential and other structures as the housing market cooled due to the rise in mortgage rates associated with the Federal Reserve s tightening cycle. Both business fixed investment and fixed investment in residential and other structures were below their prepandemic trends. Overall spending on structures was near the lower end of the business-cycle range as shown in panel D of figure Some of the slowing GDP growth in which followed strong growth in was accounted for by inventory investment. The overall real inventory-to-sales ratio shrank to the lowest on record in : Q2 as firms fought supply chain bottlenecks and then began to rapidly recover with inventory investment at high levels in : Q4 and : Q1. The | Chapter stock of real inventories continued to grow strongly in but because inventory investment was lower in : Q2 and : Q3 than in : Q1 inventory investment subtracted from real GDP growth in those quarters and over the four quarters of the year Government spending. The Federal Government s real purchases ( expenditures and gross investment ) edged up slightly by percent during the four quarters of Most of the surge in Federal spending that had supported households businesses and State and local governments in and consisted of transfers and subsidies that are not directly part of GDP ; while these transfers and subsidies fell purchases were little changed. Defense expenditures and gross investment barely changed during the four quarters of the year while nondefense purchases edged up. State and local government purchases increased slowly by percent during the four quarters of the year. Relative to the average cyclical response State and local purchases were near the lower end of the business-cycle range as shown in panel G of figure Imports and exports. Finally real exports grew faster than overall GDP during the four quarters of growing by percent at an annual rate reflecting the continued reopening of the world economy. Although real imports grew more slowly than real exports during the four quarters of the year at percent that import pace exceeded the growth of real GDP by percentage point. Due to the stronger growth in real exports relative to imports real net exports partially recovered from their pandemic-induced decline in contributing percentage point to overall real GDP growth. ( See chapter of this Report for an in-depth discussion of international trade and investment in ) The Historic Strength of Labor Markets in Labor markets were very tight in as the strong economy led firms to continue to hire workers after pandemic-induced layoffs and hiring pauses At the end of the year the unemployment rate was percent matching the lowest rate tied with September and prepandemic since Other labor market measures also showed a historically high degree of tightness including the ratio of job openings per unemployed person shown in figure and the quit rate considered by some to be the best measure of labor market tightness ( Furman and Powell ) which reached at least a 20-year high at the end of and remained elevated through Figure shows the ratio of total job openings divided by the total number of unemployed people. During recessions this measure tends to fall as firms slow hiring reduce job openings and lay off workers and it plummeted in By April however the measure had climbed to the highest level on record indicating that the labor market was unusually The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Job Openings per Unemployed Person Ratio Sources : Bureau of Labor Stastistics ; CEA calculations Note : All values are seasaonally adjusted Figure The Beveridge Curve at Two Intervals Vacancy rate ( percent ) December Unemployment rate ( percent ) July February April December Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics CEA calculations Note : All values are seasonally adjusted tight. In the second half of the year job openings decreased and the number of unemployed persons increased slightly Figure shows another view of the labor market : the Beveridge curve the relationship between the unemployment rate and the percentage of job openings relative to labor demand known as the vacancy rate. The Labor demand equals job openings plus employment | Chapter Beveridge curve during the pandemic-recession recovery represented by the dark blue dots shifted up and out possibly due to increased pandemicrelated difficulties in hiring and retaining workers. All the months of are located in the upper-left-hand corner of the figure where vacancy rates are high and unemployment rates are low indicating that labor markets were tight and that labor demand was high relative to labor supply Economists disagree about how much of this labor market tightness was due to a shortage in the supply of workers versus an excess demand for workers. On the demand side the high aggregate demand described later in this chapter led to an increased demand for workers by businesses. There are a range of potential supply-side factors which are discussed in chapter of this Report The Cooling of Financial Markets in The stock market recovered quickly from large declines during the COVID19 pandemic reaching a new peak at the end of In early as inflation rose and the Federal Reserve began hiking the Federal Funds Rate to cool off the economy stock prices declined. The losses in reversed only part of the gains made during the previous two years ( figure ) Along with stock prices bond prices also fell.3 The price of 10-Year Treasury Notes which moves inversely to the yield began the year near historical highs but ended the year quite a bit lower likely due in part to upward revisions in market expectations for the future path of inflation and associated revisions in market participants expectations for the path of the Federal Funds Rate.4 From near the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic to the end of the correlation between changes in stock prices and long-term bond prices was reversed from its previous sign. From until the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic in the correlation between changes in stock prices and bond prices was generally negative ( Rankin and Idil ) During this 20-year period the Federal Reserve lowered the Federal Funds Rate increasing bond prices. These increases were primarily in response to negative aggregate demand shocks which drove down stock prices as during a typical recession As shown in figure the pandemic-induced recession fit this pattern in early : stock prices fell and bond prices rose. In contrast in inflation led the Federal Reserve to raise the Federal Funds Rate causing both stock and bond prices to decline. This relationship can be seen in Bond prices rather than bond yields are discussed here in order to simplify the comparison with stock prices. The spot price of the 10-Year Treasury Note is calculated from the market yield assuming no coupons A complete description of the drivers of changes in the interest rate on 10-Year Treasury Notes is beyond the scope of this chapter ; see Stigum and Crescenzi ( ) The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Stock Market and Bond Prices Index ; January = Index ; January = S&P index ( left axis ) 10-year Treasury Note price index ( right axis ) Sources : Federal Reserve System ; Standard & Poor s ( S&P ) Note : The prices of coupon 10-Year Treasury Notes are shown relative to January figure starting slightly before the tightening cycle began possibly due to markets anticipating monetary actions. The change in the sign of this correlation after the start of the pandemic suggests that negative supply shocks were important for U.S. financial markets in ; these shocks moved the price level higher and output lower thus hurting stock prices and led to increasing interest rates thus hurting bond prices Inflation in Beyond the developments summarized above in discussing output growth the historically strong U.S. labor market and financial markets the rise of inflation in and its continued elevation through exacerbated by Russia s invasion of Ukraine were important aspects of s overall economic picture. For most of the period the rate of inflation was below the Federal Reserve s long-term percent target. Then the COVID19 pandemic hit the United States in early Prices fell briefly in the spring of when the pandemic initially struck interrupting many forms of economic activity ; but prices and the economy quickly recovered Inflation began to climb in Although at the end of many forecasters predicted that inflation would quickly fall inflation instead persisted in The year was one of historically elevated inflation but it was also a year that saw many actions taken to bring that elevated inflation E.g. the : Q1 annualized CPI inflation rate predicted by the December Blue Chip consensus was percent close to the Federal Reserve s target and much lower than the actual quarterly inflation rate of percent | Chapter Box Measures of Consumer Price Inflation Inflation can be challenging to precisely define and measure. This box describes what inflation is not and what it is how the government measures inflation and what information key inflation measures provide Defining inflation. Inflation can be tricky to talk about. First inflation is the rate of change of the price level not the level of prices. High inflation means that prices are rising rapidly not that prices are high. Second increases in the prices of specific goods and services do not always reflect inflation. Due to changes in relative demand and supply prices for specific goods and services rise and fall relative to each other all the time. For example during the COVID-19 pandemic demand for television sets rose and their prices increased. Concurrently demand for airline tickets fell along with their prices. Price indices such as the Consumer Price Index ( CPI ) and the Personal Consumption Expenditures ( PCE ) Price Index which are discussed below aggregate prices in the economy in an attempt to measure the price level. Inflation is a positive rate of change in the price level Measuring inflation. Measuring the price level and therefore inflation is a difficult task. This chapter frequently references two measures that approximate the level of prices faced by consumers : the CPI produced by the Bureau of Labor Statistics ( BLS ) ; and the PCE Price Index produced by the Bureau of Economic Analysis ( BEA ) ( The main text refers exclusively to the CPI-U which follows the market basket of urban consumers. The description urban refers to anyone not living in extremely rural areas and covers about percent of the U.S population. The BLS also supports several other versions of the CPI. The CPI-W follows the market basket of wage earners ; the CPI-E follows the market basket of the elderly ; and the chain CPI follows the same consumers as the CPI-U but it aggregates with a formula that allows for more substitution. ) The CPI measures the prices of a fixed basket of consumer goods and services ( BLS ) The basket which was updated every two years from to and will be updated every year in the future approximates the average consumption of a household as surveyed in the annual Consumer Expenditure Survey. The assumption of a fixed consumption basket makes comparing the prices of the same goods and services across time relatively easy but it can misrepresent the rate of price changes households actually face ( or experience ) if households change what they consume when prices change. For instance if the price of oranges falls relative to the price of apples consumers will usually buy more oranges and fewer apples. The PCE Price Index in contrast to the CPI uses a formula that allows for such substitution. Further while the CPI focuses on out-of-pocket expenditures the PCE Price Index captures a wider range of consumer costs including for example employer-provided health insurance. Largely because the PCE Price Index allows for more substitution ( but also due to other differences ) The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | the 12-month change in the PCE Price Index has averaged basis points less than the corresponding change in the CPI for the last years Headline inflation versus core inflation. Economists and policymakers focus on price indices that exclude goods and services with volatile prices such as food and energy in order to get a better sense of persistent movements in inflation ( Gordon ) Food and energy prices are erratic largely because they are influenced by weather and international commodity markets and therefore can move independently from the other goods and services whose prices are determined domestically to a greater extent. The core CPI and the core PCE Price Index exclude food and energy whereas the corresponding headline CPI and headline PCE Price Index include food and energy. Of course because consumers buy food and energy headline inflation measures better reflect the costs consumers actually face Monthly versus yearly inflation. Each month the BLS and BEA update the CPI and the PCE Price Index respectively and the monthover-month percent change in each price level. They also report 12-month percent changes which are substantially less volatile because they accumulate month-over-month percent changes over months. Measures of annualized 3-month or 6-month inflation the 3-month or 6-month percent change mathematically adjusted to be comparable to 12-month or yearly rates can also be calculated from the raw price indices. These measures are less volatile than monthly inflation but are more timely than yearly inflation. Figure 2-i plots annualized 6-month inflation for four price indices : the headline CPI the core CPI the headline PCE Price Index and the core PCE Price Index. All four inflation indices began to increase in but turned downward in the second half of Figure 2-i. Types of Consumer Price Inflation Percentage change 6-month annualized Headline CPI Headline PCE Core CPI Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : All values seasonally adjusted | Chapter Core PCE Figure The Expectations-Augmented Phillips Curve at Two Intervals 3-month annualized core CPI inflation ( percent ) controlling for expected inflation ( see note ) : Q4 : Q4 Unemployment rate ( percent ) : Q1 : Q4 : Q4 : Q4 Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Federal Reserve Bank of Philidelphia Note : CPI = Consumer Price Index. The y axis shows a measure of the actual rate of inflation minus the difference betwen the expected rate of inflation and the long-term rate of inflation or ( E [ ] * ) where = core CPI inflation E [ ] = 1-year lagged median 1-year ahead core CPI inflation expectations from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philidelphia s Survey of Professional Forecasters and * = the long-term ( post-2000 ) average of core CPI inflation percent. Actual CPI inflation values are seasonally adjusted down. As discussed in box there are many ways to measure inflation One of the most common the 12-month rate of change in the headline Consumer Price Index ( CPI ) peaked at percent in June a pace not seen since The fight against inflation has not been an easy one but progress has been made as of December when the 12-month rate of change in the headline CPI inflation was percentage points lower than in June The unexpected nature of the inflation in and is exemplified by figure The figure shows an estimate of the Phillips curve the relationship between inflation unemployment and inflation expectations from until the last prepandemic quarter in : Q4 ( dark blue dots ) and during the economic recovery from : Q4 through : Q4 ( light blue dots ) The light blue dots are substantially above the dark blue dots indicating that inflation moved more strongly with unemployment during the economic recovery than in the previous economic expansion. Investigating why inflation responded so strongly and the fiscal and monetary responses to it occupies much of the rest of this chapter. ( Also see box ) Measures of inflation can be approximately decomposed into contributions from subcategories of goods and services. Figure plots the decomposition of annualized three-month headline CPI inflation into five categories : food ; energy ; core goods which exclude food and energy goods ; shelter which includes rent and owners equivalent rent and core services The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Decompostion of Inflation Contributions to quarterly headline CPI inflation percentage points quarterly annualized rate : Q1 : Q3 Food : Q1 Energy : Q3 Core goods : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 Core services less shelter : Q3 Shelter Source : Bureau of Labor Statistics Note : All values seasonally adjusted less shelter which also excludes food and energy services. The figure shows that inflation during in the United States was broad-based with each of the subcategories contributing substantially to overall inflation The timing of these contributions differs and tells an interesting story In early the contribution of core goods inflation to overall inflation rose as consumer purchases rotated from services to goods during the pandemic when supply chains snarled and productive capacity could not rise fast enough to match the rise in demand. As consumer behavior and supply chains both normalized in monthly core goods inflation declined and actually turned negative in late The contribution of food and energy inflation rose in and continued in Russia s invasion of Ukraine in February increased pressure on global oil and agricultural commodity markets. Partly as a consequence the contribution of food and energy to inflation rose both domestically and globally. Inflation in core services which was the primary contributor to overall inflation in the decade before the pandemic was only slightly above its prepandemic pace in but increased sharply in The decomposition shown in figure is informative but it is only an accounting exercise : it does not explain the underlying economic factors that led one category to move relative to another. If one category contributed more than another in a certain quarter it means that prices in that category were increasing relative to prices in the other category not necessarily that price increases in that category were the underlying cause of inflation. For example it is possible for headline CPI inflation to be percent with core | Chapter Figure Global Measures of Consumer Price Inflation 12-month percent change in national consumer price indices U.S U.K EU Canada Japan Sources : U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics ; U.K. Office for National Statistics ; Eurostat ; Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications ; Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation of India ; Statistics Canada CEA calculations Note : Measures are of headline consumer price inflation less owner-occupied housing ( sometimes called the Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices ) goods inflation contributing negative percent and core services inflation contributing positive percent. The difference in goods and services inflation would mean that services prices were increasing relative to goods prices not that either was causing inflation. In the next subsection possible causes of U.S. inflation in are examined in detail High inflation in was not just a U.S. phenomenon as shown in figure In after years of relative stability inflation began to climb across a number of countries. In the second half of inflation in the EU and the United Kingdom was higher than in the United States partially reflecting the EU countries and the United Kingdom s greater exposure to the war in Ukraine and specifically the war s effect on energy prices Inflation in some other countries such as Japan remained relatively low though well above its prepandemic norm Factors That Had an Impact on Inflation in As discussed in box the root causes of inflation are imperfectly understood and economists use many theoretical frameworks to model and study it. Because the most common framework used to analyze inflation is aggregate supply and demand this subsection first discusses what are generally thought of as supply factors and then examines what are generally thought of as demand factors. The role of expectations a common theme in many inflation frameworks is also discussed. Fiscal and monetary actions are both The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Box The Phillips Curve and Other Models of Inflation Economists have spent much time and effort trying to explain and predict inflation using a variety of methods and approaches. This box explains one common model the Phillips curve ; describes its recent history ; and discusses each of its components inflation ; economic tightness or slack ; inflation expectations ; and other factors before briefly discussing theories of inflation that do not depend on a Phillips curve type relationship The term Phillips curve is used to refer both to the empirical relationship between forms of inflation and measures of economic tightness or slack used in the macroeconomic model developed by Klein and Goldberger ( ) and noted by Phillips ( ) ( with regard to wage inflation and unemployment ) and to the theoretical relationship between the two. Today policymakers and forecasters often refer to the expectations-augmented Phillips curve which recognizes that inflation expectations can influence inflation independently from measures of economic tightness or slack As shown in figure in the main text the empirical relationship between the unemployment rate one measure of tightness and Core CPI inflation can change drastically even when controlling for inflation expectations. The Phillips curve appeared to have become flat in about as discussed in the edition of the Economic Report of the President ( CEA ) More precisely the coefficient on the unemployment rate was near zero ( hence the adjective flat ) This flatness during the business-cycle expansion is shown by the dark blue dots in figure and the accompanying flat dark blue dashed line. Elevated unemployment rates failed to lower inflation during the first half of this cycle while the low unemployment rates during the second half of that cycle failed to increase inflation Viewed from the end of the Phillips curve has substantially changed as the decline in the unemployment rate to near historic lows in coincided with the first major increase in U.S. inflation since the 1980s as shown by the light blue dots in figure and accompanying steeply sloped light blue dashed line. The increase in inflation during and was much larger than the consensus economic forecast perhaps because most forecasters had come to believe in a flat Phillips curve anchored by stable inflation expectations ( Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia ) One of the important questions facing the economy in is whether the Phillips curve will remain steeply sloped as inflation continues to cool. If the Phillips curve remains steep this implies that inflation may fall without much of an increase in the unemployment rate A Phillips curve that returns to near its prepandemic slope would imply | Chapter that inflation may fall but with a larger increase in the unemployment rate than in the second half of Measures of inflation in the Phillips curve. As described in box measures of inflation that include food and energy prices are volatile for reasons that have little to do with the domestic economy. Thus core inflation measures which exclude food and energy fit better and are preferred for forecasting applications. Some practitioners use estimates of a deeper more persistent underlying inflation rate as described or suggested by Ascari and Sbordone ( ) Yellen ( ) and Rudd ( ) in order to enhance the fit and predictive power of the Phillips curve. Figure uses annualized 3-month core CPI inflation ( Simple estimates of this underlying inflation rate involve a menagerie of methods and measures as discussed by Detmeister These measures include averaging across months of inflation data using the inflation rate on specific categories of spending such as the median CPI from the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland ; and trimming categories that see the most and least inflation when calculating the inflation rate such as the Trimmed-Mean PCE from the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas n.d. among others. ) Measures of economic tightness or slack in the Phillips curve Choosing an appropriate measure of economic tightness or slack is a difficult conceptual issue. Slack refers to the intensity of resource utilization in the economy ( Yellen ) Figure shows one possible measure of slack : the difference between real GDP and a longer-run trend of real GDP. The situation at the end of when real GDP was higher than its trend indicates that resource utilization was higher than normal which may have fed through to inflationary pressures via increased costs to firms to produce a unit of output ( Boehm and Pandalai-Nayar ) Another commonly used measure of slack is the deviation of the unemployment rate from the natural rate of unemployment the rate of unemployment that would exist when the economy is stable in the longterm and not disrupted by shocks. Estimating the natural rate of unemployment which is by nature unobservable is a difficult task. ( Many practitioners estimate the natural rate of unemployment together with the Phillips curve. But to have separate measurement power that natural rate estimate would need to come from a method external to estimation of the Phillips curve itself as was done by Michaillat and Saez ) For simplicity figure uses the unemployment rate alone without an external estimate of the natural rate Inflation expectations in the Phillips curve. The expectationsaugmented Phillips Curve includes inflation expectations because many theories of inflation suggest that expectations may in some cases be self-fulfilling in other words if people believe that inflation will rise inflation will rise ; and if people believe that inflation will fall it will The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | fall. Empirically expectations are important to explaining the decline in inflation since the 1970s and its stability in the 2010s ( Blanchard et al. ) The exact link between inflation expectations and actual inflation is still debated ( Rudd ; Bernanke ; Werning ) Figure uses projections of core CPI inflation from the Survey of Professional Forecasters Given the importance of inflation expectations managing expectations is an important aspect of managing inflation. Inflation expectations are said to be anchored when they do not change much even when the economic environment changes. Though many believe that the Federal Reserve had an implicit inflation target at which it wanted to anchor inflation starting in the 1990s or earlier it was only in that the Federal Reserve announced an explicit longer-run target of percent annual PCE Price Index inflation ( Federal Reserve ) In the Federal Reserve revised its Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy to indicate that it would conduct policy in a way that seeks to anchor inflation expectations at percent and results in inflation that averages percent over time ( Federal Reserve ) As can be seen below in the text even though inflation in and rose well above percent measures of long-run inflation expectations remained relatively stable lending support to the idea that the Federal Reserve had successfully anchored inflation expectations Other factors. While Phillips curves are often parsimonious models of inflation factors other than expectations and slack may be used to help empirically estimate the curve and control for other influences Yellen ( ) highlights the importance of changes in imported goods prices which are an input to many production processes and can proxy for exchange rate dynamics. In a similar vein below the text highlights a measure of supply chain pressures and its relation to a producer-side measure of inflation. The price of energy may also be included although pass-through from energy prices to measures of core or underlying inflation has diminished in recent years ( Clark and Terry ) Alternative models of inflation. The Phillips curve is one of most common frameworks that economists use to understand inflation but it is far from the only one. For example when economists talk about how supply and demand affect inflation they are usually referring to the Keynesian Aggregate Demand and Aggregate Supply ( AD-AS ) model which evolved from attempts by John Hicks to formalize the ideas of John Maynard Keynes in the 1930s ( Hicks ; Keynes ) The Phillips curve is often considered to be part of Keynesian theory because due to the link between employment and real output something similar can be implied from the AD-AS model. Keynesian theory can be understood as one explanation for the connection between inflation and slack observed in the empirical Phillips curve. New Keynesian theory which | Chapter is a modern mathematically formal development of Keynesian theory offers a related explanation ( Gal ) The standard New Keynesian Phillips curve relates inflation to the theory s measure of slack and features a larger role for expectations than most Keynesian models Monetarism is both a theory that describes a group of formal mathematical models and also a set of less formal ideas. As a theory it is most associated with Milton Friedman who famously said Inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon in the sense that it is and can be produced only by a more rapid increase in the quantity of money than in output ( Friedman ) Monetarist models emphasize inflation as a consequence of the growth of the quantity of money compared with the level and growth of output rather than a connection between inflation and slack Finally a number of models of inflation emphasize the importance of government debt. One of the best-known of these models the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level ( FTPL ) argues that increases in government debt that are not backed by credible promises of repayment via increases in future tax revenue or reductions in future spending lead to inflation ( Cochrane ) Proponents and critics of the FTPL disagree over the direction of causality in this relationship and the implicit assumptions that such causality implies ( Bassetto ) usually considered to be demand factors in the near term ; because they are both especially important they are discussed separately.6 Over the last two years many hypotheses about the causes of the current inflation situation have been proposed by academics journalists and politicians. The goal of this subsection includes reviewing prevalent propositions not to argue for a single hypothesis or set of hypotheses. The possible causes discussed here likely played some role in the level and elevated nature of inflation in and the pandemic was a large exacerbating cause to each. Interactions between causes likely worsened inflationary pressures. Frequently cited hypotheses include the shock to energy food and other commodity prices associated with Russia s invasion of Ukraine ; pandemic-related supply chain issues ; the extension of zero interest rate monetary policy and accompanying quantitative easing ; household transfers In the medium to long terms both monetary and fiscal actions can influence supply. For example low interest rates can spur long-term investment. Government spending can build infrastructure e.g. Donaldson and Hornbeck ( ) and support research and development e.g. Gross and Sampat ( ) as discussed in the paragraphs about legislative and executive actions in the text below. In general these supply-side factors take longer to impact the economy than do demand-side effects of monetary and fiscal actions The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Supply Chain Pressures and Producer Inflation 24-month change index points 12-month percent change 24-month change in cumulative ISM supplier delivery index ( left axis ) 12-month PPI core finished goods inflation ( right axis ) Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Institute of Supply Management ( ISM ) Note : PPI = Producer Price Index. The dark line is equal to ( Si ) with i = where Si = the ISM supplier deliveries index which is equal to if the number of manufacturers that report lengthening delivery times is equal to the number of manufacturers that report shortening delivery times. Longer lags include more information and the 24-month changes fit with recent data on the change in PPI inflation legislated as part of the CARES Act the American Rescue Plan and related legislation ; and households accumulation of excess savings. The impact of supply factors on inflation. As described in the edition of the Economic Report of the President the COVID-19 pandemic introduced challenges to the labor force and constraints on the supply of goods and services ( CEA ) In mid-2022 these disruptions finally began to ease As shown in figure increases in supply chain pressures were strongly correlated with rises in goods inflation in The measure of supply chain pressures in the figure is derived from an Institute for Supply Management ( ISM ) survey in which supply managers are asked whether delivery times for their raw materials are shorter the same or longer than the preceding month. Because the resulting ISM measure captures monthly changes in delivery times these responses must be cumulated over time to make an index of the level of delivery times.7 In figure the change The ISM supplier deliveries index is calculated by subtracting the percentage of supply managers saying that delivery times are longer from the percentage of supply managers saying that delivery times are shorter dividing by and adding To construct this index of delivery time levels is subtracted from the ISM and the index is cumulated over months. The ISM delivery index indicates only the one-month change in delivery lags so cumulating more months includes more information. Cumulating over the preceding 24-month period fits the recent data on the change in PPI inflation | Chapter Figure Commodity Pressures and PCE Inflation 12-month percent change Russian invasion begins 12-month percent change Retail gasoline price index ( left axis ) PCE Price Index inflation ( right axis ) FAO food price index Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; U.S. Energy Information Administration ; Bloomberg Agriculture Spot Index Note : FAO = Food Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Data are displayed on two axes because commodity and gasoline prices are much more volatile than inflation. The PCE Price Index is seasonally adjusted in this measure of delivery times over an appropriate interval is plotted against the change in the core Producer Price Index ( PPI ) for finished goods The PPI measure reflects prices charged by manufacturers. The relatively high correlation between the change in delivery times and core PPI finished goods inflation since suggests that supply chain issues have a significant impact on finished goods inflation According to the ISM survey suppliers delivery times started lengthening substantially shortly after the start of the COVID-19 pandemic and most supply managers were reporting lengthening delivery times until September Delivery times shortened during the final three months of the year but were still elevated at the end of Another measure of supply chain stress the Global Supply Chain Pressure Index produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York also increased notably in but fell for most of Collectively these measures indicate that supply chain delays stopped getting worse and even began to unsnarl toward the end of the year. Still overall inflation remained high indicating that the drivers of inflation had broadened including to the service economy ( Powell 2022a ) Figure shows that commodity prices as represented by gas and food price inflation started rising in These commodities are traded on international markets and their prices influence inflation globally. Then in February Russia invaded Ukraine. The resulting chaos both directly and indirectly led food prices to quickly jump higher and gasoline and natural gas prices soon followed. As commodity suppliers adapted to the The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Employment Cost Index and Inflation 12-month percent change PCE Price Index Employment Cost Index ( ECI ) Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : The PCE Price Index is seasonally adjusted but the ECI is not disruption caused by the war commodity prices fell. Since commodities are a basic input to most production processes and consumers directly purchase some commodities such as food gasoline and natural gas directly higher commodity prices can quickly feed into overall inflation. Russia s status as a major oil exporter led to a spike in many energy prices and the price of regular gasoline in the United States peaked at $ a gallon in June. But by the end of the year the price of regular gasoline had fallen to $ a gallon partly due to the Biden-Harris Administration s decision to draw down the Strategic Petroleum Reserve which is further discussed below As the economy continued to recover from the recession in and consumer demand for goods and services increased demand for workers to produce these goods and services also increased. Illustrated by the ratio of vacancies to unemployment shown in figure the demand for workers relative to their supply has been high during much of the recovery from the pandemic-related recession. If firms are having difficulty hiring workers then the relative price of workers that is hourly compensation should increase. Figure displays the Employment Cost Index a measure of hourly compensation that adjusts for changes in the composition of the workforce showing that inflation in was accompanied by rising wages But rising wages can be both a cause and a consequence of inflation ( Jord et al. ) The BLS s measure of real average wages or wages relative to the overall price level declined overall in falling in the first half of before rising in the second half. Some parts of the labor income distribution saw better real wage outcomes than others with outcomes positive in the lowest quartile ( Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta n.d. ) | Chapter Although there were fears during of a wage-price spiral where workers expecting increased inflation would demand higher wages which would lead to higher realized inflation and then workers would demand even higher wages and so on those fears lessened toward the end of as inflation and wage growth showed broad slowdowns. Notably as shown below with the University of Michigan s survey results ( see figure ) consumers short-term inflation expectations remained well below actual inflation throughout the year and longer-term expectations remained anchored Some have pointed to another factor that may have influenced the reaction of prices and thus inflation to the COVID-19 shock : increased market concentration in U.S. industries. More U.S. industries have become dominated by a few large firms over the last years. There is some evidence that these firms increase prices in response to cost increases more than firms without market power would have done in the past ( Br uning Fillat and Joaquim ) However the link between market power and pricing when subject to shocks like the pandemic is not clear ( Syverson ) Measuring market power is a difficult task and measuring the prices firms charge above the cost of their inputs their markup isolated from the effects of the increased demand and constrained supply of is even more fraught The impact of monetary factors on inflation. By controlling short-term interest rates and through them longer-term interest rates the Federal Reserve is able to influence when consumers and businesses spend money versus save money thereby affecting aggregate demand. In both traditional Keynesian and New Keynesian aggregate supply-and-demand frameworks ( see box ) higher interest rates lead to decreases in real output and inflation all else being equal ( Miranda-Agrippino and Ricco ) Figure shows that the Federal Reserve kept the Federal Funds Rate close to zero from April until it began to raise the Federal Funds Rate in response to rising inflation in March By the end of the Federal Reserve had increased the Federal Funds Rate to a range between and percent. The rapid increase in the Federal Funds Rate was an attempt to bring demand into better alignment with supply and cool inflation. It is important to note that the Federal Funds Rate alone is not enough to judge the stance of monetary policy. The Federal Funds Rate is a nominal rate so its effect on the real economy depends on inflation. The real Federal Funds Rate is approximated in figure by subtracting short-term expectations of consumer inflation.8 Another perspective on the stance of monetary policy is the real rate relative to r * the long-term real rate consistent with the economy growing at its long-term trend. Though it is hard to estimate there is evidence that Exactly which measure of inflation is appropriate to use to deflate the nominal Federal Funds Rate is outside the scope of this chapter The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure Nominal and Real Measures of the Policy Rate Percent Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate Real Federal Funds Rate r * Sources : Survey of Professional Forecasters ( SPF ) ; Federal Reserve System ; CEA calculations Note : The bright blue line subtracts 1-year-ahead expected inflation from the SPF from the dark blue line. The orange line subtracts the median estimate of the appropriate long-term Federal Funds Rate from the Federal Reserve quarterly Summary of Economic Projections ( SEP ) from the bright blue line r * declined during recent decades ( Powell ) Because of this decline in r * and depending on inflation expectations low Federal Funds Rates may not be as stimulative as they were in the past ( Jord and Taylor ) The Federal Open Market Committee ( FOMC ) in its December Summary of Economic Projections ( Federal Reserve 2022a ) suggested that long-run r * calculated by subtracting the longer-run inflation rate ( percent ) from the longer-run Federal Funds Rate ( percent ) was percent. The difference between the real Federal Funds Rate and r * shown by the orange line in figure is a plausible measure of the stance of monetary policy. At the end of the stance of monetary policy as measured by both the real Federal Funds Rate and the real Federal Funds Rate minus r * was above percent indicating a restrictive monetary policy An additional factor in judging the stance of monetary policy is the Federal Reserve s balance sheet. In following the playbook used during the financial crisis the Federal Reserve announced additional measures to support the economy including emergency lending and asset purchase programs sometimes known as quantitative easing. Figure shows that assets held by the Federal Reserve the sum of Treasuries mortgage-backed securities and all others grew to $ trillion by the end of more than double their size before the COVID-19 pandemic The increase in the size of the Federal Reserve s balance sheet contributed to a substantial increase in measures of the money supply. As discussed in box in a monetarist would have predicted that the substantial | Chapter Figure The Composition of the Federal Reserve s Balance Sheet dollars ( trillions ) 12-month percent change Treasuries ( left axis ) All other ( left axis ) Mortgage-backed securities ( left axis ) Core PCE inflation ( right axis ) Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis ; CEA calculations Note : Excludes unamortized premiums and discounts on securities held outright. Nominal dollars were converted to dollars using the PCE Price Index. The PCE Price Index is seasonally adjusted increase in money at a time when real output was shrinking would lead to inflation. In and with some lag they would have been right But years ago they would have been wrong. When the Federal Reserve more than quadrupled its balance sheet in the five years after the financial crisis inflation did not rise by much and it quickly returned to a stable rate below percent. There are important differences : the recession was longer and deeper ; households and firms had worse balance sheets ; the unique pandemic-related supply-side challenges were not present ; and the fiscal response to the crisis was smaller ( Guerrieri et al. ) Nevertheless the drastically different result in makes it hard to draw a straight line between the Federal Reserve s balance sheet actions in and inflation ( Crawley and Gagnon ) The impact of fiscal factors on inflation. Extraordinary monetary policy in and was accompanied by expansive fiscal policy. In the pandemic prompted an increase of slightly more than percentage points in the Federal Government s outlays relative to GDP the largest such increase since the increase of nearly percentage points when the United States entered World War II. Much of this increased spending was distributed in economic impact payments made directly to households Support was also provided via large temporary expansions of unemployment benefits and funds offered to small businesses to maintain payrolls and extend operations The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure The Fiscal Impulse and Inflation 4-quarter percent change Percentage-point contribution to real GDP Taxes and benefits programs ( left axis ) Federal spending on goods and services ( left axis ) State and local spending ( left axis ) Core PCE inflation ( right axis ) Sources : Hutchins Center at Brookings Institution ; Bureau of Economic Analysis Note : All values are seasonally adjusted Aggregate supply-and-demand frameworks predict that all else being equal increases in government outlays will increase output and inflation Estimates of the fiscal multiplier or the ratio of the change in total real output to an expansionary fiscal policy action vary considerably with different estimates suggesting that government spending increases total output by more or by less than the government spending itself ( Ramey ) Empirical estimates of the impact of government spending on inflation are mixed ; a recent meta-analysis found that increases in government spending offset by tighter monetary policy often tend to be deflationary rather than inflationary ( J rgensen and Ravn ) Figure plots the Hutchins Center s Fiscal Impact Measure ( FIM ) which uses information on the Federal Government s spending on goods and services State and local government spending on goods and services and taxes and benefit programs to approximate the contribution of fiscal policy to total real GDP growth each quarter ( Belz Sheiner and Campbell ) A positive fiscal impulse means that the contribution of fiscal policy to real GDP is larger than it was the quarter before. Figure shows that the FIM spiked in : Q2 mainly due to an expansion of transfer programs and was positive for two of the next three quarters but was a significant drag throughout and is projected to remain negative in and using projections for fiscal policy by the Congressional Budget Office in its current services baseline Table highlights legislative and executive actions that can not be easily characterized as fiscal policy and hence are outside the scope of | Chapter Table Selected Legislative and Executive Actions in Date Action Goal April to October Release of million barrels of crude oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve Increase the supply of gasoline to lower its price and the prices of other goods May Additional funding for domestic fertilizer production and technical assistance in agriculture and expansion of eligibility for double-cropping insurance Encourage farmers to expand production lowering and stabilizing food prices May Housing Supply Action Plan Increase the supply of available homes to lower housing costs June Ocean Shipping Reform Act Lower shipping costs and improve supply chains by fostering compeition July President Biden announces a series of actions that incentivize solar adoption and energy efficiency upgrades Lower demand for fossil fuels and lower energy prices August IRA promotes clean energy adoption authorizes Medicare to negotiate drug prices and caps annual out-of-pocket prescription costs at $ Increase the supply of clean energy to lower the price ; reduce prices and lower markups in the pharmecutical industry October Executive Order on Promoting Competition in the American Economy Lower fees and hidden costs and increase consumer and small business bargaining power Note : IRA = Inflation Reduction Act. This table only captures some of the many actions taken in the FIM which by most economic definitions is primarily concerned with the levels of government revenue and spending and the path of deficits. The actions can be roughly divided into two categories. First there are measures to promote competition in and in the future such as the Ocean Shipping Reform Act President Biden s Executive Order on Promoting Competition in the American Economy and the Inflation Reduction Act ( IRA ) Second there are measures meant to either directly or indirectly expand the supply of particular goods or services such as the President s decision to tap into the Strategic Petroleum Reserve to reduce gasoline prices and executive actions in May intended to help increase agricultural production and add to the stock of affordable housing. The actions listed in table have likely lowered costs for specific goods or services many of which are key inputs to other industries and increased the future supply of many products. The long-term impact of these plans should be disinflationary Figure shows the Federal Government s historic primary deficits or total revenues minus total spending not including interest payments on outstanding debt and those deficits projected for the next years by the Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) which uses the economic Procompetitive IRA measures include provisions that granted Medicare greater bargaining power in prescription drug cost negotiations with pharmaceutical companies. The IRA s clean energy provisions will boost supply in targeted industries in the long term The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Figure OMB s Primary Deficit Forecast Percentage of annual fiscal year GDP Actual Projected ( OMB ) Sources : Office of Management and Budget ( OMB ) ; CEA calculations assumptions from the Administration forecast presented in the next section The winding down of spending under the CARES Act the American Rescue Plan and related legislation combined with higher tax revenue due to the recovery in GDP led to a smaller deficit in as a share of GDP than in and or the years after the financial crisis ; but the deficit was higher than the post World War II prepandemic average. One of the intentions of the reforms to the tax code made during the Biden-Harris Administration including an increase in the corporate minimum tax an increase in the Internal Revenue Service s funding to help it bring in uncollected taxes and close loopholes and a new excise tax on stock buybacks is to reduce future deficits ( Gleckman and Holtzblatt ; Congressional Research Service ) In an op-ed on May President Biden said that he expected the reduction in the Federal deficit in to help ease price pressures ( Biden ) Some theories suggest that lower deficits ( or higher surpluses ) over time can ease inflationary pressures ( see box ) Empirical estimates of the impact of government deficits on inflation do not provide consistent answers ( Cat o and Terrones ; Banerjee et al. ) Nevertheless the global coincidence of unprecedented deficit-funded fiscal actions begun in and the highest rate of inflation in years has convinced some economists that the two are related ( Bordo and Levy ) In and partially due to pandemic-era fiscal measures and pandemic-related constraints on in-person spending consumer income exceeded consumer spending by substantially more than it usually does | Chapter Figure Excess Savings and Inflation 3-month annualized percent change dollars ( trillions ) $ trillion in excess savings accumulated from : Q1 to : Q4 $ trillion in excess savings drawn down from : Q1 to : Q4 Actual savings ( left axis ) Core PCE inflation ( right axis ) Savings at average rate ( left axis ) Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : The average saving rate from to was percent. Nominal dollars were converted to dollars using the PCE Price Index. All values are seasonally adjusted leading to a surplus of savings beyond what would have occurred if the saving rate ( i.e. saving as a share of disposable income ) had remained at prepandemic levels. The buildup of excess savings was due to the increased precautionary savings and pandemic-related constraints on spending that led consumers to spend less and save more than usual ( Bilbiie et al. ) paired with the direct payments and income support program expansions included in the CARES Act the American Rescue Plan and related legislation. Figure plots one measure of excess savings ; the dark blue line represents the deviation of actual saving from what it would have been under the average quarterly saving rate from to ( percent ) ; and the green shaded area between the dark blue line and the light blue line is the excess savings in the quarter. By the end of the amount of cumulative excess savings peaked at about $ trillion or more than two months of usual prepandemic consumer spending Given the excess savings households had the potential to spend more than they normally would without incurring debt even after the withdrawal of some fiscal recovery programs. In an aggregate supply-and-demand framework if households spend their excess savings the spending will increase aggregate demand exacerbating inflation when supply is constrained ( Aladangady et al. ) Excess savings as shown in figure were drawn down by about $ trillion in and consumer spending rose counteracting the aggregate demand effect of the negative fiscal impulse shown in figure If the drawdown of excess savings together The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | with current income boosted aggregate demand it could have contributed to high inflation in and Additional demand factors affecting inflation. The pandemic and recovery supported by funds provided by the CARES Act the American Rescue Plan and related legislation also generated large and unusual shifts in consumer demand most importantly away from in-person services and toward distancing-friendly goods and then back again as shown in panels B and C of figure In April possibly driven by this unusual spending on goods inflation in the price of goods over the preceding months as measured by the PCE Price Index was higher than inflation in the price of services for the first time in nearly a decade as shown in panels D through F of figure In the second half of goods inflation settled some but the consumer demand rotation back to services caused services inflation to increase. Correspondingly the ratio of the consumption of real goods to that of real services also rose and then fell back somewhat toward prepandemic levels but remained elevated Because consumer spending makes up nearly percent of GDP it is informative to look at consumer spending on its own as a measure of where the economy in was relative to its trend as shown in figure above Figure panel B shows that goods consumption remained above its Figure Consumer Goods-Services Rotation A. Total spending B. Spending on goods C. Spending on services PCE Trend PCE on goods Trend dollars in trillions dollars in trillions dollars in trillions Trend PCE on services D. Overall prices E. Goods prices F. Services prices Index ; = Index ; = PCE Price Index Trend Goods PCE Price Index PCE Price Index Index ; = PCE Price Index Services PCE Price Index Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : PCE = Personal Consumption Expenditures. Trend lines were calculated by regressing each respective series on time from to All values are seasonally adjusted | Chapter trend through Services consumption as shown in figure panel C recovering from the obstacles to in-person services during the pandemic and seeing a rapid rise in prices remained below its trend. Overall as shown in panel A of figure consumer spending was near its trend. Business fixed investment as broken out in figure which is necessary to add to domestic productive capacity did not see the same rapid increase as consumption. This disconnect between above trend goods consumption and the lack of increased production whether due to supply constraints on production or slow investment means that domestic supply was not able to provide the level of goods and services demanded. As supply chain disruptions made it challenging to address this imbalance through increased imports inflation rose as goods prices increased ( Guerrieri et al. ) The impact of inflation expectations. Expectations play an important role in the major frameworks that economists use to analyze inflation as described in box Some economists think that higher expectations of future inflation can be self-fulfilling making efforts to fight inflation more difficult or painful. If businesses consumers and financial market participants expect inflation to be high they will behave in ways consistent with this expectation and that may bring about actual higher inflation. For example workers with high inflation expectations may demand higher wages and businesses with high inflation expectations may price goods higher. The back and forth between these effects can lead to further increases in inflation. In long-term inflation expectations stayed near their historical levels and short-term expectations moved with actual inflation pointing Figure Actual and Expected Inflation 12-month percent change 1-year expected inflation year expected inflation 12-month headline CPI inflation Sources : University of Michigan ; Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | to inflation expectations that were dependent on actual inflation rather than being driven independently in a way that could lead to further inflation When inflation began to rise in long-term inflation expectations had been steady for decades and even as inflation started to climb these expectations remained low. Figure plots two of the most commonly tracked measures of inflation expectations : the median expected annual price change over the next months from the University of Michigan s monthly survey of households ; and the median expected average annual price change over the next five to years from the same survey. Although both measures increased during they did not increase by nearly as much as realized inflation. Long-term inflation expectations ( year expected inflation the light blue line ) in particular were reassuringly stable indicating that although elevated inflation was expected in the short run it was not expected to last. As discussed in box this stability was taken as evidence that inflation expectations were anchored. Still toward the end of some economists worried that the modest increases in long-run inflation expectations and the possibility of sustained increases in expectations would make it harder to bring inflation down ( Powell 2022b ) The Forecast for the Years Ahead The Biden-Harris Administration finalized the latest version of its official economic forecast on November This forecast provides the Administration s estimated projections of key economic variables over the next years from to and also includes its forecast for During the interval between when this forecast was finalized and the publication of this Report more data have become available so that the official forecast discussed in this chapter differs from those published more recently This overall forecast is a critical input to the President s Fiscal Year Budget because it is an input into the budget projections of many Federal agencies and to projections of tax revenues. The forecast development also provides insight into what challenges lie ahead and where the economy might need additional investment and support COVID-19 continues to generate forecasting uncertainty. Although U.S. COVID-19 fatalities surged to a day in : Q1 due to the new Omicron variant they declined to per day in April and then the fourweek moving average fluctuated in the range of to per day for the rest of the year held down by vaccinations increasing immunity and new treatments. Further COVID-19 declines or future surges pose upside and downside risks for the forecast. The potential for future supply chain disruptions due to COVID-19 surges abroad or wartime disruptions provide further risks ; the Russian invasion of Ukraine is another source of uncertainty | Chapter Table Economic Projections Percent Change ( Q4 to Q4 ) Inflation Measures Level ( percent ) Unemployment Rate Interest Rates Real GDP GDP Price Index CPI Annual Q4 3-Month T-Bills 10-Year T-Notes Actual Forecast Year Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Department of the Treasury ; Office of Management and Budget ; CEA calculations Note : These forecasts are based on data available as of November ; actual data for arrived later. The interest rate on 3-month ( 91-day ) Treasury Bills is measured on a secondary-market discount basis Averaging these risks the Administration presents a central forecast ; table summarizes its key aspects The Near Term For this Report s near-term forecast two questions were paramount. First does real GDP currently exceed its short- or long-run potential level ? And second how soon will inflation return to the Federal Reserve s percent target and how will this return influence output and employment ? The Administration forecast largely followed the consensus of Blue Chip forecasters by revising its GDP forecast downward. Over the six months between March and October the Blue Chip consensus economic forecast was revised to show substantially lower real GDP growth and higher inflation during the two years and ( see table ) This combination of revisions suggests that the consensus implicitly recognized that demand had exceeded available supply during ; the consensus panel did not make any offsetting upward revisions during the subsequent two years The lack of a bounce-back in the consensus forecast for real GDP growth in The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Table Evolution of the Blue Chip Consensus Real GDP Forecast Percent Growth Annual Average to Annual Average Real GDP March October Revision CPI March October Revision Source : Blue Chip Economic Indicators Note : The Blue Chip panel revises its long-term forecast in March and October with growth rates that are annual average to annual average and may reflect that the constraints on supply during partly reflected long-term factors. Between October and December inflation in came in lower and real GDP growth during came in stronger than the Administration had predicted as of November. In light of the new data available since the forecast was finalized a forecast assembled today would differ from that finalized in November The forecast given in table predicted slow ( percent ) real GDP growth for the four quarters of because GDP growth may need to be less than trend growth to alleviate the current tight labor market. The Blue Chip consensus panel also predicted that real GDP growth would be slow over the four quarters of the year.10 The second question how soon will inflation return to levels consistent with the Federal Reserve s target depends on the success of monetary and fiscal policy and the legislative and executive actions discussed above. As a consequence of the FOMC s decision to raise the target Federal Funds Rate from close to percent in February to between and percent in December other short-term rates also increased including the yield on 91-day Treasury Bills which rose percentage points during the months of the year to percent by the end of the year. Though nominal interest rates on long-term securities also rose they did not increase by as much as short-term rates perhaps reflecting market confidence that inflation will recede over the next years. As of November the Administration predicted that interest rates would continue to increase during but would then begin to decline in The Administration further predicted that inflation would fall quickly in from its pace as supply chains unsnarled and would return to rates consistent with the Federal Reserve s In October the Blue Chip panel predicted that Q4-to-Q4 real GDP growth would be percent which was lowered to percent in the December survey | Chapter long-term targets by ( see e.g. the FOMC s December statement : Federal Reserve 2022b ) Consistent with slow GDP growth in November the Administration expected the unemployment rate would edge up in averaging percent but peaking at percent in : Q4. The combination of this rising unemployment slow GDP growth a falling vacancy rate the effects of expected fiscal policies and executive actions and continued confidence in the Federal Reserve s commitment to its percent target rate was expected to lower the rate of CPI inflation to percent during and to percent during As mentioned in box above CPI inflation tends to outpace the PCE Price Index ; hence a percent CPI inflation rate is consistent with the Federal Reserve s target of a percent PCE Price Index inflation rate. Another measure of inflation the price index for GDP was expected to fall from a forecasted percent rate during to percent during Post World War II history suggests that bringing down inflation via monetary policy or otherwise will likely lower employment growth and output growth. Recognizing this relationship in November the Administration expected that unemployment would increase during the four quarters of before starting to decline in From its expected percent peak in : Q4 the unemployment rate was expected to edge lower to percent by the end of eventually falling in to the long-term rate of percent that the Administration considers to be consistent with stable inflation The Administration s near-term forecasts for real GDP growth in near-term inflation the unemployment rate and interest rates were roughly consistent with the forecast of the Blue Chip Economic Indicators ( the consensus ) and that of the FOMC as of November The Long Term In contrast to the near-term outlook the Administration s long-term forecast for real GDP growth exceeded the October Blue Chip consensus longterm forecast by an average of percentage point a year during the nine years The Administration believed that potential real GDP growth in the long run would be modestly higher because of the expected effect of the President s proposed economic policies assuming that they are enacted including a range of programs to enhance human capital formation provide childcare and reform immigration policy. In addition the Administration recognized that the downward pressure on labor force participation from the The Congressional Budget Office s forecast is absent from this list because its latest forecast ( during the interval that the Administration forecast was in play ) was finalized on March before the release of much data on GDP and inflation and was therefore out of date The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Table Supply-Side Components of Forecasted Real Output Growth Percentage-Point Contribution to Annual Real Output Growth : Q2 : Q4 : Q3 : Q1 : Q1 : Q4 : Q4 : Q4 : Q4 : Q4 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Population Labor force participation rate Component Employed share of labor force Average weekly hours Output per hour Output per worker differential Sum : Real GDO Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; Department of the Treasury ; Office of Management and Budget ; CEA calculations Note : These forecasts are based on data available as of November Total may not add up due to rounding. : Q2 : Q3 : Q1 : Q4 and : Q4 are all quarterly business-cycle peaks. Population labor force and household employment have been adjusted for discontinuities in the population series. Detailed row defintions : ( ) civilian noninstutional population ( ) nonfarm business average weekly hours ( ) nonfarm business output per hour ; output is measured as the average of income- and product-side measures ( ) difference between output-per-worker growth in the economy as a whole and in the nonfarm business sector ( ) gross domestic output ( GDO ) is the average of GDP and gross domestic income ( GDI ) retirement of baby boom cohorts is likely to wane during the last five years of the budget window ( ) as discussed in box Although the circumstances surrounding this year s near-term forecast were unique to the key issues affecting the long-term forecast are less tied to recent events. These issues can be described most clearly in terms of the supply-side components of GDP which although erratic in the short run have more understandable long-term movements The first set of key issues has to do with the long-term labor supply As discussed in chapter of this Report the U.S. population is aging. The first row of table shows that the Administration s forecast expected that the civilian noninstitutional population age years and above would grow by an average of percent at an annual rate from to below the average percent annual growth rate from to Much of this expected growth will likely come from immigration.13 The labor force participation rate was projected to continue its decline reflecting the aging of the baby boom cohorts into retirement. This downward pressure on the The civilian noninstitutional population excludes individuals who are incarcerated or are living in mental health facilities or homes for seniors or who are on active duty in the Armed Forces Projected growth rates come from demographers at the Social Security Administration. Table shows projected growth rates for the years since the business cycle peak in : Q4. The choice of this long period to discuss these supply-side components is because many of these components move sharply for business-cycle reasons ( workweek and productivity ) and others have large erratic components in the short run ( labor force participation rate and the productivity differential ) Also see Social Security Administration ( 2022a ) | Chapter Box Aging and Growth The United States like most advanced countries is going through a demographic transition and this will have a large impact on a variety of economic variables for years to come. In figure 2-ii the blue line plots the age distribution of the United States in the bars show the current age distribution and the orange line plots the expected age distribution in Although the U.S. population is still growing the center of mass of the age distribution is shifting to the right that is to older ages Of particular note is the baby boom cohort whose members were between and years of age in Most baby boomers are now Figure 2-ii. The Evolution of the U.S. Population s Age Composition Millions of people Baby boom cohort Years of age Source : Social Security Administration ( 2022b ) Note : The U.S. Social Security population differs slightly from the U.S. civilian noninstitutional population Figure 2-iii. Age Labor Force Participation Rate Profiles in Percent Male Age LFPR profile Female Age LFPR profile Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : LFPR = labor force participation rate The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | at or above the age of retirement. As they age the baby boomers will continue to push out the right tail of the distribution Most people retire when they are between the ages of the earliest age of eligibility under Social Security and as can be seen from the sharp decline in participation for those ages shown in the age participation rate profiles given in figure 2-iii. Using the Social Security Administration s projections for the age distribution through together with these age participation profiles overall participation is projected to drop about percent ( or about percentage point ) a year for the next five years. But during the last five years of the forecasted interval this downward pressure on the overall labor force participation rate will be reduced to about percent a year because most of the baby boom cohort will have already retired. Using the identity shown in table the less negative growth in the participation growth rate is expected to have a positive impact on GDP growth participation rate was projected to wane after however as discussed in box The workweek ( row of table ) was projected to stabilize after a long historical period of decline attributable to the entry of women who on average have shorter workweeks than men and to the declining share of manufacturing in total employment In the Administration s forecast the employed share of the labor force was projected to remain close to its level at the business-cycle peak and therefore made no net contribution over the forecast interval Productivity growth ( measured as output per hour ) was projected to grow percent a year over the 15-year interval somewhat more slowly than its percent long-term average but faster than the percent growth rate during the business cycle. Finally the output per worker differential which is the difference between the output per person for the economy as a whole and the output per person in the nonfarm business sector was expected to be negative because of the national income accounting convention that productivity does not grow in the government or household sectors Because productivity growth is assumed to be zero for these sectors of the economy while productivity growth was forecasted to be positive in the nonfarm business sector the differential was necessarily negative. That said this differential was projected to be less negative than the historical average because of the projected declining share of government in total output The long-term forecast of the inflation rate was based on the assumption that the Federal Reserve will succeed in hitting its target of percent for inflation as measured by the PCE Price Index. Forecasts for future interest rates were informed by the FOMC s near-term forecast of the Federal Funds | Chapter Rate. Projections for the yield on 10-year Treasury Notes lie between the Blue Chip consensus forecast and the implicit forecast provided by forward rates derived from the market prices of U.S. Treasury securities Conclusion The forces that have buffeted the U.S. economy since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic only began to calm in The United States found itself in an enviable position among advanced economies with substantial growth during and positive growth in a low unemployment rate and lower inflation than some other countries. Moreover inflation pressures abated from their mid-year highs by the end of both in terms of headline and more importantly for the future core inflation. The U.S. economy has by some economic measures such as the record low unemployment rate and the return of output to or even above the trend fully recovered from the COVID-19-induced recession As discussed in this chapter the rise in inflation during this period appears to have been driven partly by the intersection of constrained supply and strong demand. These dynamics reflected the effects of the pandemic on consumer demand and supply chains along with the strong fiscal and monetary support that was necessary to offset the unique and powerful negative shock caused by COVID-19. Though these fiscal and monetary interventions contributed to the strong demand that played a role in the ensuing inflationary pressures they also set the stage for the historically strong labor market and supported smoothly functioning financial markets. At the same time these interventions helped avoid the deep and lasting hardships that otherwise would likely have beset millions of American households. In this uncertain environment as President Biden said at the time the risk of doing too little exceeded the risk of doing too much ( White House ) Overall the recovery from the pandemic-induced recession progressed far enough in that the U.S. economy is well situated to weather the anticipated below-trend growth over the near term. The speed and strength of the pandemic recovery testifies to the power of fiscal and monetary policy to fight even the largest negative shocks. The government is united in working toward sustainable growth low inflation and inclusive prosperity The Year in Review and the Years Ahead | Chapter Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships In the global economy continued to face challenges as the economic shocks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic persisted into their third year. In addition Russia s unprovoked invasion of Ukraine disrupted global commodity markets and caused businesses and governments to reevaluate key trade and investment linkages. Nevertheless in the United States persistently strong global economic ties contributed to the continuing recovery of manufacturing output strong consumption deepening business investment ( BEA 2023a ) and resilience to shocks. They also provided strategic room to counter geopolitical aggression The global economic shocks of the past three years have highlighted the need for policies that balance the benefits of these economic ties with the risks to economic and national security that they can entail. The policy response to external challenges along with the pursuit of greener and more inclusive economic growth at home will transform the international economic linkages that manifest through global markets for goods services and data. Strong partnerships between governments are essential to effectively address these challenges This chapter begins by describing how the global economic events of were reflected in the United States robust international trade and investment flows. It then examines how ongoing COVID-19 disruptions more recent geopolitical tensions and the expansion of the digital economy have affected global economic policymaking priorities. It closes by underscoring the critical role of international partnerships between the United States and its allies and partners in ensuring the effectiveness of their collective response to these shared challenges The United States International Trade and Investment in As the headline-grabbing supply chain challenges associated with the persistence of COVID-19 retreated and despite Russia s invasion of Ukraine U.S. international trade and investment reached record highs in Trade in goods and services ( exports plus imports ) increased by percent compared with in real inflation-adjusted terms surpassing the record set in ( figure ) and reflecting robust imports and exports of goods despite headwinds from slowing global growth and the strong U.S. dollar ( BEA 2023a ) Record imports were driven by a surge in the first quarter of which retreated in the second half of the year. Although they declined from their first-quarter high they remained strong in historical terms. In contrast exports increased relatively steadily to the third quarter with a shallow fourth-quarter decline. These distinct paths are reflected in the sharp increase and subsequent narrowing of the trade deficit ( exports minus imports ) in ( figure ) The trade deficit shot to percent of gross domestic product ( GDP ) in the first quarter of the largest since the Figure Real U.S. Trade in Goods and Services Trillions of chained dollars quarterly seasonally adjusted at annual rates : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 Balance Exports Goods exports Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations | Chapter Imports Goods imports Figure U.S. Trade Balance Percentage of GDP quarterly : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 Goods : Q3 : Q1 Services : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 Total Source : Bureau of Economic Analysis Figure Real U.S. Services Trade Billions of chained dollars quarterly seasonally adjusted at annual rates : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 Other services exports Travel and transportation exports Other services imports Travel and transportation imports Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations third quarter of The deficit then declined as imports fell from their peak reaching percent of GDP in the fourth quarter Over the past years the U.S. goods trade deficit has been partially offset by a surplus in services trade. That is U.S. exports of services have consistently exceeded imports of services. However services surpluses have been depressed since the abrupt halt in international movements at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic as exports of travel and transportation services Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | have recovered more slowly than imports.1 In real travel and transportation services exports had only reached percent of their level whereas imports were at percent ( figure ) In stronger growth in travel services imports ( spending by U.S travelers abroad ) compared with exports ( spending by foreign visitors to the United States ) was likely driven in part by the dollar s strength ( box ) For transportation services the differences in recovery paths were compositional : U.S. transportation services exports are typically dominated by passenger air services so fewer foreign visitors due to COVID-19 suppressed these exports. While the plurality of U.S. transportation imports are also typically passenger air services a large share are maritime freight services Since most shipping companies are foreign-owned record goods imports pushed these services imports higher ( BEA 2023b ) In official U.S. data on services trade this category is named transport rather than transportation. Box Effects of the Strengthening U.S. Dollar on the U.S. Economy In the U.S. dollar strengthened against the currencies of its main trading partners particularly other advanced economies. The Federal Reserve s broad real exchange rate index increased by percent between January and its peak in October falling back at the end of to realize a percent year-over-year increase in December ( figure 3-i ) The dollar s rise was driven by strong U.S. growth and rising interest rate differentials as well as by the appeal of U.S. assets as safe haven investments as Russia s invasion of Ukraine stoked global uncertainty. The weakening of the dollar at the end of the year reflects the Federal Reserve s signal that the pace of rate hikes would slow and signs of relatively strong economic conditions in other advanced economies Dollar exchange rates have an important influence on trade patterns because they determine the price of U.S. goods and services in the national currencies of the Nation s trading partners. When the dollar is strong it takes more foreign currency to purchase dollar-denominated goods and services. At the same time it reduces the dollar cost that U.S buyers pay for imported goods and services denominated in foreign currency effectively making them cheaper. All else being equal these changes in relative prices encourage U.S. buyers to substitute away from goods and services produced in the United States and toward foreignproduced goods and services ( i.e. imports ) deepening the U.S. trade deficit | Chapter Figure 3-i. Federal Reserve Board s Real Broad Dollar Index Index : = through December Strengthening U.S. dollar Jan-2016 Sep-2016 May-2017 Jan-2018 Sep-2018 May-2019 Jan-2020 Sep-2020 May-2021 Jan-2022 Sep-2022 Broad Advanced foreign economies Emerging market economies Sources : Federal Reserve Board ; CEA calculations Note : Advanced foreign economies include Australia Canada the euro area Japan Sweden Switerland and the United Kingdom Emerging market economies include Argentina Brazil Chile China Colombia Hong Kong India Indonesia Israel South Korea Malaysia Mexico the Philippines Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Taiwan Thailand and Vietnam In the dollar s strength was only one of many strong currents shaping trade patterns. As such it is difficult to distinguish its effects from other forces. However as an example it is likely that the strength of the dollar contributed to the comparatively stronger rebound in imports relative to exports of travel services as depicted in figure This is because when the dollar is strong as explained above it has more value in foreign currency terms making travel budgets go further and thus incentivizing increased spending on hotels restaurants and other goods and services by Americans abroad. The opposite effect makes travel in the United States more expensive for foreign visitors The strong dollar also likely dampened U.S. exports of agricultural commodities like soybeans cotton and corn in ( Jiang et al. ) Indeed exports in the Bureau of Economic Analysis ( BEA s ) broad end-use category of food feed and beverages which includes these agricultural products fell to its lowest level in real terms since another period of the dollar s strengthening. ( The BEA classifies traded goods in six broad end-use categories : consumer goods ; foods feed and beverages ; industrial supplies and materials ; capital goods ; automotive vehicles etc. ; and other goods. ) Because agricultural commodities tend to have relatively few intrinsic differences across countries of origin it is particularly attractive for buyers to substitute away from U.S. varieties when a strong dollar increases their relative prices. Indeed research suggests that exchange rates are a particularly relevant factor for buyers of less-differentiated commodities and U.S. agricultural exports tend to decline in periods of real dollar strength ( Cooke et al. ; Mattoo et al. ) Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | The strong real exports of manufactured goods in seemingly conflict with the deterioration of U.S. currency competitiveness. ( These exports are defined as goods exports under the North American Industry Classification System chapters ; U.S. Census Bureau 2023b ; BLS ) However this may be explained in part by two offsetting forces First the dollar s strength lowers the dollar costs of imported inputs and capital equipment priced in foreign currencies thus increasing the cost-competitiveness of U.S. manufacturers that rely on these imports ( Goldberg and Crockett ) Second in U.S. manufacturers loss of currency competitiveness was likely offset by a deterioration of cost-competitiveness in other countries that were more exposed to rising input costs from energy price hikes A strong dollar can also lower the dollar price of imported consumer goods dampening inflationary pressures. In practice however the dollar s impact on movements in U.S. consumer price inflation has historically been limited due to the relatively low pass-through of exchange rate movements to U.S. import prices ( Gopinath and Itskhoki ; Gopinath Itskhoki and Rigobon ) Moreover imported goods constitute a relatively small share of the basket of goods used to calculate common measures of inflation representing only percent of the Consumer Price Index by one estimate ( Borusyak and Jaravel ) so declines in prices of imported goods are unlikely to have a substantial impact on measured inflation in a given period Pandemic-Related and Macroeconomic Trends Have Shaped Record Goods Imports Strong demand growth and the unwinding of the pandemic-era supply chain pressures that mounted throughout underpinned the dramatic increase in goods imports in the first quarter of ( for the top U.S. import partners see box ) Along with the strengthening dollar these forces sustained elevated imports through the rest of the year. To illustrate how this pattern unfolded in record imports in the broad end-use category of consumer goods figure splits this category in two. The household goods series depicts trends in real imports of goods most closely associated with household consumption such as apparel and footwear cellphones furniture and household appliances. The other consumption goods series reflects trends in real imports of goods like pharmaceuticals artwork and gem diamonds that are less associated with everyday household expenditures.2 The CEA is grateful to the International Trade Programs team in the Economic Indicators Division of the U.S. Census Bureau for suggesting this division | Chapter Box The United States Top Goods Trading Partners Although research suggests that the product composition of goods trade has shifted in recent years the United States top trading partners have largely remained the same ( Bown 2022a ) The top U.S. export destinations and import sources are still China and the European Union the two largest economies outside the United States as well as the United States North American neighbors Mexico and Canada. Together these four economies are responsible for over half of U.S. trade ( figures 3-ii and 3-iii ) Figure 3-ii. Top Sources of U.S. Goods Imports Share of nominal imports European Union % Rest of the world % China % Mexico % Canada % Source : U.S. Census Bureau Figure 3-iii. Top U.S. Goods Export Destinations Share of nominal exports European Union % Rest of the world % China % Mexico % Canada % Source : U.S. Census Bureau Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | Figure Real Imports of Consumer Goods Billions of dollars Jan-2018 Jul-2018 Jan-2019 Jul-2019 Household goods Jan-2020 Jul-2020 Jan-2021 Other consumption goods Jul-2021 Jan-2022 Jul-2022 All consumer goods Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : Consumer goods exclude automobiles and parts. Household goods include apparel footwear and other household goods ; furniture and other household goods ; household appliances ; cell phones and other household goods ; and toys games and sporting goods. Real series have been adjusted with the Bureau of Labor Statistics ' import price indices Figure reveals that the first-quarter import surge was largely driven by household goods reflecting the pandemic-induced shift in consumption expenditures to goods and away from services ( see chapter of this Report ) This shift disproportionately increased import demand throughout this period in part simply because goods are more import-intensive than services. Compounding this the persistence of remote work and diminished leisure spending outside the home increased demand for goods like computers and home improvement products that are particularly import-intensive in the United States ( Chetty et al. ; Higgins and Klitgaard ; IMF 2022a ) In the first quarter easing of port congestion in addition to high inventory investment by businesses responding to global market uncertainty after months of COVID-19-related supply chain snarls and the impending threat of Russia s invasion of Ukraine further boosted imports. Imports of household goods decreased from their first-quarter peak as consumption expenditures began to shift back to services supply chain backlogs were cleared and inventory rebuilding continued ( see chapter ) However they remained well-above prepandemic levels throughout the first half of the year. In the second half of the year household goods imports declined even more significantly as rising interest rates began to dampen consumer demand Real imports of capital goods also set a record in exceeding the previous record set in by percent. Together with robust imports of industrial supplies and materials fuels metals and other key industrial | Chapter Figure Real Imports of Capital Goods ( Excluding Automobiles ) Billions of chained dollars Jan-2018 Jul-2018 Jan-2019 Jul-2019 Jan-2020 Jul-2020 Jan-2021 Jul-2021 Jan-2022 Jul-2022 Sources : Census Bureau ; CEA calculations inputs these imports supported a strong rebound in domestic output in ( see chapter ) Like household goods capital goods imports surged in the first quarter with relief from pandemic-era port congestion ( figure ) Unlike household goods capital goods imports remained substantially above prepandemic levels as imports of various types of electrical equipment industrial machinery transportation equipment and information and communications technology equipment including semiconductors benefited from a combination of easing supply constraints and strong business demand Geopolitical Shocks and Global Demand Have Shaped Record Goods Exports Real exports of goods surpassed their prepandemic heights of by percent in ( see box for the top U.S. export partners ) Increased demand for U.S. energy exports was a key driver as many countries particularly in Europe looked to replace Russia as a source of crude oil and natural gas supplies. U.S. exports in the broad end-use category of industrial supplies and materials which includes energy goods hit a record high in as did exports of consumer goods. In contrast to consumer goods imports depicted in figure the increase in real consumer goods exports was driven by pharmaceutical goods ( figure ) Shocks from Russia s invasion of Ukraine had a significant impact on global commodity markets in that echoed in U.S. exports. In contrast to other traded goods commodities like oil as well as many metals minerals and agricultural products are relatively standardized across source countries Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | Figure Real Exports of Consumer Goods Billions of dollars Jan-2018 Jul-2018 Jan-2019 Household goods Jul-2019 Jan-2020 Jul-2020 Other consumption goods Jan-2021 Jul-2021 Pharmaceutical goods Jan-2022 Jul-2022 All consumer goods Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : Consumer goods exclude automobiles and parts. Household goods include apparel footwear and household goods ; furniture and household goods ; household appliances ; cell phones and other household goods ; and toys games and sporting goods. Real series adjusted with BLS import price indices allowing buyers to substitute across source countries fairly easily. Because of this their price in any given country is largely determined by global market movements. As such although Russia and Ukraine are relatively small trading partners for the United States representing only percent of U.S. exports and percent of U.S. imports in because they are major producers and exporters of key commodities disruptions of their exports influence the prices U.S. consumers must pay for food and fuel and also overall inflation ( see chapter ) In addition since the United States is an exporter of some commodities also exported by Russia and Ukraine notably energy and agricultural products disruptions to supplies or changes in the pattern of exports from these countries can affect U.S. exports as well ( IEA 2022a ) Initially Russia s invasion largely cut off Ukraine a major exporter of food commodities especially wheat corn and vegetable oil from global markets threatening global food security. The loss of Ukraine s export supply along with the reluctance of global buyers to engage with Russian exporters on the exports of grains and oil seeds and Russia s own export restrictions on fertilizer and other agricultural products resulted in contractions along key supply lines for food staples and agricultural inputs like fuel and fertilizer sending prices soaring in the immediate aftermath of the invasion ( Glauber and Laborde ) Prices retreated as allied nations successfully collaborated to mitigate disruptions. Nevertheless the uncertainty associated with Russia s domestic actions and aggression toward Ukraine including the destruction of infrastructure used to store and export food commodities and the naval blockade of Ukraine s Black Sea | Chapter Figure U.S. Exports of Liquefied Natural Gas and Millions of cubic meters North America European Economic Area ( including EU ) and U.K China Other Asia-Pacific Rest of the world Total Sources : U.S. Census Bureau accessed with Trade Data Monitor ; CEA calculations Note : Liquefied natural gas is covered by HS271111. Other Asia-Pacific includes Australia Japan South Korea New Zealand and all nations that belong to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations : Brunei Cambodia Indonesia Laos Malaysia Myanmar the Philippines Singapore Thailand and Vietnam trade route continued to exacerbate elevated prices. This led U.S. exports of food feed and beverages to exceed their record by percent in nominal terms even as they fell to their lowest level since in real terms ( Foggo and Mainardi ; U.S. Census Bureau 2023b ; Yale School of Public Health ) Real exports of these products were ultimately depressed by the strong dollar weakening global demand and other productspecific factors including adverse weather conditions Disruptions from Russia s invasion of Ukraine had a more significant real impact on U.S. exports of energy goods notably liquefied natural gas ( LNG ) and crude oil. The quantity of U.S. exports of LNG and crude oil rose substantially over s already-high levels. For LNG U.S. exports also shifted dramatically to European countries as Russia restricted its oncedominant supply of natural gas via pipeline ( figure ) Crude oil exports expanded more broadly across destinations with the notable exception of a decrease in exports to China ( figure ) Although this figure only captures a single year rather than a trend research suggests that reductions in China s energy imports from the United States in likely represented a shift to imports from other sources including Russia along with a drop in demand due to slower Chinese economic growth ( Bown 2022b ) International Trade in Services and Digital Trade Have Been Resilient Through the end of U.S. trade in services other than travel and transportation was remarkably stable and resilient amid the continued disruption of the COVID-19 pandemic and rising geopolitical tensions ( see figure ) In part this is because digital technology enables adaptations that allow Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | Figure U.S. Exports of Crude Oil and Millions of barrels North America European Economic Area ( including EU ) and U.K China Other Asia-Pacific Rest of the world Total Sources : U.S. Census Bureau accessed with Trade Data Monitor ; CEA calculations Note : Liquefied natural gas is covered by HS271111. Other Asia-Pacific includes Australia Japan South Korea New Zealand and all nations that belong to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations : Brunei Cambodia Indonesia Laos Malaysia Myanmar the Philippines Singapore Thailand and Vietnam many traded services to be remotely provided. Further many countries have made efforts to reduce obstacles to digital trade including by promoting access to and efficiency of electronic payments ( Klapper and Miller ) Just as remote work minimized pandemic-related disruptions in many domestic industries that specialize in information digital technologies allowed movements of service providers to be converted into movements of data and thus minimized interruptions of international trade in these industries ( Brynjolfsson et al. ; Dingel and Neiman ; Espitia et al ; Pei de Vries and Zhang ) Furthermore limitations on mobility increased demand for other traded digital services as more household consumption as well as work moved online In fact the pandemic likely accelerated the trend of rising digital trade flows. Though there is no standardized definition of digital trade it can be conceptualized as including three general types of transactions. The first is traditional e-commerce whereby the Internet facilitates a purchase that is delivered offline. The second is digitally provided services which are provided and consumed online. This category includes a wide array of services that are increasingly part of everyday life including digital media like streaming music and videos ; digital platforms that connect individuals to make transactions ; the services embedded in the Internet of Things like smart household appliances and connected medical devices ; and the cloud computing services relied on for business operations. The third category includes data which are a basic element of many cross-border transactions but can also be deployed by companies as part of their operations or sold to other businesses to target advertisements improve manufacturing | Chapter Figure U.S. Trade in Potentially ICT-Enabled Services Billions of dollars Imports of potentially ICT-enabled services Imports of all other services Exports of potentially ICT-enabled services Exports of all other services Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : ICT = information and communications technology. Price indices for exports and imports of potentially ICT-enabled services are calculated as the average of price indices for their components ( insurance services ; financial services ; charges for the use of intellectual property ; telecommunications computer and information services ; other business services ; and personal cultural and recreational services ) weighted by the category 's nominal share. The nominal series is then converted with this price index operations and power machine learning for artificial intelligence ( AI ) tools among many other uses ( Meltzer ; OECD 2023a ; Staiger 2021a ; Wharton ) Although digital trade can not be precisely measured using current data sources the evidence suggests that there have been dramatic increases during the last two decades. Cross-border data flows that underpin digital trade transactions are estimated to have increased by a compound annual growth rate of percent between and and by about percent between and ( Birshan et al. ) In comparison flows of goods and services grew at a compound annual growth rate of about and percent respectively between and ( BEA 2023c ) Estimates suggest that e-commerce transactions grew at an average annual rate of percent between and and by percent between and E-commerce transactions made up an average of percent of retail sales by value in up from percent in and percent in ( U.S Census Bureau ) Likewise the subset of traded services that the BEA defines as potentially ICT-enabled ( i.e. information and communications technology enabled ) has grown dramatically over time ( figure ) Real exports Potentially ICT-enabled services trade includes the categories of services trade for which digital technologies are thought to play the most prominent role. These include ICT services themselves as well as insurance services financial services and charges for the use of intellectual property including royalties and licenses Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | and imports of potentially ICT-enabled services grew at an average annual rate of and percent respectively between and This was much faster than real exports and imports of all other services which grew at average annual rates of and percent respectively during the same period Unlike traditional trade in goods and services for many digital trade transactions there is no physical movement of a good or a person across a border. Rather the transaction is fully realized by data flows. In great contrast to physical exchanges the direct marginal cost to move data across borders is nearly zero. Moreover the cost difference in procuring an identical digitally delivered service from nearby versus from far away is also close to zero ( Goldfarb and Tucker ) Absent a sharp increase in regulatory hurdles digital trade is thus poised for further dramatic increases as digital technology continues to improve as the Internet of Things continues to spread and as robotics and artificial information technologies are further developed ( Baldwin ) At present U.S. trade in potentially ICT-enabled services is concentrated among advanced economies ( BEA ) However as digital technology develops and as the infrastructure that enables Internet use improves there will be more opportunities to draw on workers and consumers from around the world to provide and demand a wide range of digital services This is likely to propel substantial increases in digital trade with emerging markets ( Baldwin ) and provide benefits to U.S. consumers workers and businesses. However increased competition from service providers abroad will also likely have negative effects on some American businesses and workers ( box ) Continued Growth for Foreign Direct Investment Despite Elevated Uncertainty Global foreign direct investment ( FDI ) flows exhibited strong growth during the first three quarters of ; total real global FDI flows grew by percent during the first three quarters of compared with the same period in ; global FDI flows in the first quarter of reached their second highest level in the past five years increasing by more than percent yearover-year and by over percent compared with the prior quarter ( BEA 2023d ; OECD 2023b ) Global FDI as a share of world GDP reached about percent of GDP in the first half of a continued recovery from the sharp contraction in international investment during the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Though FDI can sometimes pose risks ( e.g. to national security in limited cases ) research has found that inward and outward FDI can be Real FDI flows are calculated as the average of global FDI inflows and outflows in dollars deflated by the U.S. Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index ( chain type ) | Chapter Box Rising Digital Trade and U.S. Labor Markets Advances in digital technology that facilitate the remote production and provision of goods and services will create significant opportunities and challenges for U.S. workers ( Amiti and Wei ; Eppinger ; Grossman and Rossi-Hansberg ) U.S. workers have a comparative advantage in many tradable services and some sophisticated goods industries due to skill level and education. Access to a larger global market will allow these industries to expand increasing demand for these skills which may lift wages and provide opportunities for employment for a portion of the workforce. However other workers in services industries that compete directly with digitally enabled imports ( e.g. a worker for a traditional big box retailer competing with a foreign e-commerce company ) may face lower wages and job loss. Importantly research suggests that these losses may disproportionately affect individuals who are more economically vulnerable exacerbating economic inequality within the United States ( Oldenski ) In particular Baldwin ( ) argues that an expansion of digital services trade may have particularly negative effects on U.S. workers providing intermediate services ( e.g. administrative assistants graphic designers travel agents and information technology help staff ) who will face rising competition from lowwage counterparts in developing countries Labor provisions are a core feature of the Biden-Harris Administration s work with U.S. partners on digital trade and featured in the United States discussions with the EU in the U.S.-EU Trade and Labor Dialogue under the U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council ( DOL ) as well as in Pillar of the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity ( USTR 2022b ) These provisions aim to ensure that trade policy supports fair competition for U.S. workers in the digital economy raising the standard for workers abroad rather than facilitating competition on the basis of low labor standards Research on previous labor market shocks notably the so-called China Shock whereby increased import competition in certain manufacturing sectors led to concentrated and persistent job losses in some communities has revealed that the costs for many workers to adjust after a change in the demand for their labor can be very high ( Autor Dorn and Hanson ; Eriksson et al. ) This suggests that there is an essential role for complementary domestic policies to equip U.S workers who are exposed to increased competition through digital trade with the resources to adapt ( CEA chap. ; Clausing ) Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | Figure Real U.S. Outward Foreign Direct Investment by Destination Billions of dollars quarterly : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 Group of Seven ( excluding United States ) : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 Large emerging markets : Brazil China India Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : Data are net financial transactions ( without current cost adjustment ) on a directional basis in this case those that relate to outward investment ( U.S. direct investment abroad ) Nominal series converted to dollars using U.S. Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index. Data through : Q3 the source of significant contributions to economic growth and increased resilience to shocks ( Alfaro ; OECD 2020a ) Although FDI flows are not directly subject to the same types of physical disruptions as international trade ( i.e. the ability to carry out financial transactions is not affected by issues like port closures or physical distance ) they are similarly responsive to changes in global economic conditions Elevated uncertainty about global economic conditions and changes in the economic policy environment can reduce or reverse investment flows ( Choi Furceri and Yoon ; Gulen and Ion ; Julio and Yook ) Businesses may decide to delay or suspend investment decisions when uncertainty is high and when investors find it difficult to determine when conditions are likely to normalize. Following the strong flows in the first quarter of elevated global inflation and tightening global financial conditions as well as the compounding effects of Russia s invasion of Ukraine resulted in individuals companies and governments moderating global FDI flows in the second and third quarters of ( although they still grew percent compared with the second- and third-quarter flows in ) ( OECD 2023b ) Focusing on the United States in the first half of the country was both the largest recipient and largest source of FDI globally ( OECD 2022a ) FDI flows into and out of the United States are largely flowing from or to advanced economies ( e.g. the Group of Seven ) especially in comparison | Chapter Figure Real U.S. Inward Foreign Direct Investment by Source Billions of dollars quarterly : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 Group of Seven ( excluding U.S. ) : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 : Q1 Large emerging markets : Brazil China India Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; CEA calculations Note : Data are net financial transactions ( without current cost adjustment ) on a directional basis in this case those that relate to inward investment ( foreign direct investment in the U.S. ) Nominal series converted to dollars using U.S. Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index. Data through : Q3 with FDI to and from large emerging market countries ( figures and ) Along these lines the United States its allies and its partners are taking measures to deepen investments in the critical industries in one another s economies as a way of reducing dependencies on other countries that have had an outsized role in these industries notably China. For instance the United States its allies and its partners are coordinating to increase their collective capacity to produce semiconductors ( Shivakumar Wessner and Howell ) As part of the United States CHIPS and Science Act the State Department will manage the International Technology Security and Innovation Fund which will promote the development of complementary secure supply chain investments in key partners to strengthen and support the U.S. semiconductor industry ( U.S. Department of State 2022a ) Similarly coordinated efforts to catalyze infrastructure investment in emerging and developing countries through the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment particularly to support the digital economy and the green energy transition will help reduce uncertainty strengthen secure supply chains create new opportunities for businesses and workers and boost overall economic growth ( White House 2022a ) The increased policy clarity resulting from these types of commitments and the shared experience of supply constraints during the pandemic may further catalyze mutual investment thereby deepening the United States investment relationship with its key allies and partners Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | Global Economic Relations Are at a Turning Point Since World War II a central focus of the international economic policies of the United States its allies and its partners has been reducing barriers to trade and investment in pursuit of greater economic prosperity ( Irwin 2022a ; CRS ) These policies have led to an expanded and strengthened web of integrated economic relationships in the form of global supply chains and they have supported flows of goods and services across borders that have substantially increased national incomes around the world ( CEA chap ; Irwin 2022b ; World Bank ) However disruptions of these flows during the global COVID-19 pandemic hit critical nodes of supply chains and hindered production worldwide amplifying constraints on the supply of certain essential goods to businesses and households ( Espitia Rocha and Ruta ) In addition Russia s invasion of Ukraine made it imperative for the United States its allies and its partners to sever economic relations with Russia that could facilitate its military aggression. The resulting economic sanctions the reluctance of some international businesses to maintain even permitted economic relationships with Russia and Russia s retaliatory export restrictions made the risk of undiversified supply chains even more apparent. They also underscored the power of economic integration as a tool of foreign policy ( Yellen 2022a ; Lagarde ) Alongside these shocks increased competition from imports over time has also hurt the employment and earnings outcomes for some groups of workers ( box ) Long-standing concerns about the associated role of international trade in rising income inequality within the United States ( Autor et al. ; Chetverikov Larsen and Palmer ) along with concerns about the climate crisis through the greenhouse gas emissions embedded in the consumption of tradable goods and services within the United States have led to calls to reassess and update the approach to trade policy in the United States and elsewhere ( CEA chap. ; Tai 2021a 2021b ; WTO ) Although market incentives and current trade rules do not always align production and trade flows with broader social political environmental or national security objectives international trade and investment can be powerful sources of economic gains. Empirical research has demonstrated that in addition to supporting lower costs for businesses and consumers ( de Loecker et al. ; Jaravel and Sager ) and jobs and higher wages for workers in export industries ( Feenstra et al. ; National Security Council ; Riker ; U.S. Department of Commerce ) trade and investment facilitate the flow of knowledge across borders spurring productivity gains and innovation ( Goldberg et al. ; Keller and Yeaple ) Beyond the United States borders trade and investment with the United States provides opportunities for many developing countries to fight | Chapter potentially destabilizing poverty ( Irwin 2022b ) and can be a foundation for closer relationships with the United States in other domains ( Chivvis and Kapstein ) Moreover as leaders have emphasized global economic integration is also part of a strategy to promote economic resilience and security ( Georgieva Gopinath and Pazarbasioglu ; Lagarde ; Yellen 2022a ) Extensive research has found that under a broad set of conditions businesses are more resilient during supply disruptions when they are able to draw on a geographically diverse set of sources rather than a concentrated source of supply for inputs. Put simply geographically distributed supplies can act as a pressure valve for supply challenges during periods of idiosyncratic supply disruptions ( Bonadio et al. ; Eppinger et al. ; Caselli et al. ; D Aguanno et al. ; Espitia Rocha and Ruta ; Grossman et al. ) Although the opportunity to trade does not automatically deliver geographic diversity in sourcing it does enable it. Similarly global markets can serve as a backstop for demand providing alternative markets for businesses when domestic demand is low ( Caselli et al. ; Lagarde ) As such it is in the interest of the United States to pursue approaches to lower trade costs within greener fairer and more secure trade and investment partnerships The United States its allies and its partners have thus reached a turning point in international economic policy whereby it is necessary to reckon with a broad mandate : On one hand it is desirable to maintain the benefits associated with international trade and investment and to facilitate the growth of these benefits in the digital sphere. On the other hand the focus of trade policy needs to expand beyond reducing barriers. Decisionmakers need to ensure that policy supports increased resilience to global supply shocks ; limits the ability of adversarial powers to weaponize economic integration to the United States detriment ; preserves fair competition in the presence of large nonmarket economies ; and minimizes exposure to cybersecurity and regulatory risks while facilitating digital trade flows. Trade policy can also advance other objectives that interact with international markets such as fighting climate change promoting workers rights and labor standards both at home and abroad and expanding the benefits of trade to underserved communities ( Meltzer and Kerry ; USTR 2022e ) The mandate to balance these priorities exists both at the level of individual policy measures and for aggregate U.S. policy making coordination across agencies within the U.S. government and between U.S. partners increasingly important The approach the United States takes to international economic policy in this challenging environment sends a signal to businesses consumers and governments around the world about U.S. priorities. As such it forms a key element of U.S. foreign policy Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | Imperatives of Economic Partnerships in the Changing Global Environment Confronting systemic vulnerabilities that have become more prominent over the past two years while preserving the benefits of international economic integration to the maximum extent will require close collaboration between the United States its allies and its partners. This subsection explores three critical policy objectives where cross-border trade and investment play an essential role in promoting economic well-being and for which there is a need to calibrate trade policy to meet current challenges : ( ) building more resilient supply chains ( ) responding to adversarial or unfavorable political and economic policies abroad and ( ) safely advancing digital trade Although the scope of this chapter is limited to these three areas the United States and its allies and partners also face a broader mandate to update and strengthen the rules norms and institutions that underpin international business and economic relations in the twenty-first century environment This includes facing sociopolitical challenges and combating climate change ( CEA chap. ) Existing institutions and frameworks for global dialogue and collaboration remain important as incubators for solutions to complex and evolving challenges ( Staiger 2021b ) Today s challenges also provide a critical opportunity for the United States to play a global leadership role working with its allies and partners to chart a modern course for a greener more inclusive more resilient and more secure global economy ( box ) Box The United States New Approach to Economic Partnerships The Biden-Harris Administration is pursuing deeper commercial ties through economic partnerships that address vulnerabilities to external shocks while making international trade and investment greener and fairer. The Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity a flagship effort consists of four pillars. The trade pillar seeks to craft high-standard inclusive free fair and open trade commitments. The supply chain pillar seeks to establish commitments for supply chain transparency diversity and coordination. The clean economy pillar seeks cooperation on clean energy decarbonization and infrastructure. And the fair economy pillar seeks economic frameworks to enforce tax antibribery and anticorruption systems. Commitments within each of the four pillars will be designed to enhance the benefits for workers in the United States and around the world ( White House 2022b ) | Chapter Resilience during Global Supply Shocks In the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic disruptions in the supply of manufacturing inputs like semiconductors consumer products like bicycles and medical supplies and equipment made Americans acutely aware of the importance of supply chain resilience that is the ability of businesses and public services to continue to provide goods and services when a source of supply or distribution is suddenly unavailable. The past three years have demonstrated how shortfalls of inputs or equipment in one industry can disrupt production and distribution in linked industries slowing overall economic output ( Cerdeiro and Komaromi ) Furthermore Americans have witnessed how supply disruptions can even put public health and safety at risk. This experience has motivated both firms and governments to take steps to build resilience Falling barriers to trade induced by both policy and technological change have enabled businesses to reach around the world to source the inputs and equipment that ultimately come together to produce the goods purchased by consumers and public service providers at lower cost greater variety and higher quality ( Baldwin and Freeman ; de Loecker et al ; Fan Li and Yeaple ; Krugman ) However the inputs and equipment themselves are often also an amalgam of raw materials extracted in one country processed in another and combined with more materials in a third country. As a consequence of this global production process firms and governments often have only a limited visibility of the critical nodes of supply chains which limits their ability to evaluate or reduce their exposure to rising geopolitical tensions climate-related disasters and other risks. As such researchers have emphasized that government support for initiatives to increase the visibility of supply chains or to enhance supply chain transparency can reduce the information costs of broader steps to increase resilience ( CEA chap. ; National Academies ) Because stages of production take place globally engaging with partner governments to collect and share information can make efforts to map and monitor supply chains more complete. Such collaboration can alert governments to potentially fruitful avenues to mitigate destabilizing supply dependencies and because sharing information highlights cross-country interlinkages it can catalyze coordinated responses during crises. Indeed experts have argued that a sustained commitment by countries to share information and coordinate policies affecting the supply of critical health-related goods and services will be essential in preparing for future public health crises ( Bown 2022c ; National Academies ) Partnerships to increase supply chain transparency can also reduce the costs of gathering information to satisfy climate and other policies such as those that aim to eliminate trade in products made with forced labor like the Uyghur Forced Labor Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | Prevention Act in the United States ( Baldwin and Freeman ) More generally greater supply chain transparency gives both firms and consumers the information they need to vote with their wallets by choosing to buy from producers and vendors whose practices are consistent with their own values ( Mollenkopf Peinkofer and Chu ) In this way transparency can leverage market forces to reward and advance greener more inclusive and more secure business practices The Biden-Harris Administration has initiated several ongoing dialogues on supply chains that focus on sharing information designing early warning systems for supply chain disruptions developing technical standards and facilitating private investment. These discussions have been held through the U.S.-EU Trade and Technology Council the Quad Critical and Emerging Technologies Working Group the Minerals Security Partnership and the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity. The United States also conducts regular bilateral dialogues on supply chains with a number of countries including Canada Mexico the United Kingdom Japan and South Korea These and other partnerships can further contribute to maximizing the benefits of government incentives to increase productive capacity for critical goods and materials that is traded goods that are essential building blocks for economically and intrinsically important goods and services such as medical and energy supplies and core technologies ( Baldwin and Freeman ; Miroudot ; IMF 2022a ; OECD 2020b ; White House 2021a ) Cross-country coordination can reduce the risk that competing government subsidies lead to unproductive excess capacity or an oversupply that blunts incentives for further innovation. Likewise since support from foreign governments can impose economic distortions on domestic competitors frameworks for allies and partners to resolve differences can help to limit those distortions and avoid costly retaliatory measures ( Bown and Hillman ; Staiger 2021b ; Sykes ) Finally partnerships to encourage cooperation and communication about industry standards for traded goods and services can enhance the ability for trade to contribute to supply chain resilience. Though there are legitimate reasons for countries to have differing approaches to regulations and standards affecting product design and distribution fragmentation of entire supply chains because of regulatory differences can decrease resilience. For example divergent industry standards may make digital systems less interoperable or standard manufacturing inputs less substitutable across production systems making it more costly to find alternative sources in the event of a supply disruption. As such forums to develop internationally recognized product standards as well as those that facilitate information sharing on domestic regulatory measures play a critical role in facilitating the ability of trade and investment to promote resilience | Chapter Box Coordination Has Been Critical for the Success of the Sanctions Policy toward Russia Russia s invasion of Ukraine on February started the largest land conflict in Europe since at least the conflicts in the Balkans in the 1990s. The scale and brutality of this conflict marked an abrupt departure from the post World War II and in particular the post Cold War rules-based global political and economic order ( National Security Council ) The coordinated response by the coalition of the United States and more than allied and partner nations to impose costs on Russia and address the associated threats to the global economy highlights how pooling resources and acting in coordination to achieve a policy goal is often more effective than a unilateral approach ( Aslund and Snegovaya ; Berner Cecchetti and Schoenholtz ) To date the coalition s sanctions against Russia have targeted key aspects of the Russian economy. Extensive financial sanctions have restricted capital flows into Russia depriving it of revenues necessary to continue funding its war. For example the United States has prohibited U.S. persons from making new investments in Russia and the United States and its allies and partners have sanctioned major Russian financial institutions and taken action to remove major Russian banks from the SWIFT financial messaging system ( CRS 2022a ) Beginning in early and continuing through the year foreign direct investment into Russia fell sharply ( figure 3-iv ) highlighting the scope and strength of coordinated financial sanctions and the private sector s responses to Russian aggression ( OECD 2022b ) The coalition s member countries have also imposed extensive export controls and have revoked Russia s normal trade relations status Figure 3-iv. Real Russian Foreign Direct Investment Net Inflows Billions of dollars quarterly : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 : Q1 : Q3 Sources : Bureau of Economic Analysis ; Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Note : Nominal series converted to dollars using U.S. Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index. Data through : Q3 Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | thereby increasing tariffs on imports from Russia and thus the cost of doing business with Russia ( U.S. Department of Commerce ; Tai ) The United States coordination with its allies and partners on export controls has hampered Russia s ability to backfill its imports of military or dual-use items ( U.S. Department of State 2022b ) Sanctions and export controls contributed to a sharp overall drop in Russia s imports and a shift in Russia s energy exports away from Europe both of which researchers have characterized as key factors harming the Russian economy ( Demertzis et al. ) The International Monetary Fund estimates that the Russian economy contracted by percent in ( IMF 2022b ) In addition some analysts estimate that Russia s economy will continue to suffer significantly in the medium to long runs. For example some predictions suggest that the Russian economy will not return to its prewar level of real GDP for five years or more ( Economist Intelligence Unit ) Importantly recognizing the potential for negative spillovers to the global economy from financial and trade sanctions the United States and its allies and partners have coordinated to relieve global market stress including by ensuring trade channels remained open in selected commodities exported by Russia and Ukraine ( IMF 2022b ; OECD 2022c ) This meant going after Russian energy in a measured way by coordinating with partners and allies to allow energy transactions to continue while also designing price caps on seaborne Russian oil and petroleum products to limit Russia s revenue and ensure a stable global supply of energy ( U.S. Department of the Treasury 2022a 2022b ) ( The price cap on seaborne oil entered into force in December The price cap on petroleum products entered into force in February ) In addition the United States has carved out agricultural commodities fertilizer and medical supplies from sanctions and issued extensive public guidance to ensure these authorizations are well understood ( U.S Department of the Treasury 2022c ) The United States has also worked with the United Nations to find a pathway for Ukrainian wheat to reenter global markets : through the Black Sea Grain Initiative more than million metric tons of grains and other foodstuffs left Ukrainian ports between July when the program took effect and November ( United Nations ) The global market s spillovers from Russia s war against Ukraine illustrate the broader themes of this chapter : the past year has been marked by profound new and lingering disruptions of global commerce Nevertheless global markets remain relatively robust and economic coordination a key element of the post World War II era between the United States and its allies and its partner countries has been critical Without coordination in there was a nontrivial risk that divergent sanctions policies could have increased confusion and uncertainty in | Chapter markets to the detriment of the global economy notably global price stability. A lack of coordination also could have lessened the impact on the Russian economy of these sanctions. In coming years continued coordination between the United States and its allies and partners will remain important for crafting effective policies to respond to these kinds of disruptions and to mitigate the economic and political uncertainty that may arise as a result of rising geopolitical tensions ( Georgieva Gopinath and Pazarbasioglu ) Responding to Geopolitical Challenges In today s environment of rising geopolitical tensions and geostrategic competition the United States economic strength is one of its most profound sources of global power and influence. This strength is greatly enhanced by the collective economic strength that it can wield along with its allies and partners that share its support for a free open prosperous and secure world ( National Security Council ) Coordination between the United States and its allies and partners can enhance the ability of aligned countries to provide shared security against and resilience in facing adversarial actions by for example enabling a network of alternative sourcing and market opportunities In a recent example the United States and its allies and partners have been able to impose significant economic costs on Russia in response to its invasion of Ukraine in February ( box ) By coordinating their actions U.S. allies and partners have been able to limit Russia s access to goods and services necessary to pursue its illegal war. Indeed research has shown more broadly how coordinated economic actions more effectively limit a targeted country s ability to evade economic consequences than do unilateral measures ( Bapat and Morgan ; Drury ; Peksen ) Equally economic partnerships can mitigate the economic consequences of adversarial actions targeted at the United States its allies and its partners. Just as concentrated dependencies on foreign adversaries can create vulnerabilities diversified linkages with allies and partners can lessen them. Strong diverse and reliable economic linkages between trusted partners give businesses alternative markets to which they can shift their sourcing and sales if necessary mitigating the impact of adversarial actions ( Harrell Rosenberg and Saravalle ) For example Russia has sought to weaponize Europe s dependence on its supply of natural gas in an attempt to weaken Europe s resolve to support Ukraine and to continue imposing costs on Russia in retaliation for its aggression. However trade partnerships with the United States and other allies and partners have ensured that Europe has Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | Box The U.S.-EU Energy Partnership Diminishes Russia s Leverage One of Russia s biggest sources of economic leverage has been its dominance as a supplier of energy via its natural gas pipelines to Europe Historically Russia supplied Europe with roughly one-third of its gas ( Corbeau ) Since the start of its invasion of Ukraine Russia has cut pipeline deliveries of natural gas to Europe by more than half and it may stop flows entirely in ( IEA 2022b ) However the EU was able to replace some Russian gas with imported liquefied natural gas including from the United States thus weakening Russia s ability to impose economic damage by restricting supplies of this critical source of energy for European households and industry. Economists estimate that natural gas shortages in Europe could have caused a contraction in some European economies of up to percent if the global LNG market had been unable to respond ( Flanagan et al. ) The ability of the United States to contribute to easing natural gas shortfalls has thus been critical Since Russia s invasion of Ukraine the United States and the European Union have strengthened their cooperation on energy security Through the Joint Task Force on Energy Security the United States has made commitments to supply LNG to Europe through ( White House 2022c ) Through this partnership the United States and the EU have agreed to address short-term energy supply issues with LNG while minimizing greenhouse gas emissions from LNG through measures to increase energy efficiency reduce demand for gas and regulate methane emissions. The task force has also led to additional commitments to advance renewable energy by expediting renewable energy projects and accelerating the deployment of clean energy technologies ( White House 2022d ) The United States is also strengthening its bilateral partnerships with European countries to increase energy security empower global decarbonization efforts and achieve net-zero economies in hard-toabate energy sectors through clean nuclear energy technology. In the United States announced its support for the Front-End Engineering Design study to provide the basis for the deployment of a small modular reactor power plant in Romania ( U.S. Department of State 2022c ) ; support for a pilot of commercial-scale production of clean fuels from small modular reactors in Ukraine ( U.S. Department of State 2022d ) ; and technical assistance for the inaugural civil nuclear project in Poland ( U.S. Department of Energy ) These investments will help reduce dependence on Russian energy in Eastern Europe in both the medium and long term | Chapter had the ability to shift to alternative energy sources limiting the damage of Russia s coercive behavior on households businesses and workers ( box ) Promoting Opportunity and Managing Risks in Digital Trade As discussed earlier in this chapter digital trade is poised to expand dramatically as work and consumption increasingly take place online ; as the Internet of Things digitally connects more everyday objects ; and as frontier technologies for which masses of data are a fundamental input such as AI continue to develop. Digital trade may also provide solutions for some of the core challenges to global trade and investment discussed above. For example with technologies like 3-D printing or other forms of so-called additive manufacturing digital information flows can potentially facilitate the substitution of entire stages of manufacturing supply chains that currently involve the physical movement of goods improving resilience in the presence of supply disruptions ( Freund Mulabdic and Ruta ) Likewise products in the growing TradeTech industry use advanced technologies including AI to enable supply chain transparency and traceability These products could reduce the cost of ensuring that supply chains meet security social and environmental criteria that make trade safer greener and more equitable ( Capri and Lehmacher ) However digital trade also creates vulnerabilities that must be managed especially given rising geopolitical tensions Digital trade has two fundamental requirements. The first is the infrastructure and equipment that transmit store and process data flows including the network of underwater fiber-optic cables that carry more than percent of international data ( Comini Foster and Srinivasan ; Morcos and Wall ; World Economic Forum ) The second is a regulatory environment that permits the flow of data across borders with appropriate safeguards. Absent guardrails digital trade can introduce potentially critical risks to economic well-being and national security through both of these gateways ( Meltzer ) The risks involved are manifest and nontrivial. Among the most salient are cybersecurity risks : The constant flow of large volumes of digital information creates an appealing target for the theft of data. This can allow competitors to capture intellectual property including trade secrets that threaten American businesses. It can result in unauthorized access to Americans sensitive personal information violating their privacy and potentially enabling financial or other crimes. Digital technology can allow goods and services traders to falsify information potentially facilitating the evasion of national laws regulations and standards. Digital systems can also be manipulated or disabled remotely potentially compromising national Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | defense and critical infrastructure ( Meltzer ) Estimates suggest that the economic cost of security breaches of information and technology assets during were as high as percent of global GDP ( or about $ trillion ) Other studies suggest that the costs are disproportionately high for critical industries like health care transportation energy and financial services ( IBM ; UNCDF ) The expansion of the digital economy modifies existing markets and creates new ones bringing new challenges to protecting consumers and workers and promoting competition. For example the difficulties of verifying identity and quality online can compromise consumer protection laws and labor market protections ( Goldfarb and Tucker ) Likewise the importance of large userbases and quantities of data and the ability of digitally enabled companies to attract suppliers of products and consumers from all over the world creates new market concentration dynamics and poses new challenges to regulators focused on competition policy ( see chapter ) Governments employ a variety of measures to address these challenges by regulating the movement storage and processing of data. Regulations affecting digital trade generally fall into a few categories. First data flow restrictions for example limits on access to digital media may be used to protect intellectual property rights or enhance security among other objectives. Second so-called data localization policies government regulations that determine where and how data related to their citizens government and businesses are stored may be used to enhance consumer privacy and facilitate regulation ( Casalini and Gonz lez ; CFR ) Such policies may also reflect domestic economic priorities to try to protect industry from international competition These regulatory measures can mitigate some risks associated with digital trade but they can also blunt the very benefits they are put in place to protect ( Meltzer ) For example data flow restrictions can hamper innovation which benefits from sharing information and knowledge across borders ( Valero ; White House 2022e ) These restrictions can be particularly detrimental for the development and use of AI technologies which rely on the availability of large data sets and are increasingly prominent in business and important for national security. The ability to aggregate store process and transmit data across borders is similarly critical for the financial services sector and its development ( Carr French and Lowery ) Similarly data localization requirements can increase vulnerability to cyberthreats by concentrating data thus making systems easier to target ( Bauer et al. ) These requirements can also make integrated risk management including monitoring and detecting fraud and cybersecurity risks more difficult for global firms and institutions to conduct particularly those in the financial services sector. Mismatches in equipment standards | Chapter and regulations can limit system interoperability and thus the resilience of digital systems International cooperation to define the vulnerabilities associated with data flows and digital supply chains and the regulatory measures that diminish them can reduce the risks and enhance the economic benefits of digital trade ( Ahmed ; Casalini et al. ; Huang Madnick and Johnson ; OECD 2022d ) Efforts to enhance workers rights and increase consumer protections from cybercrime and fraud that crosses borders are integral to these efforts. Indeed scholars policymakers and business leaders have all emphasized the importance of creating an international digital architecture that promotes trust in data flows ( CFR ) To do so governments must grapple with how to provide a regulatory system that is safe and secure without unnecessarily restricting the benefits of trade. Best practices in international trade suggest that regulations should be transparent should be nondiscriminatory for like products and services and should not be more Box U.S. Digital Trade Initiatives Digital trade is an increasingly prominent element of various international working groups and agreements reflecting its importance for inclusive economic growth and security and the challenges policymakers around the world face in developing appropriate and consistent regulatory approaches. Attesting to the focus that the Biden-Harris Administration has placed on ensuring that digital trade benefits people as workers and consumers the United States has led efforts to foster trust in the digital economy support innovation and competition promote a resilient and secure digital infrastructure ensure consumer protection and privacy and address discrimination. It is pursing these efforts by cooperating in regional partnerships that include the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity the World Trade Organization s ( WTO s ) Joint Statement Initiative on Electronic Commerce the Americas Partnership for Economic Prosperity and the U.S.-Central Asia Trade and Investment Framework Agreement as well as bilateral engagements with the United Kingdom Kenya Taiwan and other countries ( CRS 2022b ; USTR 2022a 2022b 2022c 2022d 2022e ; White House 2022f ) The United States has also actively participated in multilateral forums to exchange information on best practices and promote standards and frameworks for tackling the risks associated with digital trade. These include the WTO the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and the Group of Twenty and Group of Seven which together cover a broad set of countries around the world ( USTR 2022e ) Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | burdensome or restrictive than is necessary to achieve their goals including enhanced security and economic resilience ( Casalini and Gonz lez ) In this regard the Biden-Harris Administration is engaging with various forums to build this trusted system ( box ) These include working with partners and allies to promote an environment that fosters development of the global economy and facilitates robust cross-border data flows that are consistent with both privacy and security needs. However given the rapid pace at which the digital economy is evolving and the variety of domestic regulatory objectives negotiating every aspect of the digital regulation may not always be desirable or possible. In this context frameworks to establish common principles and provide for regulatory transparency have tremendous value ( Staiger 2021a ) Conclusion The record-setting flows of trade and investment in demonstrate that the United States remains deeply connected with the global economy However disruptions such as those experienced during the COVID-19 pandemic and rising geopolitical tensions pose fundamental challenges to globally connected production systems. Though the shock from Russia s invasion of Ukraine reverberated primarily in global commodity markets it also increased the level of geopolitical uncertainty which was already elevated after two years of pandemic-induced stress. The unprovoked invasion of Ukraine has exposed and intensified geopolitical rifts that along with the experience of the pandemic-induced supply shock have increased the perceived risk and uncertainty associated with global goods trade and some types of cross-border investments. These uncertainty effects may have longer-term effects on trade as governments adjust their international economic policies and businesses change their global sourcing patterns Certainly the economic links between Russia and the rest of the world and global markets for the commodities in which Russia is a key player will be transformed. Preserving the benefits from international trade and investment while protecting national security addressing the effects of climate change ( Tai 2021a ; USTR 2022e ; White House 2021b ) and promoting resilience and equity in a revitalized domestic economy demands new policy approaches to respond to both existing and emerging risks Given the global nature of the challenges discussed in this chapter the policy decisions that the United States it allies and its partners make now will reverberate in international trade and investment for some time The importance of partnerships in the modern global economy can not be overstated. Enhanced partnerships that feature commitments to share information and coordinate actions are essential to sustaining the economic dynamism and productivity delivered through global economic integration | Chapter in uncertain times ( Yellen 2022b ) Institutional arrangements must evolve to ease tensions between openness on one hand and security and domestic imperatives on the other hand ( Staiger 2021b ) Effective coordination both across and within governments can help to ensure that the individual policies that sum to the aggregate of international economic policy reflect a deliberate coordinated policy direction that responds to today s challenges Confronting New Global Challenges with Strong International Economic Partnerships | Chapter Investing in Young Children s Care and Education Investments in the earliest years of a child s life can generate substantial benefits with returns over the child s lifetime that often considerably exceed costs. In particular a large body of evidence demonstrates that early care and education ( ECE ) programs can improve children s short-term development and long-term well-being producing benefits not only for them but for society as well ECE programs also support parents employment which has become increasingly important with the decline in households where a parent stays home to provide full-time childcare. Women s labor market options have grown considerably over the past years increasing the opportunity costs of staying out of or reducing time in the workforce ( Yellen ) Both men and women point to caregiving and family responsibilities as a major obstacle for their career advancement with mothers particularly likely to report career interruptions and reduced engagement in the labor force ( Parker ; Pew Research Center ) The challenge of balancing work and family looms largest for the parents of young children not yet enrolled in K-12 schooling and has ramifications across parents careers As a result of these trends a market for nonparental ECE services has developed. Care for young children is wide-ranging from informal care ( paid or unpaid ) by relatives neighbors or in-home caregivers to formal care in home-based center-based or school settings.1 This decentralized patchwork of providers caring for children in homes centers and schools stands in contrast to for example the more structured system of public K-12 education in the United States. Though the ECE market is one upon which many families rely ( NCES ) and despite ample evidence that ECE programs can both effectively facilitate children s healthy development and support parents employment the ECE market often does not function well This chapter first presents evidence on the effects of ECE investments for children their parents and society. It then discusses ECE market challenges including workforce turnover and low pay the high costs of providing highquality care price sensitivity among ECE customers the fragility of the childcare business model and the resulting underprovision of high-quality ECE relative to what would be socially optimal. The chapter closes with a discussion of the role of public subsidies in supporting a better-functioning ECE market The Effectiveness of Early Childhood Investments Ample research documents the benefits that ECE investments can generate both directly for children who participate and working parents who rely on the care and indirectly through spillovers to their families and communities. This section summarizes and highlights the relevant evidence on ECE investments benefits for children and society the role of ECE quality in improving outcomes and the benefits of ECE for working parents Benefits for Children and Society ECE investments support children s healthy development and early learning starting at birth which cascades into longer-term and broader benefits for them their communities and the economy. A large body of research points This chapter employs the term ECE to encompass childcare preschool and prekindergarten ( pre-K ) programming because there is often a significant overlap in how programs are structured funded and delivered. Childcare typically refers to programs serving children from infancy through school age while preschool and pre-K commonly refer to programs aimed at the year or two before formal school entry. As such preschool programs typically serve children ages three and four years old and often operate on a school-day and school-year schedule. The terms childcare preschool and pre-K are used in the chapter when the policy research or data in question pertain to a specific segment of the broader ECE landscape | Chapter to ECE experiences as influential for children s short-term outcomes such as school readiness and early social-emotional and cognitive skill development as well as long-term outcomes like educational attainment executive function employment and earnings ( Deming ; Duncan and Magnuson ; Heckman and Kautz ; Weiland and Yoshikawa ) These long-term positive effects have been demonstrated in studies of childcare Head Start and other model preschool programs ( Bailey Sun and Timpe ; Campbell et al. ; Gray-Lobe Pathak and Walters ; Heckman et al. ; Herbst ) Some studies of short- and medium-term program effects find that improvements in test scores fade out over time. However when these studies also track long-term outcomes they find substantial improvements in life chances despite the short-run evaporation of test score gains ( Chetty et al ; Deming ) Moreover there are documented complementarities between ECE investments and subsequent school investments ( Johnson and Jackson ) Recent evidence captures the intra- and intergenerational spillovers of ECE exposure to siblings and the children of those exposed to the ECE program ( Barr and Gibbs ; Garc a et al. ; Garc a Heckman and Ronda ) When deployed well ECE investments can advance both economic efficiency and equity. The return on these investments manifests not only as improved individual life chances but also as societal benefits in the form of greater productivity and economic growth ; less individual reliance on government transfers ; and fewer bad outcomes that are costly for society such as poor health high school dropout and crime ( Heckman and Masterov ) Figure presents a stylized depiction of the return on investments at various stages of life with examples of programs in each period. The figure shows how the Heckman curve as it is known maps the economic argument that $ invested earlier in life can yield a greater return than $ invested later ( Heckman ) In other words the efficacy of human capital investments likely declines with age a conclusion that aligns with the science on a child s developing brain and its malleability during the infant and toddler years ( Knudsen et al. ; Shonkoff and Phillips ) According to this argument policies and programs targeted at the earliest years of life have the greatest potential to generate large individual and societal returns followed by investments in the preschool years when children are three to five years of age Research that estimates returns on human capital investments over a wide range of ages is generally consistent with the Heckman curve. In comprehensive assessments of the long-run benefits of specific early childhood programs researchers estimate a $ to $ return on every $ invested in Head Start is the federally funded preschool program for children from low-income families ; it began in as part of the War on Poverty ( ECLKC ) Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | Figure Return on Investment in Human Capital by Age Early years programs Rate of return Preschool programs K-12 schooling Job training years years Middle childhood early adolescence Late adolescence early adulthood Age at time of investment Source : Adapted from Heckman ( ) Perry Preschool ( Heckman et al. ) and even higher rates of return for the Carolina Abecedarian Project and the Carolina Approach to Responsive Education programs ( Garc a et al. ) Defining Quality in ECE Although there is solid evidence that ECE investments can be effective in the long run less empirical evidence speaks directly to the features of ECE that matter for improving children s outcomes. This research gap is due in part to limited data on inputs to and outputs from ECE programming and in part to ECE s multifaceted aims. In addition the quality of the ECE experience is measured relative to the possible alternative settings where children could spend their time and these settings vary widely. That said there are some aspects that research suggests are important dimensions of high-quality ECE While parents definitions of good ECE settings are likely subjective and include family-specific preferences for location linguistic and cultural match hours of operation and program type there have been efforts across the United States mixed delivery system to define and measure program quality objectively.3 Beyond the core safety and security requirements systematic efforts to boost ECE quality include the Head Start Program Performance Standards and States quality rating and improvement systems A mixed delivery system provides care through home-based community-based and school-based settings and can involve funding and accountability from Federal State and local sources in addition to families paying directly for ECE services | Chapter ( Office of Child Care ) These systems rely on various components depending on the State including licensure lead teachers educational attainment child caregiver ratios and other measures and most States directly incentivize providers achieving higher levels of quality as defined in the State s system. States make information on program quality publicly available. Though research has not definitively established links between quality rating and improvement systems and measurable child outcomes ( Cannon et al. ) the evidence suggests that assignment to a low rating does lead programs to improve on the measured dimensions and influences parents choices ( Bassok Dee and Latham ) An important measurable dimension of ECE quality is the nature of relationships and interactions between ECE staff and children in the care setting. Evidence suggests that stable attached child caregiver relationships in children s earliest years provide a critical foundation for their subsequent healthy development ( Hatfield et al. ; Pianta ; Sabol and Pianta ) Indeed research points to the importance of the caregiver s focused attention which means that having more early childhood educators or educators who have been trained in how to productively engage with children could generate economy-wide long-term productivity gains ( Blau and Currie ) Relatedly research suggests that ECE staff turnover is associated with children s weaker language and social skill development ( Caven et al. ) Childcare workers experiencing economic stress have a more difficult time fully engaging with children and offering a high-quality learning experience ( Schlieber and Mclean ) Evidence also indicates that improvements in compensation and working conditions can significantly reduce turnover and are associated with better care and improved child outcomes ( Bassok et al. 2021b ; Grunewald Nunn and Palmer ; King et al. ) Some comprehensive model programs have generated large returns but they are made up of a package of components including home visits parenting programs and health and nutrition offerings which makes it difficult to isolate the impact of specific features of these programs in that evidence base. Notably ECE settings provide early academic skill building and educational inputs alongside other types of support for children s healthy development including play-based and social activities and physical and mental health and nutrition services. Box explains the role of nutrition support in young children s development Benefits for Working Parents In addition to benefits for children ECE programming can be important for families because it allows parents to participate in the labor market while raising their children. In percent of families with children under six Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | Box Nutrition Support in Early Childhood ECE settings often provide services and support beyond the classroom including programs for parents health services and access to food For example from its inception in the Head Start program was designed to be a comprehensive early childhood development program with an emphasis on health and nutrition components ( Vinovskis ) Among young children the Child and Adult Care Food Program ( CACFP ) provides funding for healthy meals and snacks for children in Head Start and other ECE programs. Research suggests that funding and standard-setting programs like the CACFP are associated with improvements in child nutrition offerings and reductions in households food insecurity ( Heflin Arteaga and Gable ; Korenman et al. ; Ritchie et al. ) Researchers have established that increased access to healthier food provided to children through nutrition assistance for their families or through meals while in childcare or at school lead to improved health cognitive functioning and long-term well-being. Evidence from the introduction of both the Food Stamp Program now the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program ( SNAP ) and the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women Infants and Children ( WIC ) across the United States suggests that both programs have improved children s early life health outcomes ( Almond Hoynes and Schanzenbach ; Hoynes Page and Stevens ) and if provided before age five long-term economic outcomes ( Bailey et al. ; Hoynes Schanzenbach and Almond ) Young children can also interact with the National School Lunch Program School Breakfast Program and Special Milk Program offered in participating childcare preschool and pre-K settings. Several studies indicate that school meals can improve nutrition and health outcomes ( Gundersen et al. ; Bhattacharya Currie and Haider ) Although there are a few exceptions ( e.g. Schanzenbach and Zaki ) many studies conclude that higher participation in these meal programs leads to increases in academic achievement and educational attainment ( Imberman and Kugler ; Frisvold ; Hinrichs ) These findings are consistent with clinical evidence that nutrition is important for cognitive performance ( Alaimo Olson and Frongillo ; Wesnes et al. ) Food assistance programs are an important tool to reduce food hardship for many Americans particularly in times of economic distress Though food insecurity had been trending down in the decade preceding the COVID-19 pandemic most dramatically for Hispanic and Latino households ( figure 4-i ) nonwhite children experienced setbacks in food security in and Additionally gaps that predate the COVID19 pandemic remain between Black and Hispanic or Latino children and | Chapter Figure 4-i. Food Insecurity among Households with Young Children Percentage of households with children under six reporting low or very low food security Hispanic or Latino Non-Hispanic Black Non-Hispanic Asian American or Pacific Islander Non-Hispanic white Sources : Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations white and Asian American or Pacific Islander children ( U.S. Census Bureau 2021a ) As of the rate of food insecurity was higher for households with children for households with children under age six and particularly for single-woman-headed households than it was for households overall ( USDA 2022a ) As households with children face food insecurity ECE settings and schools will continue to serve as an important source of nutritional assistance for children. Beginning in as part of ongoing efforts to advance families food security children who receive free or reducedprice school meals will have access to a permanent food assistance program to address the summer gap in access to nutrition support ( USDA 2022b ) years had all parents in the household working ( BLS ) In large part this stems from a rise over the past half century in maternal labor force participation. From the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s participation rates for both prime-age women and prime-age mothers grew by about percentage points. Since then both rates have plateaued and have even experienced periods of decline although they remain higher today than in the mid-1970s ( figure ) Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | Figure Labor Force Participation Over Time by Maternal Status Percentage of prime-age women in the labor force Overall Mothers Sources : Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations As noted in chapter of this Report the rise in maternal labor force participation occurred in tandem with a rise in paid ECE and senior care Time use data suggest that among mothers of young children more highly educated mothers in particular have reduced time spent on care of their children concurrent with the rise in maternal employment ( Flood et al ) While increased formal ECE was likely partially the result of maternal participation research indicates that ECE also enables it ( Herbst ; Morrissey ) Specifically research examining ECE availability expansion and subsidization finds that ECE has large positive effects on maternal employment ( Blau and Tekin ; Gelbach ; Herbst ) Several studies of programs in other countries specifically Canada Germany and Norway also confirm the responsiveness of mothers employment to ECE expansions ( Baker Gruber and Milligan ; Bauernschuster and Schlotter ; Finseraas Hardoy and Sch ne ; Lefebrve and Merrigan ) Evidence from across ECE contexts including childcare subsidy receipt and the introduction of public preschool and kindergarten programs suggests that certain mothers employment is most affected. Those mothers who respond to program introduction and availability by working more are those whose youngest child is eligible for the program and those who are relatively disadvantaged ( i.e. single mothers and those with lower levels of education ) ( Cascio ; Cascio and Schanzenbach ; Fitzpatrick ; Gelbach ; Tekin ) Research on the Head Start program similarly documents that program access improved employment and earnings outcomes for single mothers ( Wikle and Wilson ) | Chapter In addition to increasing parents likelihood of working at all policies that expand access to ECE can boost their productivity in the workplace by allowing them to get additional education or job training and increasing the likelihood they will work full time ( Davis et al. ; Herbst and Tekin ) These effects may have been especially important in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic which according to survey evidence made parents and mothers in particular likely to reduce their work hours or productivity even while remaining in their jobs ( Pew Research Center ) Increased access to ECE such as through policies to expand availability and reduce costs would likely enable more parents to work which could bolster long-run economic growth and expand the economy s productive capacity. However as the next section describes the market for ECE faces fundamental challenges hampering families ability to secure ECE that meets their needs Challenges in the Market for Early Care and Education Although as noted above investments in children can make a difference not only for the children themselves but also for their families and communities in ways that spill over to society it is not at all clear the ECE market works for both providers and families. Important questions include : can families that need care access a well-functioning market to meet their needs ? And is the supply of ECE inefficiently low from society s perspective ? The evidence indicates that the care economy faces fundamental challenges in terms of both supply and demand and thus there is an important opportunity for effective policies to improve the functioning of this market On the supply side a core concern is whether care businesses that invest in higher quality such as through better staff compensation professional development and coaching for early educators and lower child caregiver ratios can recoup the increased costs while also charging rates that families can afford On the demand side families face liquidity constraints given that they are more likely to be financially strapped when their children are young and the parents are in the early and relatively unstable years of their earnings trajectories ( Davis and Sojourner ) That is many families simply lack the resources to invest in high-quality care when it is needed and can not borrow against future earnings to do so at competitive interest rates. Highquality care can consume a large fraction of families budgets especially for low-income families ( Landivar Graf and Rayo ; U.S. Department of the Treasury ) As such many families are sensitive to the price of childcare and may respond by forgoing market-based care and instead relying on parental care or informal arrangements ( Morrissey ) Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | Workforce Challenges Early care and education is a labor-intensive industry and as discussed above a stable qualified workforce is an essential ingredient in the provision of high-quality ECE services. According to the National Survey of Early Care and Education ( NSECE ) a nationally representative survey of childcare providers conducted before the pandemic the average departure rate of caregivers in center-based care the share of staff members who work directly with young children who left the focal program in the last months was percent. Though this rate of turnover is comparable to the public teaching profession ( percent ) half of teaching departures are to another teaching position whereas evidence suggests that many childcare providers leave the industry entirely ( NCES ) Research in Louisiana suggests even higher turnover overall finding that more than one-third of ECE educators depart annually and that most turnover is a departure from the ECE profession ( Bassok et al. 2021a ) Evidence also demonstrates that turnover varies considerably across centers with nearly percent losing more than half their workforce in each year of the three-year study period ( Doromal et al. ) a and higher turnover in centers paying low wages and those serving infants and toddlers ( Caven et al. ) The NSECE also documents that the average longevity for a home-based ECE provider was relatively short with about percent of home-based providers having operated five or fewer years ( NSECE ) Though these survey data predate the pandemic the evidence suggests that periods of low unemployment in the broader economy are related to higher turnover in childcare employment ( Brown and Herbst ) Thus the tight labor market during the pandemic recovery period could exacerbate high workforce turnover and slow the recovery from pandemic-induced job losses in childcare ( see box ) Churn in the workforce prevents workers from gaining experience in the field and impedes staff continuity in ECE settings potentially reducing the quality of care The workforce challenges for ECE largely stem from workers low pay. As described below this low pay results in part from the price sensitivity of consumers and the thin profit margins of care businesses. Childcare workers who are described in more detail in box make low wages relative to typical nonsupervisory workers. In the United States in December the typical production or nonsupervisory worker made on average $ an hour yet production or nonsupervisory childcare workers earned considerably less $ an hour ( BLS ) According to one analysis childcare workers earn percent less on average than workers in other occupations with similar composition by age education and other demographic characteristics ( Gould ) In particular comparing the earnings of childcare pre-K kindergarten and elementary school teachers illustrates | Chapter Box The American Rescue Plan and Support for Childcare At the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic the childcare industry was severely affected. Between February and April childcare employment fell more than percent. Recognizing the disruptions of the care infrastructure wrought by the pandemic the American Rescue Plan ( ARP ) Act allocated funds to stabilize childcare including $ billion in funding for the new Child Care Stabilization Program. Data from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ( ; also see White House ) indicate that more than childcare programs in the United States with total capacity to serve as many as million children have received funding through these grants intended to help the industry recover by providing grants to childcare programs to help cover operational costs such as wages and benefits rent and utilities and program materials and supplies. As of the fall of the most common uses of funds were personnel costs at centers and rent and utilities at family childcare homes These grants likely have had economic consequences that extend beyond their effects on childcare workers and providers. As described earlier in this chapter access to childcare is an important input for parental employment particularly for women ( e.g. Morrissey ) This relationship between employment and access to childcare likely helps to Figure 4-ii. Percent Change in Maternal Employment Percent change in the 12-month rolling average of the employment population ratio relative to January Low ARP High ARP Sources : Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations Note : Data are restricted to mothers who have at least one child under six. Low ARP refers to employment among those living in the half of core-based statistical areas ( CBSAs ) with the lowest provider capacity covered by American Rescue Plan ( ARP ) funding per population. High ARP refers to employment among those living in the half of CBSAs with the highest provider capacity covered by ARP funding per population Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | explain the significant disproportionate drop that women experienced in their attachment to the labor force at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. Whereas the overall employment population ratio ( i.e. the employment rate ) fell by percent between February and April the employment rate for women fell by percent. Several studies indicate that during these months employment for mothers of young children was particularly hard hit ( Boesch et al. ; Collins et al. ; Heggeness ; T zemen ) The CEA s analysis comparing maternal employment among those living in areas with relatively more provider capacity ( as a share of population ) supported by ARP funding to employment among those living in areas with less provider capacity supported by funding suggests that maternal employment has recovered more quickly in areas with greater capacity supported by stabilization grants ( figure 4-ii ) This analysis does not rule out other potential explanations of the differences in maternal employment across low- and high-ARP places including underlying differences in community characteristics but it points to an area for further research to better understand the effects of ARP childcare stabilization funds on the childcare industry and the parents who rely on it the extent of low compensation among care workers. On average childcare workers earn less than half and preschool workers earn just over half the average annual earnings of kindergarten and elementary school teachers ( BLS 2021a ) Childcare workers also rarely receive nonwage employee benefits ; only percent of these workers belong to an employer- or unionsponsored health insurance plan compared with percent of all workers ( Gould ; BLS 2021b ) In their labor-intensive industry which typically has families payments as the sole source of revenue childcare providers have limited options to cuts costs or raise revenue in order to pay higher wages. Low pay means that ECE workers are more likely to have an income below the Federal poverty line ; in childcare workers lives in a family with an income below this threshold compared with about in families overall ( Gould ) In addition percent of childcare workers rely on a public assistance program such as Medicaid or SNAP compared with percent of the United States workforce as a whole ( Whitebook et al. ) The High Costs of High-Quality Care Given the importance of ensuring safe secure and high-quality ECE for infants and young children and to make quality more visible to families | Chapter Box Who Works in ECE ? Most childcare workers are women and they are disproportionately women of color ( Banerjee Gould and Sawo ) Figure 4-iii shows the breakdown of childcare employment by gender and race/ethnicity compared with the overall workforce. About percent of childcare workers are Black and about percent are Hispanic higher than the share of Black and Hispanic workers in the overall workforce ( and percent respectively ) Additionally historical norms that have devalued care work typically performed by women and labor market discrimination affecting women and people of color may exacerbate low pay. The current composition of the care workforce has legacies in slavery when Black women acted as caregivers through coercion and force ( Glenn ) Since the end of the Civil War care workers have been shut out from workforce protections such as those enacted under the New Deal ( Burnham and Theodore ) Lawmakers continue to exclude many care workers from labor protections and benefits including minimum wage laws paid leave retirement benefits and overtime pay. The historical roots of the devaluation of care work and the ongoing barriers to equal treatment that women and people of color face in the labor market likely continue to affect the pay and working conditions for ECE workers today Figure 4-iii. Racial and Gender Breakdown of Employment Percentage of employment All workers Men Hispanic women White women AAPI women Childcare workers Black women Women of other race/ethnicity Source : Gould Sawo and Banerjee Note : AAPI = Asian American Pacific Islander Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | there are rules and standards for formal ( i.e. licensed and regulated ) childcare providers. Some regulations vary by State and others are Federal. For example the Child and Adult Care Food Program s Child Care Standards which some childcare centers must meet to receive certain Federal reimbursements require childcare centers to have at least one early childhood educator for every four children under age three ( but at least six weeks of age ) and one educator for every six children between age three and six These quality regulations are critical for ensuring children s safety and well-being and insofar as they require higher staffing levels and childcare workers with in-demand skills they necessarily increase providers costs of doing business Additionally though industries such as manufacturing have seen large technological advances leading to improvements in quality and labor productivity these advances are less applicable to labor-intensive servicebased industries such as ECE. Like those for many services to percent of childcare business expenses are for labor ( Workman ) Increasing wages in other industries that have higher labor productivity gains means that wages for care workers must also increase for care businesses to compete for workers thus raising overall prices. As noted above stable child caregiver relationships are a key component of high-quality ECE and one documented way to improve continuity in the ECE workforce is through competitive pay ( Bassok et al. 2021b ; Grunewald Nunn and Palmer ) Figure Formal ECE Consumption by Income Level Percent Income quintile Share of households receiving care Share of households paying for care Sources : National Survey of Early Care and Education ; CEA calculations Note : Early care and education ( ECE ) measures are limited to children under age and to formal ECE which includes paid individuals ( with no prior relationship ) center-based care preschool community-based care and other organizational ECE on a regular and irregular basis | Chapter High-quality ECE is fundamentally an expensive service so it is not surprising that its use and costs vary considerably across the income distribution. Figure shows formal ECE consumption by family income level giving the proportions of both households receiving care and those paying for care. Both measures increase with income and families across the income distribution are participating in some subsidized care though much more pronouncedly in the lowest income quintiles. Only about percent of households with young children in the lowest quintile pay for ECE while percent of those in the highest quintile pay for ECE ( NSECE ) Although low-income families more often qualify for subsidized services those that pay for ECE devote a larger fraction of their income to ECE expenses than middle- and high-income families. Recently released data from the Department of Labor s National Database of Childcare Prices document that prepandemic median childcare prices for one child account for between and percent of median family income in communities across the country with even higher prices for infant care ( Landivar Graf and Rayo ) For low-income families that burden is even more pronounced. Figure shows average annual ECE expenses as a share of income for all households with young children receiving formal ECE and for households that pay for ECE. For those paying for ECE the share of income spent on ECE declines sharply by income level. The lowest-income families that pay for formal ECE spend one-third of their annual income on ECE Figure Average Annual Expenses for Formal ECE as a Proportion of Income by Income Level Percent Income quintile Among households receiving formal care Among households paying for formal care Sources : National Survey of Early Care and Education ; CEA calculations Note : Early care and education ( ECE ) measures are limited to children under age and to formal ECE which includes paid individuals ( with no prior relationship ) center-based care preschool community-based care and other organizational ECE on a regular and irregular basis Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | compared with the highest-income families which spend about percent of their annual income on ECE ECE Pricing and Price-Sensitive Consumers As noted above businesses supplying care services face a pool of consumers with financial constraints that may limit their ability to afford the cost of high-quality care. In particular low- and moderate-income families tend to be more likely than higher-income ones to curtail their purchases of these services if the price rises by forgoing nonparental care altogether or by relying on informal unpaid or lower-quality ECE services The budget constraints that families face in turn affect the supply of high-quality care. ECE providers serving families that are more sensitive to prices may be unable to afford costly quality improvements. In supplying care providers choose their investment in quality at the point where their marginal revenues equal their marginal costs that is where an additional $ invested is equal to an additional $ earned. Providers serving low-income families have little economic ability to improve quality from a relatively low level ; their clients may not be able to pay more for higher-quality care due to their budget constraints. In theory with full information and accessible credit markets parents may be willing to borrow against future earnings to access high-quality ECE that meets their and their young children s needs However such credit is not generally available. As such families must pay for childcare out of their current income which may be particularly constrained when children are young and parents are in the low-earning stages of their careers ( Davis and Sojourner ) Providers serving high-income families conversely can more easily charge higher prices to recoup the costs of their investments in quality When these providers invest in better-quality care their clients are generally able to pay higher prices in large part because their family budget/income can accommodate it. This aspect of the ECE market gives rise to a stronger relationship between quality and total revenues among providers serving high-income families ECE pricing is also complicated by parents who stay home full time and informal care providers. The most recently available evidence suggests that about one in five parents was a full-time stay-at-home caregiver in ( Livingston ) Further some people who supply childcare services do so while also caring for their own children altering their cost-benefit calculus ( Porter et al. ) These care providers charge lower rates on average than larger licensed providers exerting downward pressure on prices in the broader ECE market and attracting families that can not afford center-based care ( National Women s Law Center ) Parents may also shift to relatives neighbors or in-home providers on an ad hoc or more permanent basis | Chapter when market-based options fail to meet their needs. Evidence suggests that these informal ECE settings are often of lower quality than parental care and center-based care ( Bassok et al. ; Flood et al. ) In percent of childcare businesses were sole proprietors ( i.e. with no employees other than themselves ) and the average receipts per establishment were about $ ( U.S. Census Bureau ) Even under the unreasonable assumption that providers had no expenses these receipts put the average sole proprietor at about the 20th percentile of the earnings distribution. Indeed absent other resources at these revenue levels it would be difficult to sustain a family by running a childcare business. These data suggest that some providers may supply care at below-market rates perhaps as supplementary income while providing care for their own children or family members with altruistic motives or because of limited employment options Business Model Fragility As noted throughout this chapter the ECE market is fundamentally challenged because it can not provide high quality at prices families can afford The ECE market has other fundamental characteristics that are factors in its business model which are vulnerable to economic headwinds. Researchers have confirmed that childcare responds more strongly to negative economic shocks than other low-wage industries and takes longer to recover from recessions than the rest of economy ( Brown and Herbst ) In sum ECE is a highly fragmented industry populated by small firms often sole proprietorships that pay low wages have high labor turnover and face low profit margins of less than percent for most childcare providers ( Carson and Mattingly ; Grunewald and Davies ; U.S. Department of the Treasury ) Liquidity challenges for childcare business owners explain why even a few weeks without revenue is often untenable for ECE providers as became evident during the COVID-19 pandemic. According to the CEA s analysis of November Small Business Pulse data percent of social assistance small businesses ( which include childcare businesses ) reported large or moderate negative effects of the pandemic on the business compared with percent of small businesses in general. In the same data almost double the number of social assistance businesses ( nearly percent ) reported temporarily or permanently closing compared with all small businesses ( percent ) In social assistance businesses were also more likely to report that they anticipated needing financial support or additional capital in the next six months The demographic composition of childcare providers may exacerbate the issue of limited access to capital. The owners of private childcare Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | Figure Ratio of Young Children to Childcare Capacity in Ratio of children under to childcare slots Sources : Center for American Progress ( ) ; CEA calculations businesses are disproportionately women and people of color aligning with the composition of the ECE workforce ( as shown in box ) and these providers may face more pronounced barriers in capital markets. Almost all childcare businesses nearly percent are owned by women while half are minority-owned ( National Women s Business Council ; Mueller ) Yet women and minorities tend to have fewer assets to get them through tough times. One study indicates that even after controlling for other differences small business owners who are women or people of color have lower loan approval rates and pay higher interest on loans for their businesses ( Asiedu Freeman and Nti-Addae ) Participation in and Availability of ECE Data on ECE participation represent the intersection of the supply of and the demand for ECE slots ; participation requires both the availability of a slot referring to its provision along with take-up of the slot which incorporates a family s care preferences and needs. That is for a family to access ECE in the United States there must be an available slot that also meets the family s needs in terms of cost location operating hours and quality among other factors. According to data on childcare capacity and population by county more than half of Americans live in neighborhoods where the number of young children outpaces the availability of licensed childcare slots by three to one or more ( Malik et al. ) Figure maps the ratio of children under age five to licensed childcare slots across U.S. counties The ratios of young children to childcare slots are larger when looking at infant and toddler care as shown in figure for counties in States with | Chapter Figure Ratio of Infants and Toddlers to Childcare Capacity in Ratio of children years of age to childcare slots Sources : Malik et al. ( ) ; CEA calculations available data for In one analysis researchers found that percent of the counties for which they had data had at least three infants and toddlers for every childcare slot for children under three ( Jessen-Howard Malik and Falgout ) Rural and low-income communities were more likely to have high child-to-capacity ratios which could reflect lower demand for nonparental ECE in those areas and Hispanic families were more likely to live in areas with high ratios ( Malik et al. ) An undersupply of ECE slots may exacerbate a lack of participation in formal ECE. In percent of children age three to six years who were not yet enrolled in elementary school were in a formal preschool setting outside the home ( U.S. Census Bureau 2021b ) Prepandemic data point to existing gaps by race ethnicity and family socioeconomic status. Hispanic children in particular have historically participated in formal care at lower rates and Black children more likely to be in the care of relatives than other children ( de Brey et al. ) Lower-income and disadvantaged families have used nonparental care at lower rates though participation among families at the lowest end of the socioeconomic distribution resembles that of more advantaged families ( de Brey et al. ; NCES ) Many argue that the differences by socioeconomic status and region of the country in child participation in ECE is due to a lack of availability of suitable slots. However is it possible that what appears to be a lack of availability more young children than capacity could in fact be the result of lower demand due to parents preferences ? Data sources including surveys In the October School Enrollment Supplement of the Current Population Survey respondents are asked if the focal child attends preschool or nursery school. Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | Figure Excess Demand by Provider Type Percentage of providers experiencing excess demand Overall Child age group Community s poverty density Rural Moderatedensity urban High-density urban High poverty Moderate poverty Low poverty Age Age Age Community s urbanicity Sources : National Survey of Early Care and Education ; CEA calculations Note : Excess demand is defined by whether providers have turned families away due to lack of capacity or had a waiting list in the past year. Line denotes the overall percentage of providers experiencing excess demand ( percent ) can help to identify whether observed participation rates fall short of families demand for ECE slots for their children. For example to conduct the National Head Start Impact Study researchers constructed a nationally representative sample of Head Start grantees. Because excess demand was a critical feature of the study design grantees could only participate if they expected to be oversubscribed in the fall of ; percent of Head Start grantees in the nationally representative sample were not serving all eligible children in the community who wanted Head Start ( U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ) Analysis of prepandemic data found that there were Head Start slots for every income-eligible preschool-age children who lived within miles of a Head Start center ( Ghertner and Schreier ) In addition to the Head Start program other data sources similarly document excess demand for ECE providers limited slots. National Survey of Early Care and Education data for suggest that percent of centerbased care providers experienced excess demand for childcare slots in that they either rejected families because they were too full or maintained waiting lists. As presented in figure excess demand varied by provider type. Providers serving only infants and toddlers and those serving all young children were more likely to report excess demand for their services ( percent and percent respectively ) than those serving only preschool-age children ( percent ) Though excess demand did not vary linearly with community poverty the level of urbanicity was important with providers in rural areas less likely to report excess demand. There is also a limited supply | Chapter Figure Reasons Households Face Difficulty Finding Care Percentage of all households that face difficulty finding care reporting primary reason for difficulty Mother s employment Cost Child age group Lack of available slots Income relative to poverty threshold Quality Rural Urban Below Above Age Age Not in labor force Unemployed Employed All Location Location Sources : National Center for Education Statistics ( ) ; CEA calculations Note : Households included are those that reported some or much difficulty finding the type of childcare or early childhood program they wanted for their child or reported that they did not find the childcare program they wanted. Households are grouped by their response to the question What was the main reason for the difficulty finding childcare or early childhood programs ? The four most common reasons are displayed so the bars do not sum to of childcare subsidies funded by the Federal Government and States ; only percent of the children who were eligible for oversubscribed subsidies in received them ( Chien ) On the consumer side households also report difficulty accessing care that meets their needs. In percent of households that searched for care for their young children had difficulty finding care that met their needs ( National Household Education Surveys Program ) Among this group when respondents were asked the main reason for difficulty the most common barrier was cost followed by a lack of open slots ( figure ) Other significant barriers in the search for care included locational challenges and insufficient quality. Cost was a particularly pronounced concern among urban households and households with an income below the poverty threshold. A lack of available slots at the ECE providers they contacted was a more salient difficulty for households with working mothers those above the poverty threshold and those in rural areas. The disconnect between families reports of difficulty finding ECE and providers reports of a lower incidence of excess demand in rural areas perhaps suggests that the types of available care ages served or other program features offered in rural areas Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | do not meet families needs. Previous research also documents more pronounced search difficulty for Black and Hispanic households ( NCES ) The undersupply of ECE warrants attention because of the documented effectiveness of investments in facilitating parents labor force attachment as well as in improving children s short- and long-term outcomes both of which are important for individual well-being and strong economic growth The Role of Subsidies in the Market for Care The sizable social benefits of high-quality ECE and the challenges in the ECE market create an opportunity for policy innovation. Hendren and Sprung-Keyser ( ) document the returns on various investments across the life cycle using a metric called the marginal value of public funds which includes any increased revenue and cost savings for the government and find that investments in childhood health and education yield the largest returns. Though other public and private entities also spend money on ECE in the United States increased Federal funding could help move the quality of care for young children closer to the socially optimal level ( Davis and Sojourner ) Research indicates that improving ECE and reaping the social and economic benefits of investing in children requires ( ) broadening access and in particular addressing disparities by race ethnicity and family socioeconomic status ; ( ) incentivizing supply building including workforce support ; and ( ) ensuring quality International Comparisons Many countries around the world subsidize ECE ( Olivetti and Petrongolo ) Whereas among all countries that belong to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) national governments spend an average of percent of their gross domestic product on ECE the United States spends only percent ( OECD ) As discussed in chapter of this Report women s labor force participation in the United States has stagnated and fallen behind participation rates in many other comparable countries. Researchers have advanced the relative lack of family-friendly policies in the United States as one potential explanation for why U.S. women s labor force participation has failed to increase at the same rates as its peer countries ( Blau and Kahn ) Among OECD countries the United States has one of the lowest ECE participation rates among children age three to five years at percent ( OECD n.d. ) This rate was essentially unchanged between and measured before the COVID-19 pandemic. Notably several OECD countries have universal or near-universal ECE participation rates among children age three to five. This group includes Ireland which experienced | Chapter a large increase from percent in to universal participation in ( OECD n.d. ) concurrent with major reforms of and national investment in ECE including improved compensation for early educators ( Moloney ) Though the United States stands out among advanced economies for its relatively low amount of spending on preschool-age children ( age three to five ) as measured by spending per child served or as a proportion of gross domestic product public spending on ECE for the youngest children from infancy to age two is particularly low ( OECD ) Many other countries particularly the Nordic ones spend the most on ECE for infants and toddlers and continue to invest heavily in the years before school entry The United States ECE landscape is different from those of many other OECD countries and it is also importantly embedded in a different policy context that has implications for the functioning of ECE programs Of the OECD countries with available data more than percent have a centralized authority for ECE with oversight for the system that serves children from birth or age one through primary school entry unlike the United States ; many also have established a right to at least one year of ECE enrollment before age five ( OECD ) In addition parental leave policies in many other countries alleviate pressure on the ECE infrastructure for providing infant care which is the costliest to provide and the least agile in accommodating fluctuations in enrollment due in part to smaller group sizes and child-to-adult ratios ( Landivar Graf and Rayo ; OECD ; Office of Child Care n.d. ) All OECD countries with the exception of the United States offer nationwide paid maternity leave ( OECD ) Many also offer paid paternity leave after the birth of a child and OECD countries provide paid parental leave that allows parents to share caregiving responsibilities in that time period ( OECD ) Subsidies in the United States ECE Market Subsidizing the United States ECE infrastructure more robustly could make it possible for care providers to invest in high-quality services including adequately compensating workers at a price that families can afford. Box outlines the major Federal investments in ECE Two recent working papers find that a combination of subsidies targeting low-income families coupled with provider-side investments is the most effective means to expand enrollment in high-quality ECE ( Bod r ; Borowsky et al. ) Subsidies tied to the cost of providing high-quality care allow providers to invest in costly quality improvements and adjusting the price childcare consumers pay based on their income makes it easier for families to fit high-quality care into their budgets Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | Box Federal ECE Investments Currently the Federal Government invests in ECE through several channels some of which direct funding toward private and public organizations to provide free or subsidized services while others provide financial resources directly to families for spending on ECE services Head Start is the federally funded program operated by public agencies private nonprofit and for-profit organizations Tribal governments and school systems providing free ECE for preschool-aged children from low-income families ( ECLKC ) The Early Head Start program serves pregnant women and infants and toddlers from low-income households through home visitation and center-based services ( ECLKC ) The Preschool Development Grant Birth through Five also invests in ECE with the goal of supporting systemic enhancements in strategic planning family engagement workforce development and quality improvement across all ECE programs including but not limited to States preschool programs ( OESE ; Office of Early Childhood Development ) The Child Care and Development Fund ( CCDF ) authorized by the Child Care and Development Block Grant ( CCDBG ) Act provides funding to States territories and Tribal governments to invest in ECE programs as well as directly to low-income families pursing work education or training opportunities to spend on childcare ( Office of Child Care ) Some ECE benefits operate through the tax code : the now fully refundable Child and Dependent Care Credit a tax credit that supports working families with childcare expenses ( IRS ) and the EmployerProvided Child Care Credit which provides tax credits to employers with qualified childcare expenditures including operating on-site childcare facilities or contracting with childcare providers to offer services to their employees ( Smith McHenry and Mullaly ) Recent childcare policy proposals would encourage States to build the supply of high-quality ECE and expand access to it through in part incentives for providers to increase investments in quality. In addition these proposals include subsidies targeting low- and middle-income households Both these features would allow providers to recoup the cost of additional quality investments counteracting market frictions that lead to underinvesting in quality as discussed above Investing in quality will require both process improvements and better job quality for care workers to attract and retain people with the appropriate | Chapter Box New Data and New Methods to Inform Investments in Children Understanding the current lay of the land in ECE and how to effectively invest in children requires continued innovation in data infrastructure and research methods. There are no systematically collected measures of ECE programming inputs and outcomes across the mixed delivery system and information on ECE enrollment from household surveys lags real time considerably. Misalignment in the timing and incidence of costs and benefits creates challenges for public investments in children ; the time horizon over which such investments realize their returns is long and most budget scoring calculations fail to account for long-term benefits Timely responsive data collection. Issues with the limited data on ECE provision and participation and the timeliness of its availability existed before the COVID-19 pandemic but real-time data collection became increasingly important during the pandemic for assessing which programs or elements of programs were achieving their intended goals ( Cajner et al. ) Two surveys that emerged in response have been widely used in analysis : the Household Pulse Survey and the School Pulse Panel. In theory these ongoing surveys have much potential to both inform policy and support research but the Household Pulse Survey has issues with representativeness and low response rates ( Bradley et al ) Redesign and incentives could address these problems and gathering data on households and schools over time holds promise for use in future research and policymaking Unlocking and expanding the potential of existing data sources is likely to be more cost-effective than collecting new data. Administrative data for example often contain rich information on children s and families interactions with services. The ability to link administrative data over time and across sources could facilitate many fruitful research pursuits to inform policy and practice ( Bigelow et al. ) Measuring long-run effects. Several new methods capitalize on the documented relationships between short-term metrics and longer-term outcomes of interest to project or estimate the long-run and broader impact of interventions. One recent paper documents this evolution in economic research on the effects of the U.S. social safety net on children as causal methods have evolved sufficient time has elapsed and data availability has improved ( Aizer Hoynes and Lleras-Muney ) New and reinvigorated approaches to capturing long-term effects include lifecycle benefit forecasts ( Garc a et al. ) surrogate indices ( Athey et al ) and the framework of the marginal value of public funds ( Hendren and Sprung-Keyser ) Ongoing innovation in this space demonstrates that there is interest in and urgency to more quickly measuring the broad and full impact of programs. This need is particularly pressing when assessing programs and policies that affect children Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | skills. Evidence indicates that labor supply in ECE settings responds to higher wages which suggests that as ECE jobs become higher quality more qualified people will remain in care jobs and seek to be hired by care businesses ( Blau ; Borowsky et al. ; Mocan ) Therefore the supply and quality of ECE would increase helping to counteract the longstanding undersupply of high-quality care As discussed in box the Federal Government currently invests in ECE programming through multiple avenues and many States have proceeded with efforts to increase availability and lower costs often using Federal funding from the ARP. A number of States including Connecticut Delaware Georgia Maine Maryland Oregon Pennsylvania and Vermont are offering one-time bonuses for care workers or are permanently subsidizing pay increases ( Child Care Aware ) In Texas for example lawmakers increased reimbursements to providers serving infants and toddlers from low-income households and have required childcare programs receiving public subsidies to participate in the Texas Rising Star quality rating and improvement system ( Goldstein ) The Federal Government could also play a significant role in improving data infrastructure that supports effective policymaking for ECE through better real-time information on availability and participation and by building evidence. Box discusses some of the new developments on this front and avenues for improvement Conclusion Early care and education programs play an important dual role for families : ( ) contributing to young children s development of cognitive and socialemotional skills ; and ( ) supporting parents engagement with the labor market. Both these channels also generate substantial benefits for society Ensuring that all children have access to high-quality ECE requires investing both in families ability to access programs and in the provision of these programs including supporting workforce improvements and smart capacity expansion. Such investments in ECE can yield significant long-run benefits not only for the affected children themselves but also for society at large Although the COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated many gaps in the Nation s ECE infrastructure many of these challenges and particularly disparities by race/ethnicity and family income existed before the pandemic. There are critical issues in the market for ECE programs and services and the Nation s economy often fails to support care businesses care workers and the families in need of their services. These challenges ultimately lead to low pay for workers and exacerbate the undersupply of high-quality affordable and accessible care for families. However these problems could be mitigated with policy improvements | Chapter Carefully designed government policies would address frictions in the ECE market including workforce challenges and low pay the high costs of high-quality care provision families price sensitivity and the fragility of the ECE business model thereby making childcare more affordable while improving pay for workers and ensuring investments in quality. The government could thus foster a better-functioning ECE market by funding subsidies for childcare providers including incentives to improve the quality of care and higher caregiver pay alongside subsidies and publicly provided ECE programming for families. Together these policies would address both the supply and demand sides of the ECE market ensuring that providers are willing and able to provide the high-quality affordable care needed by families and society Investing in Young Children s Care and Education | Chapter Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions The United States postsecondary education system is in many ways the envy of the world. Relative to most other international systems U.S postsecondary institutions are more numerous diverse and decentralized as well as more likely to offer opportunities for exploration transfer and reentry. Students are likely to benefit from having flexibility to find the program that fits them best. The high number of institutions relative to those of peer countries may help spur innovation among competing institutions to be responsive to the needs of students. These features help explain why the United States is the top destination for international college students : over million international students were enrolled in U.S. colleges in more than triple the number in and now account for one-fifth of all crosscountry student migration in postsecondary education ( Bound et al. ; Institute of International Education ) Nonetheless as the demand for highly educated workers has increased over the past half century earning a valuable postsecondary credential has remained a challenge for many Americans. The United States no longer leads the world in postsecondary attainment and large gaps by income and race have widened over the past several decades. This has consequences both for individuals who miss out on the personal benefits of postsecondary education and for society which forgoes the increased civic participation lower reliance on public benefits increased tax revenues higher economic growth and other benefits that such education brings. Though college continues to be a good investment on average increased student debt burdens relative to a generation ago mean this investment includes risks that some students can be left worse off if their education does not yield the labor market benefits they expect Federal and State support for postsecondary education has long included direct funding for institutions but in recent decades the primary form of support has shifted to financial aid for students. These efforts have been essential to help offset rising tuition and fees which before accounting for financial aid have roughly tripled in real terms since and have increased even more at public four-year institutions ( Ma and Pender 2022a ) Yet policies aimed at institutions and the programs they offer to build capacity to support colleges in serving students well and to hold them accountable when they do not are a critical complement to policies lowering financial barriers to attendance. Federal policy can influence the quality of postsecondary options with both carrots such as Federal support to help institutions improve student outcomes and sticks such as policies to hold institutions accountable for the economic value they provide. Where there are geographic barriers to access institution-oriented policies can help facilitate the equitable expansion of high-value programs and deter the expansion of lower-value ones Before considering institution-oriented policies this chapter first describes the landscape of U.S. postsecondary education documenting the extraordinary variation across such institutions and summarizing evidence that institutions and their programs are themselves a critical determinant of student success. The chapter next explains the rationale for Federal investment in postsecondary education and places the U.S. model of postsecondary education finance in historical and international contexts. The decentralized high tuition high aid model currently used in the United States has some advantages but also generates economic risks for students who fail to graduate or whose education does not pay off in the labor market. Imperfections in the market for postsecondary education limit the potential of the market alone to drive improvements. Such imperfections include geographic constraints | Chapter informational and behavioral constraints and production constraints that limit institutions ability to react quickly to fluctuating demand. The chapter documents one source of production constraints : State appropriations for public postsecondary institutions tend to fall during economic recessions precisely when demand for enrollment in such institutions tends to rise The rest of the chapter considers how Federal policy can help support postsecondary institutions reviewing a range of options to improve or maintain the quality of such institutions to hold institutions accountable for student outcomes and to reduce geographic barriers to access. The institution-oriented policy efforts described in this chapter have the potential to improve the landscape of postsecondary options. Throughout the discussion the chapter highlights actions that the Biden-Harris Administration has already undertaken to improve the postsecondary institutional landscape with the ultimate goal of ensuring that all students have access to a college education of value The U.S. Postsecondary Institutional Landscape The degree of heterogeneity in the institutional landscape is a distinctive feature of the U.S. postsecondary system. Colleges in the public private nonprofit and for-profit sectors offer a different mix of programs enroll a different composition of students and are financed in different ways Four-year institutions offer bachelor s degrees in fields that can vary substantially in their connection to specific occupations. Community colleges offer a range of credentials including academic associate degrees ( e.g. for students who intend to transfer to a four-year program ) ; occupational associate degrees ; short-term certificates intended to help students access the labor market quickly ; and increasingly bachelor s degrees. Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Tribal Colleges and Universities have an additional mission : to serve communities that have historically been excluded from postsecondary education. In addition institutions vary in the extent to which their students graduate and succeed in the labor market. This institutional landscape is both a driver and consequence of how the United States supports higher education and has implications for how its quality can be improved Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | Figure Distribution of Enrollment Across Institution Types by Student Characteristics Percentage enrolled in each institution Total enrollment Age and under ( % ) Age and over ( % ) White ( % ) Hispanic or Latino ( % ) Black or African American ( % ) Asian ( % ) American Indian or Alaskan Native ( % ) Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander ( % ) Private not for profit year or above Public year or above Public year Private for profit any level Other institutions Source : National Center for Education Statistics Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System Fall Enrollment component provisional data Note : The category other institutions encompasses public institutions and private not-for-profits of less than years as well as private not-for-profits of years. Reported in parentheses under each category is the percentage of total fall enrollment in all institutions captured by the given population. Percentages do not add up to due to rounding and the omission of students with two or more races students of unknown race/ethnicity and students who are nonresident aliens Institutions Serve a Diverse Student Population U.S. college students vary in age and residential status. Only about percent of undergraduates both started college before age and live on the campus of a residential four-year college ( NCES 2022a 2022b 2022c ) Nearly percent of enrolled students started their programs at age or above ( NCES 2022a ) Among enrolled students younger than about percent attend two-year ( or less ) institutions and only about half the remaining students attending four-year institutions live on campus ( NCES 2022d 2022e ) Over one-third of enrolled undergraduates are or older a proportion that rises to nearly percent for community colleges and to nearly percent for the for-profit sector ( NCES 2022f ) Undergraduates are on average fairly diverse with respect to income and race and institutions vary substantially in the extent to which they enroll different types of students. In any given year nearly one-third of undergraduates receive Pell Grants a proxy for a low family income ( NCES 2020a ) Institutions vary substantially in the extent to which they serve low-income students with about percent of campuses having fewer than one-fourth of students receiving Pell Grants and about percent having more than three-fourths receiving them.1 Overall low-income students are relatively similarly represented across the two- and four-year sectors and are overrepresented in the for-profit sector where about percent of undergraduate students receive Pell Grants ( NCES 2020b 2020c ) CEA calculations using data from the College Scorecard. These College Scorecard data were the most recent available publicly as of September which for most measures reflect the academic year | Chapter Nearly two-fifths of undergraduates self-identify as Black Hispanic Asian American Indian or Alaskan Native or Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander. Most such student groups are more heavily represented in community colleges and the for-profit sector. As figure shows students who self-identify as Black Hispanic American Indian or Alaskan Native or Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander are substantially more likely than white students to attend for-profit institutions. For-profit institutions also disproportionately attract those age or above Institutions Vary in Their Prices and Spending on Students Postsecondary institutions vary not only in the students they serve but also in the prices they charge and the amount they spend on student instruction. As table shows the average institution has an undergraduate sticker price of roughly $ in tuition and fees per year ; has a total cost of attendance of roughly $ after housing food books and other expenses are included ; and has a net cost of nearly $ after grant aid has been accounted for. Such prices vary tremendously by sector. Private nonprofit and for-profit colleges have undergraduate net costs of over $ a year while public four- and two-year institutions cost roughly $ and $ for undergraduates respectively after accounting for grants Institutions also vary widely in the amount of resources they have available and spend on student instruction the clearest measure available Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | Table College Prices and Expenditures by Sector All Institutions Private Not-for-Profit 4-Year Public 4-Year Public 2-Year Private For-Profit Any Level Tuition and fees $ $ $ $ $ Total cost of attendance $ $ $ $ $ Net cost of attendance $ $ $ $ $ Instructional expenditures per FTE student $ $ $ $ $ Measure Sources : College Scorecard ; CEA calculations Note : FTE = full-time equivalent. College prices and expenditures are per academic year for full-time enrollment of an institution s financial investment in learning.2 Figure shows that this resource distribution is highly skewed with percent of institutions spending less than $ per full-time-equivalent student each year and percent spending more than $ Such spending can buy smaller class sizes higher-quality instructors better academic support services and other resources that may contribute to student success. As table shows there is clear variation across sectors in these spending patterns. Across most sectors higher prices tend to translate into higher spending on students. Private nonprofit four-year colleges spend about $ a year on instruction ; public four-year colleges spend about $ ; and public two-year colleges spend about $ The exception to the pattern are for-profit colleges where students pay relatively high net prices but receive the lowest instructional spending of any sector ( about $ ) Institutions Vary in Their Student Outcomes Student outcomes such as degree completion rates also vary substantially by postsecondary institution. A relatively high fraction of U.S. undergraduate students who start college do not complete their degrees ( Bound Lovenheim and Turner ; Bowen Chingos and McPherson ) Though recent research suggests that graduation rates have increased somewhat since fewer than percent of undergraduates seeking a bachelor s degree complete such a degree within six years of entry ( Denning et al. ) As panel A of figure shows the average college student attends an institution where about percent of undergraduate students complete their degree within percent of the time expected ( i.e. three years for two-year colleges and six years for four-year colleges ) This average masks substantial variation as nearly one-tenth of colleges have undergraduate completion rates under percent and over one-third have completion rates above percent The instructional spending measure available in the Integrated Postsecondary Data System ( https : // nces.ed.gov/ipeds/ ) measures total spending across both undergraduates and graduate students so care should be taken when comparing such figures with undergraduate costs of attendance | Chapter Figure Variation in Undergraduate Student Outcomes A. Variation in Completion Rate B. Variation in Students Earnings Sources : College Scorecard ; CEA calculations Note : The orange line in Panel A denotes the average fraction of students completing their undergraduate education within % of the expected time. The orange line in Panel B denotes the average fraction of former students earning more than a high school graduate Not all noncompletion is problematic. The U.S. postsecondary system allows many students to explore college even when they are uncertain about the experience. A recent pre-COVID-19-pandemic large-scale survey of Americans who had attended college but had not completed their degree reveals a range of self-reported reasons for this noncompletion ( Gallup ) Some students reasons for leaving suggest that better institutional practices or financial aid policies might have helped them complete their degrees while other reported reasons indicate that some students leave after learning that college was not a good fit for them. Such exploration can be Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | Table Student Outcomes by Sector ( percent ) Measure Degree completion rate Proportion of students out-earning typical high school graduate All Institutions Private Not-for-Profit 4-Year Public 4-Year Public 2-Year Private For-Profit Any Level Sources : College Scorecard ; CEA calculations costly for students attending high-priced institutions. This suggests a policy role for balancing the benefits of exploration with the need to protect students from making poor investments of time and money Variation in postcollege earnings by institution is also striking. One such measure available in the College Scorecard is the percentage of a given college s Federal-aid-receiving undergraduate students who years after entry earn at least as much as a typical worker whose highest level of education completed is high school.3 Comparing earnings with those of workers who are high school graduates provides a rough proxy for whether a college s enrollees have better economic outcomes than if they had not enrolled in college at all The average college student attends an institution where about percent of undergraduate Federal aid recipients out-earn a typical high school graduate. Yet as shown in panel B of figure at percent of colleges fewer than half of such students out-earn high school graduates years later. Relatedly colleges also vary widely in the extent to which their students experience upward economic mobility measured by the fraction of students entering from the bottom quintile of the income distribution who later reach the top quintile ( Chetty et al. ) Degree completion rates and postcollege earnings indicate striking variation across college sectors as shown in table Four-year institutions tend to have higher completion rates and earnings than two-year institutions. Students at community colleges have similar earnings outcomes to students at for-profit colleges even though community colleges are substantially less expensive for students to attend.4 Institutions Matter for Student Outcomes The extent to which variation in student outcomes is driven by institutions themselves is challenging to measure. Some outcome differences are due The College Scorecard ( https : //collegescorecard.ed.gov/ ) is a website created by the U.S. Department of Education that gives students families and other interested parties information about the cost and value of nearly all higher education institutions. The earnings measure discussed here comes from a national average of the earnings of all those age to who indicated that high school completion was their highest level of education were working and were not enrolled in school during the measurement year. This threshold is about $ in dollars The for-profit figures cited here cover all for-profit institutions | Chapter to differences in students across institutions. A large and growing body of literature documents that some portion of undergraduate student outcome differences across institutions is causally attributable to the institutions themselves : colleges appear to vary widely in their effects on students. A given institution s effects do not appear to be inherent but depend in part upon available resources and how those resources are spent ; better-resourced institutions and those that spend more per student on instruction generally produce better outcomes including higher graduation rates and labor market earnings ( Lovenheim and Smith ) As the evidence suggests students of all kinds appear to benefit from attending the college with the best track record available to them with the worst colleges leaving the typical student worse off than they would have been if they had not attended college at all Within the four-year college sector researchers have found that students are more likely to graduate and have higher earnings when they attend colleges with more resources academically stronger peers and better historical student outcomes such as graduation rates and earnings. Such patterns hold even when comparing otherwise similar students who enroll in different colleges ( Long ; Smith ; Mountjoy and Hickman ; Cohodes and Goodman ) Evidence from States including Texas and California suggests that gaining access to well-resourced flagship institutions increases graduation rates and earnings including for those whose access comes as a result of Top Percent guaranteed admissions policies ( Hoekstra ; Andrews Li and Lovenheim ; Bleemer ; Black Denning and Rothstein ) Public four-year colleges have been documented to have substantially positive effects on students. For example research in a variety of States shows that students whose academic background gives them access to less selective public four-year institutions are more likely to graduate and have higher earnings than those lacking such access ( Zimmerman ; Goodman Hurwitz and Smith ; Smith Goodman and Hurwitz ; Kozakowski ) Consistent with observable resource differences across sectors enrollment in four-year colleges generally improves student outcomes even more for those choosing between two- and four-year options Comparing otherwise similar students who differ only in their proximity to two- and four-year options suggests that four-year college enrollment increases the rate of degree completion and may increase earnings ( Rouse ; Mountjoy ) On average community colleges have been shown to generate positive effects on students and substantially better outcomes than the for-profit colleges that enroll similar student populations ( Cellini and Turner ; Armona and Cao ) Researchers have found that enrolling and completing an associate degree at a two-year college generally improves outcomes relative to not enrolling or completing one at all ( Belfield and Bailey ; Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | Mountjoy ) Further they document that relative to those who start but do not complete their two-year degrees graduates of community colleges see substantial increases in their annual income five to nine years after college entry ( Jepsen Troske and Coomes ; Bahr et al. ; Liu Belfield and Trimble ; Bahr ; Bettinger and Soliz ; Xu Jaggars and Fletcher ; Dadgar and Trimble ; Belfield ) The return from a two-year degree is even higher in subsequent years after entry and during economic recessions ( Minaya and Scott-Clayton ) Some high-demand community college programs such as nursing raise students earnings so much that expanding the number of available slots in such programs would more than pay for itself via increased tax revenues returned to State and local governments ( Grosz ) For-profit colleges have been found to generate particularly poor outcomes for their enrollees. Advocates of for-profit colleges have argued that such poor outcomes are due to the disadvantages with which their students start ( Cellini and Koedel ) Differences in student composition have not however been enough to explain the large differences in outcomes between for-profits and other institution types ( Deming Goldin and Katz ; Scott-Clayton 2018a ) Community colleges appear to improve earnings more than for-profit colleges even when accounting for variations in student characteristics ( Cellini and Turner ; Armona and Cao ) Numerous studies comparing the earnings of the same for-profit students before and after enrollment find that such students see little or no earnings increase relative to those who do not attend college or to those enrolled in public colleges ( Cellini and Turner ; Cellini and Koedel ) R sum audit studies similarly suggest that for-profit degree holders receive employer callbacks less often than otherwise-identical degree holders from public colleges and no more often than those with no college education at all ( Darolia et al. ; Deming et al. ) Enrollment in for-profit colleges increases debt and worsens labor market outcomes relative to other two- and four-year options ( Armona Chakrabarti and Lovenheim ) Nearly two-fifths of for-profit college chains have negative returns for Federal aid recipients compared with returns from simply gaining experience in the labor market ( Armona and Cao ) The Rationale for and Delivery of Public Postsecondary Investment To assess strategies to promote access and improve quality in the postsecondary sector it is useful to understand the economic rationale for public sector involvement and to consider the possible forms such involvement can take | Chapter The Economic Rationale for Public Sector Investment A key motivation for promoting college is its value as an economic investment for both students and society. For example though students express many reasons for pursuing postsecondary education including personal exploration and growth getting a better job tops the list ( Fishman ; Stolzenberg et al. ) From a societal perspective expanding educational access has been associated with economic growth much like when the United States in the 20th century led the world in the transition to mass secondary high school education. This expansion also helped to dampen inequality ( Goldin and Katz ) However in recent decades as the demand for highly educated workers has continued to increase the United States has faced significant challenges in the transition to broad-based postsecondary education and training ( Goldin and Katz ; Neelakantan and Romero ) Although postsecondary enrollment has increased substantially since the pace has slowed since ( Ma Pender and Welch ) The United States is no longer a global leader in college degree attainment for adults age to years and the percent completion rate among those entering associate degree programs in the United States is among the lowest of all countries belonging to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) that reported their equivalent of this statistic ( NCES ; OECD ) Failing to navigate the transition to broader postsecondary education would represent a missed opportunity given the substantial private and societal benefits of college ( described in box ) Of particular concern is the large and growing gap in bachelor s degree attainment between highand low-income families which is wider for cohorts born in the 1980s than for those born in the 1960s ( Chetty et al. ; Bailey and Dynarski ) Racial disparities in college attainment have also grown over a similar time span particularly among women ( Emmons and Ricketts ; Ma Pender and Welch ) Finally despite the substantial private and public benefits many students can not afford to attend a postsecondary institution without financial assistance. The problem is that the benefits of college accrue over the course of a lifetime while the bill must be paid in advance. Typically individuals solve this problem by borrowing to pay for an investment up front such as when purchasing a car or home. However private lenders typically do not provide loans unsecured by collateral ( e.g. those for a car or a house that can be repossessed ) because a college education can not be returned or resold if the individual fails to make interest payments and defaults on the loan ( Barr ) The existence of such credit constraints provides an important rationale for the public sector providing loans to students at subsidized interest rates Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | Box The Private and Public Benefits of College The earnings premium for those with a college education is well documented ( Barrow and Malamud ) Less well known is that the benefits of college accrue to a broad range of students at a broad range of schools. Students with relatively low grades and test scores who enroll in four-year institutions derive significant earnings benefits from college attendance ( Zimmerman ; Ost Pan and Webber ; Smith Goodman and Hurwitz ) as do the percent of students who enroll in open-access community colleges rather than not enrolling at all ( Kane and Rouse ; Mountjoy ; NCES 2022g ) Associate degrees and even some shorter-course credentials in high-demand occupational fields yield substantial returns in many fields including for older students and displaced workers ( Grosz ; Jacobson LaLonde and Sullivan ; Jepsen Troske and Coomes ) Postsecondary education also serves the public good. College attainment leads to increased civic participation lower rates of involvement in the criminal justice system and reliance on public benefits increased tax revenues higher economic growth and improved health in the next generation ( Dee ; Lochner and Moretti ; Lochner ; Oreopoulos and Salvanes ; Hout ; Ma Pender and Welch ; Aghion et al. ; Currie and Moretti ) Reducing racial disparities in college attainment is particularly urgent given that underrepresentation in highly credentialed professions can adversely affect the treatment and outcomes of historically excluded groups. For example recent evidence indicates that students benefit from exposure to instructors of the same race ( Fairlie Hoffman and Oreopoulos ; Gershenson Hansen and Lindsay ; Gershenson et al. ; Lusher Campbell and Carrell ) and that Black patients benefit from access to Black physicians ( Alsan Garrick and Graziani ; Greenwood et al. ) Finally postsecondary education and training serve as a form of social insurance increasing workers resilience during economic shifts and mitigating the negative consequences of recessions ( Hyman ; Barr and Turner ; Minaya and Scott-Clayton ; Barnes et al. ) How Public Funds Are Delivered : Student Aid and Institutional Support Public funding to promote college access and completion can be delivered directly to institutions to support programming and keep prices below cost or directly to students who then use financial aid to help pay tuition and other costs at the institution of their choice. In primary and secondary | Chapter education government support is delivered primarily through institutions in the public provision of free schools and with supplemental supports such as free meals delivered through those schools. Many countries follow this model not only for primary and secondary education but also for postsecondary education with direct institutional support for predominantly public institutions helping to keep tuition prices low ( Marcucci ) Along these lines at least States currently offer statewide free community college programs ( Mishory ; Education Commission of the States ) and the Biden-Harris Administration has developed a framework for a nationwide free community college program ( White House ) The Federal Government s earliest investments in postsecondary education also focused primarily on expanding capacity and keeping prices low at public institutions which even today enroll over three-quarters of U.S undergraduates ( IPEDS ) The foundations of many of today s State colleges and universities can be traced to direct institutional support such as the Federal Morrill Land Grant Act of which granted each State acres of public land to establish public postsecondary institutions ; the Second Morrill Act of which directed Federal funds to newly designated Historically Black Colleges and Universities ; and the subsequent significant push by States to establish and expand two-year colleges in the 1960s ( Cohen Brawer and Kisker ) State and local direct appropriations for public institutions which help keep tuition prices below the full cost of provision remained the largest source of government support for postsecondary education in the United States through the end of the 20th century ( Dynarski Page and Scott-Clayton ) The Higher Education Act of which established the foundations of today s Federal student aid programs ( including the precursor to Pell Grants ) marked a significant shift from institution-focused to studentfocused assistance ( Fountain ; Leslie and Johnson ) Delivering support via student aid may conserve public resources by targeting subsidies to those students who are most in need support institutional quality by bringing in additional resources from those who can afford to pay and promote competition and choice by enabling students to use their aid at the institutions they judge as highest value ( Barr ) State and local direct appropriations for institutions have fallen from nearly two-thirds of support for undergraduates in to just under one-third in the academic year ( Dynarski Page and Scott-Clayton ) Student aid is now the primary mode of support in the United States providing $ billion in grants loans and other direct support for undergraduates in with Federal sources accounting for about half this total and loans accounting for about half of Federal student aid ( Dynarski Page and Scott-Clayton ; Ma and Pender 2022b ) The result as shown in figure is that only England exceeds the United States in the level of both tuition and student Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | Figure Average Public Tuition and Fees and Percentage of Students Receiving Public Financial Aid Bachelor s Degree Programs Average public tuition and fees ( listed prices in U.S. dollars converted using purchasing power parity ) England United States Chile Australia Austria New Zealand Italy Spain France Germany Percentage of students receiving public financial aid Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( tables C5.1 and C5.2 ) Note : Data refer to the academic year and are based on a special survey administered by the OECD in aid ( OECD ) The contemporary high-tuition high-aid model of U.S postsecondary finance is thus distinctive in both international and historical contexts In line with this high-tuition high-aid model inflation-adjusted published tuition and fees before accounting for financial aid ( sticker prices ) have since nearly tripled in the public two-year sector more than tripled in the private not-for-profit four-year sector and nearly quadrupled in the public four-year sector though such prices have stabilized over the past decade ( Ma and Pender 2022a 2022b ) At the same time net prices in the United States tuition and fees minus grants and scholarships have increased much more slowly than published prices and have actually remained flat or declined over the past decade ( Ma and Pender 2022b ) The Biden-Harris Administration has taken a number of steps to continue to improve college affordability and help student loan borrowers including providing a $ increase to grant aid for low-income students through the Pell Grant program over the last two years streamlining and improving student loan repayment and pursuing debt relief through the HEROES Act The model of financing students rather than institutions has helped fuel a system of postsecondary education that is diverse and decentralized with more opportunities for exploration transfer and reentry ( Labaree ; Goldin and Katz ) because students decide where their subsidized dollars will be spent. In contrast many other countries deliver funding primarily to public institutions that students can attend free ( Marcucci ) but that | Chapter often offer fewer spots in a more constrained set of programs. The diversity and flexibility of the U.S. system may help explain why the United States is the top destination for international students ( Institute of International Education ) In recent decades some countries that formerly provided fully free public institutions have shifted to the U.S. model as a way to maintain affordability while expanding postsecondary capacity and improving quality ( Marcucci ; Murphy Scott-Clayton and Wyness ) Still the U.S. model of postsecondary education finance is not without challenges. Over the longer term the dramatic increases in sticker prices have made it more difficult for today s students and families to pay for college relative to a generation ago. In the maximum Pell Grant the largest source of grant aid in the United States only covered percent of published tuition fees room and board at the typical public four-year institution down from percent in and nearly percent in ( Ma and Pender 2022b ; Baum Payea and Steele ; Protopsaltis and Parrott ) Despite the availability of aid research shows that tuition prices still influence students persistence and degree completion even after initial enrollment ( Acton ) Prospective students particularly those who would be first in their families to attend college may not even know that financial aid exists and thus may be dissuaded by the sticker price alone ( Levine Ma and Russell ) Research has shown that the process of applying for financial aid is itself a barrier to access ( Bettinger et al. ) and that students are more likely to apply when aid is guaranteed in advance ( Dynarski et al. ) Further research indicates many students are reluctant to borrow ( Boatman Evans and Soliz ) This may reduce the effectiveness of loans relative to grants of the same size Further the decision to invest in college entails risks in particular the risk that the earnings students gain will be less than the cost they pay for their education. The breadth flexibility and multiple entry and exit points in the U.S. system also mean more risks of making mistakes and falling off track ( Labaree ; Goldin and Katz ; Scott-Clayton ) Fewer than two-thirds of students who enroll in college finish any degree within six years ( National Student Clearinghouse Research Center 2022a ) Even among those who graduate with at least a four-year degree roughly one in five male college graduates and about one in seven female college graduates has earnings no higher than the typical worker with only a high school diploma ( Ma Pender and Welch ) Because many students rely on debt to finance a portion of their education some students who attend college may end up worse off even though the expected return is high on average. Nearly one-third of students who take on debt do not receive a degree ( Miller ) More than one in four borrowers experience a student loan default within years of college Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | Box International Comparison of IncomeDriven Student Loan Repayment Like the United States postsecondary education systems in Australia and England also combine high tuition with high financial support for students. In contrast to the United States students in England and Australia can fully defer tuition payments until after college and then repay via income-driven repayment ( IDR ) Under IDR student loan repayments are capped at a fixed percentage of income mitigating the risk that college enrollment leads to incomes too low to repay such debts Research from the United States finds that IDR enrollment reduces borrowers risk of delinquency and default ( Mueller and Yannelis ; Herbst ) IDR plans vary substantially across these countries in two important ways. First U.S. undergraduate loans though capped below most students cost of attendance are available for a wider variety of programs including short-term credentials and those at thousands of for-profit institutions ( U.S. Department of Education 2023a ; Ma and Pender 2022a ) Both England and Australia allow undergraduates to borrow the full amount of public tuition but restrict the institutions eligible for IDR. England directs IDR primarily to public university students and Australia originally restricted IDR to four-year colleges only in expanding eligibility to vocational programs ( Barr et al ; Student Loans Company ) Second IDR is the only loan repayment option in England and Australia with automated enrollment and payments income-adjusted and collected automatically through the tax authority. In contrast borrowers in the United States need to opt into IDR and annually update their own income ( Barr et al. ) Only about one-third of U.S. student borrowers in were enrolled in such a plan ( CEA calculations based on Federal student loan portfolio data by repayment plan from the U.S. Department of Education 2022a ) The Biden-Harris Administration has proposed reforms of IDR to reduce monthly and lifetime payments especially for low- and middle-income borrowers and to eliminate barriers that prevent borrowers from accessing IDR entry including nearly half of Black student loan borrowers ( Scott-Clayton 2018b ) One tool for mitigating repayment risk in a high-tuition high-aid model are income-driven repayment plans but as box discusses the implementation and use of these plans differ substantially by country Finally the global experience suggests that countries expanding student aid to for-profit institutions face challenges in regulating quality to address poor student outcomes in this sector ( Usher ; Salto ) | Chapter Although for-profit higher education is not unique to the United States it is unusual in terms of both its size in the United States and its integration into the student aid system including access not only to student loan dollars but also to nonrepayable grant aid ( Kinser ; Levy ) For-profit colleges in the United States account for percent of Federal student aid dollars and percent of student loan defaults even though they enroll only percent of students ( Century Foundation ) The Imperfect Market for Postsecondary Institutions In an idealized market the United States approach of providing portable financial aid to support consumer choice might be sufficient to ensure that high-quality choices actually exist. At least in theory this approach should promote institutional quality by weeding out low-quality institutions or prompting them to improve and encouraging better ones to expand ( Barr ; Fountain ) The postsecondary education market however is too imperfect for institutional improvements to emerge simply from students voting with their feet ( Leslie and Johnson ) Institutions may for example be able to attract students regardless of their program quality Three main types of constraints geographic constraints informational and behavioral constraints and constraints on colleges ability to expand quickly diminish the power of market forces to promote productive innovation improve quality and drive down prices through student choice and Figure Distance Between Home and College Percentage of undergraduates Within miles Between and miles Between and miles Over miles Source : National Center for Education Statistics ( National Postsecondary Student Aid Study undergraduates ) Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | competition alone. The resulting institutional landscape offers variety but it is not always clear which aspects of this variety benefit students Geographic Constraints The first main types of constraints again are geographic. First as figure shows most students attend college close to home limiting the scope for choice and competition. About percent of U.S. undergraduates attend a college within miles of their home and the fraction attending within just miles of home grew from nearly percent in to percent in ( NCES 2022h ) These proportions are substantially higher for students of color and low-income students ( NCES 2022i 2022j ) These geographic constraints make college markets thin as many students do not have a substantial number of options to choose from if they want or need to stay close to home ( Hillman ; Blagg and Chingos ) The median commuting zone has just two colleges of any type or level. About percent of those age to years live in a commuting zone with at most one public four-year college ; about percent live in a commuting zone with at most one public two-year college. Students with no options nearby must incur the high cost of relocating or lengthy commuting if they wish to attend college. Those with limited choices nearby may enroll in a program that is a poor fit for their goals ( Klasik Blagg and Pekor ) Online programs provide an alternative but many generate poor student outcomes as further discussed below Informational and Behavioral Constraints Even for students with options close to home informational and behavioral constraints can complicate decisionmaking. The United States college landscape is particularly complex with percent more bachelor s-degreefocused institutions per capita than Canada percent more than the United Kingdom and percent more than Australia ( World Higher Education Database n.d. ) The American community college serving multiple missions including both transfer and terminal associate degrees is a distinctive type of institution that only recently has begun to develop in other countries ( Redden ) The United States also has a large for-profit college sector adding to an already large and varied set of options students face College is not a simple consumer good but an experience good for which students may not have well-formed preferences in advance. The decision to enroll in college is made infrequently in one s lifetime limiting the opportunity to learn from previous decisions. Colleges differ along numerous dimensions including both content and quality which may be difficult to observe in advance. Benefits are uncertain and accrue over long time horizons making it difficult for students to compare options. Even the | Chapter best-prepared students may oversimplify or avoid decisions when choices are complex information is limited and preferences are not well established ( Hoxby and Avery ; Beshears et al. ; Lavecchia Liu and Oreopoulos ; Ross et al. ) Comparing financial aid offers can be particularly opaque. A recent report from the Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) found that percent of colleges in a nationally representative survey did not provide information on net prices in their financial aid offers and an additional percent understated net prices by omitting some costs or including loans that must be repaid ( GAO ) This complexity also affects students after college as they attempt to navigate student loan repayments ( Turner ) Finally many prospective college students are relatively young and inexperienced financial decisionmakers which increases both their susceptibility to marketing campaigns and the likelihood of decision mistakes ( Beshears et al. ; Agarwal et al. ) Indeed reports have found that some for-profit colleges take advantage of this by outspending their public counterparts 20-to-1 on advertising ( Cellini and Chaudhary ) and using dubious claims about future employment prospects to recruit students ( McMillan-Cottom ; GAO ) College Expansion Constraints In a simpler market increased demand for the best products can induce successful producers to expand and new producers to enter the market. The substantial fixed costs and labor-intensive model of traditional postsecondary Figure Per-Student State and Local Funding for Public Higher Education dollars Source : College Board Trends in College Pricing 2021b as compiled by Ma and Pender ( ) Note : Shaded areas indicate recessions Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | education however constrain institutions ability to quickly respond to increased demand without diluting students experience as discussed below As figure shows per-student State and local funding is procyclical falling during times of economic contraction. Demand for postsecondary education is however countercyclical as students tend to seek skill training when employment opportunities are worse since the opportunity cost of enrollment is lower when jobs are scarce ( Barr and Turner ) The combination of public funding s procyclicality and demand s countercyclicality means that per-student funding shrinks precisely when enrolling in a postsecondary program makes the most economic sense ( Ma and Pender 2022b ; Kane et al. ) This pattern leads to both higher tuition and lower resources provided per student during recessions which has been documented to harm students outcomes ( Chakrabarti Gorton and Lovenheim ; Bound Lovenheim and Turner ; Bound and Turner ; Deming and Walters ) Community college enrollments are particularly sensitive to economic conditions partly because they are open-access institutions to which unemployed or underemployed adults often turn for midcareer training Community college enrollments rise by about to percent overall for every increase of percentage point in the local unemployment rate with greater responsiveness among those age and above ( Hillman and Orians ; Betts and McFarland ) The only exception to this pattern has been the weak labor market early in the COVID-19 pandemic when community college enrollment declined in part because instruction particularly in fields requiring hands-on training was disrupted by pandemic conditions ( Schanzenbach and Turner ) At the same time students are more likely to enroll in for-profit institutions when funding for local public institutions decreases ( Cellini ; Goodman and Henriques Volz ) Although causal research does not establish the mechanisms underlying this result when resources per student fall four-year colleges may not be able to expand enrollment to meet demand. Community colleges do not typically have enrollment caps but when public institutions have fewer resources per student students may have more difficulty registering for the courses they want at the times they want or they may be discouraged by staffing constraints that affect their ability to navigate registration financial aid and other aspects of enrollment. In contrast for-profit institutions can cut costs and expand more quickly than traditional institutions by offering more highly standardized curricula a more limited range of programs fewer in-person courses and lower-paid instructors ( Deming Goldin and Katz ) A large portion of for-profit programs are fully online making them particularly attractive to students lacking alternatives close to home ( NCES ) The heavy concentration of online programs in the for-profit sector may partly explain why | Chapter for-profit enrollment declined much less than community college enrollment in the first year of the pandemic when demand for remote learning increased substantially ( National Student Clearinghouse 2022b ) Institution-Focused Policies That Promote Access to Postsecondary Value Research has shown that the quality of institutions matters for student outcomes. Thus policies aimed at institutions to build capacity to support colleges in serving students well and to hold them accountable when they do not are critical to ensuring that all students have access to an education of value. Federal policy can influence the quality of postsecondary options by supporting evidence-informed strategies to expand supply and improve outcomes at public institutions while holding all institutions accountable for the value they provide and protecting students from the worst options Supporting the Quality of Existing Colleges and Programs As more attention has been given to increasing college completion not just enrollment the base of evidence has grown for promising programs and policies ( e.g. see the recent review by Dynarski et al. ) This subsection considers the potential benefits of expanding specific institutional programs with a track record of success as well as the potential benefits of more flexible institutional support Enhanced guidance and advising. Personalized guidance coaching and/or mentoring have been shown to help college students overcome both academic and nonacademic challenges. Several randomized-control studies find that such services can help students persist and complete their degrees at higher rates ( Dynarski et al. ) Bettinger and Baker ( ) find that four-year college students randomly assigned to receive access to individualized student coaching from outside professionals were more likely to persist and graduate. Oreopoulos and Petronijevic ( ) find that oneto-one coaching by upper-year undergraduate mentors improved students academic performance while less intense text and email nudge interventions did not. Randomized studies have found positive effects of related interventions for community college students as well ( Linkow et al. ; Evans et al. ) Comprehensive programs. Comprehensive programs that provide multifaceted financial academic and nonacademic supports have shown particularly dramatic effects. Of these the best known is the City University of New York s ( CUNY s ) Accelerated Study in Associate Program ( ASAP ) In addition to waiving tuition and fees ASAP provides textbook vouchers free transportation a dedicated one-to-one adviser and enhanced tutoring Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | and career counseling. Students are required to enroll full time. A randomized evaluation found that the program nearly doubled associate degree completion rates three years after entry ( vs. percent ) with large effects on completion persisting after six years ( Scrivener et al. ; Weiss et al ) ASAP has since been successfully replicated in Ohio ( Sommo et al ; Miller et al. ) and CUNY is piloting a version of the program at several of its four-year campuses ( CUNY n.d. ) The version implemented in Ohio though less expensive per student than the original CUNY model cost percent more per student than business as usual but because the program dramatically increased completion rates it lowered the average cost per graduate ( Miller et al. ) CUNY s ASAP was estimated to raise degree completion rates enough to more than cover its costs so that enrolling more students was estimated to provide taxpayers with fiscal benefits of $ million in dollars ( Levin and Garcia ) Direct institutional support. All the programs described above require resources. Research indicates that per-student institutional resources are an important driver of college persistence and completion ( Bound and Turner ; Bound Lovenheim and Turner ; Webber and Ehrenberg ; Cohodes and Goodman ; Deming and Walters ) This echoes findings that resources matter for student outcomes in the K-12 context particularly for low-income students ( Jackson Johnson and Persico ; Hyman ) How resources are spent matters but because the optimal use of funds may vary from context to context general funding support with appropriate guardrails may give institutions the flexibility they need to optimize. Box describes some of the Biden-Harris Administration s efforts on this front Various scholars have offered proposals for what a more regular program of Federal institutional support for postsecondary education could look like. Existing Federal support for K-12 schools provides one model : Federal grants have long been provided to districts schools and States through Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act ( Skinner and Cooper ) Hiler and Whistle ( ) for example propose a version of Title I funding for postsecondary education that could be based on the number and proportion of Pell Grant recipients enrolled. Federal grants that match State spending which have proven effective in increasing State spending on other programs such as Medicaid ( Kane et al. ) could reduce the risk that Federal dollars simply crowd out State investment in public colleges ( Deming ) Some scholars have suggested that aid be targeted to community colleges the sector with the greatest need and potential ( Goolsbee Hubbard and Ganz ) | Chapter Box Policies Focused on Direct Institutional Support The Biden-Harris Administration has made direct institutional support a priority. The College Completion Fund for Postsecondary Student Success ( funded by the Consolidated Appropriations Act of and following similar proposals in the American Families Plan and the President s Budget Request ) in provided $ million in competitive grants to postsecondary institutions to support data-driven and evidence-based reforms that encourage postsecondary retention transfer and completion ( U.S. Department of Education 2022b ) These funds were targeted to institutions that disproportionately serve students of color and low-income students with priority given to community colleges. Congress provided an additional $ million for the program for Fiscal Year ( U.S. Department of Education 2023b ) During the COVID-19 pandemic direct support for institutions was a key aspect of Federal support for postsecondary education. The American Rescue Plan Act of provided nearly $ billion in institutional support via the Higher Education Emergency Relief Fund ( HEERF ) HEERF initially established by the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security ( CARES ) Act of required institutions to spend half the funds on emergency student aid and the other half on any costs associated with significant changes to the delivery of instruction due to the coronavirus ( U.S. Department of Education 2022c ) About percent of HEERF-participating institutions reported the program helped them keep students enrolled who might have otherwise dropped out ( U.S. Department of Education 2023c ) Evidence on similar programs during the Great Recession suggests that they help public research institutions maintain or increase their expenditures on both research and instruction ( Dinerstein et al. ) Many states have used funding from the American Rescue Plan to expand or strengthen colleges and job training programs seeing these as core strategies to build back from the pandemic ( U.S. Department of the Treasury ) Institutional Accountability Accountability policies are wide-ranging and they include ( ) strict accountability policies that cut off institutions from Federal or State aid completely if they fail to meet certain minimum standards ; ( ) performancebased funding whereby financial assistance is at least partly conditioned on institutional performance ; and ( ) policies that increase transparency and rely on the market to self-regulate. Evidence regarding each option is discussed in turn Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | Strict accountability. A variety of past and current Federal regulations suggest potentially promising results from holding postsecondary institutions accountable for program-level student outcomes as a condition of eligibility for Federal financial aid for students. For-profit colleges are most affected by such regulations in part because of the legal authority granted to regulators under Federal law and partly because of their poor observed student outcomes ( Cellini and Koedel ) Cutting off aid from programs that leave students unable to repay their loan debt is at least partly effective in discouraging enrollment in such programs ( Darolia ) Cellini Darolia and Turner ( ) further show that when for-profit colleges experience large drops in annual enrollment due to policy sanctions most such students shift to community colleges whose loan default outcomes are substantially better. Kelchen and Liu ( ) demonstrate that having debtto-earnings ratios in excess of prescribed limits made poor-performing colleges and programs more likely to close even though the regulations were rescinded by the Trump Administration before any sanctions were actually applied. Box describes these regulations further Performance-based funding. Currently roughly States have implemented policies that partly tie higher education appropriations to outcomes such as graduation rates. Known as performance-based funding this strategy is an attempt to improve institutional accountability. A review of the evidence shows however little sign of such measures inducing institutional improvements in student outcomes such as degree completion ( Ortagus et al. ) Researchers have also found that performance-based funding can incentivize behavior counterproductive to increasing the available quality of college opportunities with some public four-year institutions boosting their outcomes by decreasing admission rates and reducing enrollment of underrepresented students of color ( Ortagus et al. ; Birdsall ) Some States have modified their plans to include additional incentives for improving measures related to equity with potentially promising evidence that such equity-focused modifications can improve enrollments of low-income students and students of color ( G ndara and Rutherford ) Increasing the transparency of student outcomes. Increasing the transparency of student outcomes can potentially make college quality more salient both to prospective students and to institutions themselves increasing the competitive pressure to improve. Research indicates for example that improving students information on labor market outcomes can influence their major choice ( Baker et al. ; Wiswall and Zafar ) In addition to the College Scorecard several States have their own databases of earnings data organized by institution or industry. For example the Salary Surfer ( salarysurfer.cccco.edu ) a collection of earnings data from the California Community College System provides average salary information two years before two years after and five years after graduation by industry | Chapter Box Gainful Employment and Other Accountability Regulations Since its enactment the Higher Education Act ( HEA ) has defined the types of institutions and programs that are eligible to participate in Federal financial aid programs. Under current law educational programs must lead to a degree at a nonprofit or public institution or must prepare students for gainful employment in a recognized occupation in order to be eligible for financial aid under Title IV of the HEA ( U.S. Department of Education 2022d ) The gainful employment requirement was not however defined in regulations for the first few decades of the HEA In the Obama-Biden Administration finalized regulations defining gainful employment as requiring aid-eligible certificate and degree programs to meet a specific debt-to-earnings ratio for graduates. The Department of Education estimated that students programs would not meet this standard nearly all at for-profit institutions ( U.S Department of Education ) The gainful employment regulation was rescinded under the Trump Administration. The Biden-Harris Administration is in the process of reinstating a new such rule to ensure that Federal funds are not directed to programs that do not lead to gainful employment ( U.S. Department of Education 2022e ) The Administration has already taken other actions designed to increase the accountability of postsecondary institutions and programs to students and taxpayers. The Department of Education has solicited public comment on the development of an annual watch list identifying programs with the lowest financial value and announced plans to request improvement plans from the institutions that offer such programs. The Department of Education also reestablished the enforcement unit in the Office of Federal Student Aid to hold institutions accountable and withdrew authorization from the accreditor ACICS which oversaw for-profit institutions involved in some of the worst outcomes for students. The Administration also closed a long-standing loophole that encouraged for-profit institutions to aggressively target and recruit veterans and their families. Research indicates that such institutions lower veterans earnings ( Barr et al. ) and use this additional revenue stream to raise tuition rather than improve quality ( Baird et al. ) Recent regulations enacted by the Biden-Harris Administration will ensure that private for-profit colleges derive at least percent of their revenue from nonFederal sources including veterans benefits as required under changes made by Congress to the 90/10 rule in the American Rescue Plan Act Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | and subfield. The U.S. Census Bureau has released the Post-Secondary Employment Outcomes data product since providing earnings data by institution and degree program up to years after graduation and showing the flows of graduates from various degree programs into employment in various industries Evidence from the release of the College Scorecard and earlier efforts at transparency suggests however that transparency on its own may have a limited short-term impact on student application and behavior. Publishing annual lists of institutions with the highest levels or changes in costs for students did not appear to affect those institutions prices or enrollments at least in the short run ( Baker ) For the first time in the Scorecard made widely available average graduation rates and earnings of students enrolling at thousands of colleges nationwide. Research indicates that this release had limited effects on college search and application behavior with effects concentrated among more advantaged students ( Huntington-Klein ; Hurwitz and Smith ; Meyer and Rosinger ) The longerterm effects of the College Scorecard and other transparency efforts may however be more meaningful than the short-term effects as information takes time to reach students families school counselors and other decisionmakers. More research is needed to isolate such longer-term effects of data transparency on college quality Addressing Geographic Barriers to Access Additional policy efforts may be needed to more directly address geographic constraints on access. Though the COVID-19 pandemic has led to increased awareness of the feasibility of remote learning at scale it has also shown its limitations. This subsection discusses the evidence on the effectiveness of online education as well as other more promising alternatives to provide more students with access to high-quality college experiences on the campus of their local high school. For older returning students box provides additional information on local workforce training interventions that have demonstrated promise in improving outcomes Online programs. Some have suggested expanding online options to reduce geographic barriers to access but research findings suggest caution about this approach. In some settings such as four-year colleges there are examples of students doing equally well across both online and in-person formats ( Figlio Rush and Yin ; Bowen et al. ) as well as in blended learning approaches combining online and in-person components ( Bowen et al. ; Alpert Couch and Harmon ) Other research finds however that courses taught through online formats often lead to worse learning outcomes than their in-person counterparts ( Joyce et al ; Alpert Couch and Harmon ; Krieg and Henson ) Research | Chapter Box Supporting Workforce Training Quality Community colleges are the primary providers of education and training targeted at labor market needs with Pell Grants now the largest source of funding for workforce training for low-income Americans ( Ma and Pender 2022b ; Holzer ) Postsecondary institutions that provide such training may however be slow to respond to sectoral shifts and changes in employers specific skill needs ( Katz et al. ) The traditional academic schedule and program offerings may not always fit the needs of nontraditional students such as workers displaced midcareer Though displaced workers are eligible for Federal student aid they may not be aware of their eligibility or how to use it ( Barr and Turner ) Federal training resources specifically developed to serve such workers are funded at much lower levels through the Workforce Investment and Opportunity Act and with generally positive but somewhat mixed evidence of effectiveness ( Rothstein et al. ; Holzer ) In this context sectoral employment and training programs have shown promise. These programs typically involve partnerships between employers or industry associations training providers ( often community colleges ) workforce boards and intermediary organizations such as unions and local nonprofits ( Holzer ) These programs may improve alignment between training programs and workforce needs and the wraparound services they often provide may increase students likelihood of completion. Research on sectoral employment programs many located at community colleges concluded that such programs lead to substantial earnings gains for participants ( Katz et al. ) Additional positive evidence comes from the Trade Adjustment Act Community College and Career Training ( TAACCCT ) Initiative which provided $ billion in grants to postsecondary institutions to enhance their workforce training capacity in the wake of the Great Recession ( U.S Department of Labor 2022a ) A meta-analysis of quasi-experimental studies of TAACCCT programs concluded that the investments had overall positive effects on program completion as well as labor market outcomes ( Blume et al. ) Registered Apprenticeships provide another promising pathway to well-paying jobs. Registered Apprenticeships are formally approved by the U.S. Department of Labor or a State Apprenticeship Agency and are vetted to ensure that they align with industry needs in high-demand fields ( U.S. Department of Labor 2022b ) In this earn and learn model workers get paid while training under the supervision of a mentor typically for two to four years and simultaneously receive supplementary classroom instruction. One study found that for every $ invested employers receive $ in direct and indirect benefits in the years during and after training an apprentice ( Kuehn et al. ) Research on the causal impact of such programs is limited though descriptive research Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | indicates workers experience strong wage growth in the year after finishing the program ( Walton Gardiner and Barnow ) The BidenHarris Administration has expanded Registered Apprenticeships through additional funding and efforts like the launch of the Apprenticeship Ambassador Initiative ( White House ) during the COVID-19 pandemic found that college students performed worse in courses that shifted or later remained online ( Bird Castleman and Lohner ; Kofoed et al. ) Online coursework appears to work least well for less academically prepared students in both the for-profit sector ( Bettinger et al. ; Bird Castleman and Lohner ) and the community college sector ( Xu and Jaggars ) Many existing postsecondary options that are fully online do not appear to improve students employment opportunities or earnings relative to no postsecondary education ( Deming et al. ; Hoxby ) Online delivery of coursework may not even be less costly than in-person education ( Hemelt and Stange ) This evidence suggests that online education is unlikely to fully address geographic barriers to high-quality programs Leveraging local institutions. New high-value college opportunities could also be created closer to home and earlier in students lives. Local community colleges are increasingly offering bachelor s degrees which may reduce the distance some students need to travel for such programs. As of about percent of community colleges offered at least one bachelor s degree program ( Love ) Evidence is not yet available regarding the impact of such programs. Dual enrollment similarly brings college coursework closer by allowing high school students to take college-level courses often delivered at the high school itself to minimize travel ( Marken Gray and Lewis ) Enrollment in such coursework has grown rapidly in the last two decades ( An and Taylor ) The limited evidence suggests that dual enrollment improves postsecondary trajectories. For instance early exposure to dual-credit advanced algebra coursework increases the rigor of high school mathematics coursework taken and raises four-year college enrollment rates ( Hemelt Schwartz and Dynarski ) Early college high schools are a more intensive version of dual enrollment in which high schools form partnerships with local colleges to offer students the opportunity to earn an associate degree or equivalent amounts of college credit at little cost to their families ( Webb ) Students admitted into early college high schools are more likely to earn college degrees and earn them faster than similar students denied admission ( Edmunds et al. ; Song et al. ) Expansion of dual enrollment and early college | Chapter opportunities should be done with equity considerations featured prominently. Dual enrollment students are more likely to be white high income and high achieving than the typical student likely because higher-income schools are more likely to offer dual enrollment and higher-income students at a given high school are more likely to enroll in such coursework ( An and Taylor ) Promoting equitable access will require proactive planning and outreach by policymakers and educators Conclusion The diversity and flexibility of the United States system of postsecondary education are among its greatest assets and part of what makes it unique globally. These features also introduce complexity and risks for prospective students. In a simpler marketplace choice and competition might be sufficient to promote quality improvements and to drive bad options out of business. But investing in postsecondary education is not like buying groceries or even a car. Most students are limited geographically leaving them with a narrow set of options and the choices they do have may be hard to fully evaluate and compare in advance. Further public institutions are often constrained in their ability to meet demand while less-constrained private for-profit institutions have poor track records with respect to student outcomes. Students today rely more heavily on student loans to pay for college than did their counterparts a generation ago increasing the risk of financial hardship for those who attend college but leave without gaining valuable skills An examination of institution-oriented policy options reveals three major themes. First a variety of institutional programs many of them pioneered by community colleges have demonstrated great potential for improving student outcomes. Many of these promising programs require additional resources to expand and the Federal Government can both invest directly in postsecondary institutions and encourage States to increase their own investments. Second discouraging the proliferation of low-quality postsecondary options is important in limiting the potential for students to make enrollment choices with low or negative returns. Finally policymakers should continue exploring ways to address geographic barriers to college access through programs such as dual enrollment early college and community college baccalaureate degrees Robust Federal and State efforts to improve the affordability of college have made progress in recent decades in expanding access to college Yet as this chapter has documented making a good educational investment requires attention to both price and quality. Institution-oriented policies can help the U.S. postsecondary system build on its strengths and ensure that all Building Stronger Postsecondary Institutions | students who aspire to college have access to options that are both affordable and of high quality | Chapter Chapter Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets Despite the enormous disruption of the COVID-19 pandemic U.S. labor markets remained tight throughout For much of the last year there were two job openings for every unemployed person an unprecedented gap between labor demand and supply that has shifted the balance of power between workers and businesses. The resulting surge in hiring empowered many workers to change jobs and careers with many job switchers experiencing substantial wage gains. Workplace organizing increased with union representation petitions rising sharply in as workers sought to use their increased leverage to negotiate better working conditions It is tempting to assume that today s hiring challenges are primarily due to the lingering effects of the pandemic. However tight labor markets predated the pandemic and demographic trends indicate that labor supply challenges are likely to remain even as the pandemic recedes. The baby boom generation is aging out of the labor force and there are not enough younger workers to replace them. This tightening of the supply of labor due to population aging is a principal cause of current hiring challenges constraining the economy s capacity for growth by slowing the rate at which businesses can expand hiring. Unless efforts are undertaken to mitigate the impact of demographic change by drawing more adults into the labor market and/or increasing immigration flows the labor supply is likely to be constrained for the foreseeable future This chapter examines both short- and long-run challenges for the U.S. labor supply. In the short run some lingering effects of the pandemic remain principally in the form of heightened labor market exits of older workers Immigration inflows which were falling before the pandemic began fell steeply when the U.S. borders closed and are just starting to recover. Chief among the long-run challenges are demographic trends particularly population aging but also falling labor force participation among prime-age adults The chapter concludes with a description of several options to boost the U.S labor supply ; it also takes a closer look at labor markets experiencing especially acute labor shortfalls to see how macroeconomic forces are affecting specific industries Labor Supply Fundamentals What determines the supply of labor ? Simply put individuals who are able to work decide whether to join the labor force and if they do how many hours they will work. Individuals can also decide to leave the labor force to retire to seek further schooling or to care for small children. The aggregate labor supply of a nation is the sum of these individual choices The aggregate labor supply is also a function of the size of the working-age population which depends on fertility choices of earlier generations as well as immigration flows In the simple framework used in economics textbooks to model the labor supply decision employment is a choice between earning a wage and the alternative uses of that time ( e.g. household tasks childcare leisure ) Households also require a steady source of income to pay for necessary goods and services. This very simple model ignores many important variables that go into the labor supply decision such as the psychological and social rewards of work and the nonmonetary aspects of particular jobs. Yet this simple model does allow economists to make useful predictions of how individual decisions are affected by more easily observed factors such as changing wages and the availability of other household income Chief among these inferences is that individuals who can not meet essential consumption needs without working are highly likely to participate in the labor market. This suggests that individuals without a source of preexisting wealth or nonwage income are more likely to seek formal employment. A second implication is that individuals are more likely to enter the labor market when wages are high when nonparticipation becomes more costly in lost earnings. This model also predicts that participation will fall when wages decline for example due to negative labor demand shocks As discussed later in the chapter many economists believe that declining | Chapter relative wages for non-college-educated workers are chiefly responsible for men s declining participation in recent decades Trends in U.S. Labor Market Participation The labor force participation rate ( LFPR ) is defined as the share of the population age years and above who are working or who are actively seeking employment ( BLS ) The labor force participation rate is an important measure of labor market potential and health ( box ) Nonparticipation in paid activity is not necessarily a source of concern many nonparticipants are retirees students or parents with young children many of whom do not desire formal employment. However low participation rates can indicate an untapped potential labor supply which includes individuals on the sidelines who would enter the labor market if attractive opportunities were available or obstacles to formal employment were removed As shown in figure labor force participation rose markedly in the second half of the last century from to percent between and This growth in participation was due to the increased labor market activity of women facilitated by changing societal norms access to birth Box Labor Supply Terminology Discussions about the labor supply can be confusing given that the term labor supply is sometimes used to indicate the aggregate labor supply and at other times refers to labor force participation. In this chapter we distinguish which term we are using as follows : Labor supply typically refers to the aggregate labor supply which is a function of the adult population ( age years and above ) as well as the share of the adult population that participates in the labor market. However analyses of the labor supply often take population trends as given and focus on the labor supply decisions of individuals which are reflected in the labor force participation rate and the employment rate as defined next here The labor force participation rate ( LFPR ) is the share of the noninstitutionalized adult population participating in the labor market ; this includes people who are currently working or who are seeking employment The employment-to-population ratio or the employment rate is the share of the noninstitutionalized adult population that is employed It is a participation measure similar to the LFPR but does not include unemployed people in the numerator Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | Figure U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate Participation rate in percent age years and above All Female Male Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : Data are seasonally adjusted. Rate is for age years and above control and improved education and labor market opportunities with large gains especially among married women ( e.g. Blau and Kahn ; Goldin and Katz ; Black and Juhn ) The increase in women s participation was more than enough to offset the decline in participation among men since the 1950s. As a result of more women entering the labor market and favorable demographic trends ( the baby boom generation swelled the ranks of the workforce during this period ) the U.S. labor supply grew steadily until Labor force participation in the United States began to decline after due to both supply and demand factors. The U.S. economy experienced two demand shocks during this period : the dot-com crash which ended the economic expansion of the 1990s ; and the global financial crisis which began in Women s participation growth also leveled off and began to decline after But the most significant factor pushing down participation in recent years has been the aging of the workforce with the oldest baby boomers entering their retirement years at the beginning of the global financial crisis Why Worry About Slower Labor Supply Growth ? Declining labor force participation and slowing U.S. population growth mean that there is a dwindling supply of workers. A principal reason to be concerned about slower labor supply growth is that it implies slower economic growth ( for further discussion see chapter of this Report ) The | Chapter growth of economic output is determined by labor supply growth capital investments and productivity growth all else being equal if the labor supply s growth slows so too does economic growth. As labor market participation declines with age an aging population also reduces the fraction of active workers in the population thereby putting downward pressure on output per capita if not accompanied by capital investments or increases in productivity. Strong per capita economic growth was a primary driver of rising living standards over the last century ; the aging population could have a negative impact on improvements in U.S. living standards in the future Although demographic change is relatively easy to forecast it is more difficult to account for changes in technology and productivity that may dampen the impact of the aging population on future economic growth Cutler and others ( ) posit that labor scarcity could spur labor-saving technological innovation that would offset the impact of demographic change on output growth. Most studies have concluded that the relationship between Box Work and Leisure in the United States and Europe John Maynard Keynes famously predicted that within two generations workers would work only hours a week. For today s Americans that is simply not the case despite living in a vastly richer country than Keynes experienced in the early 1900s. After decades of decline the length of the typical American workweek began increasing in the 1970s despite widespread expectations that productivity growth would lead to more leisure time for workers. Schor ( ) highlighted the plight of the overworked American in an influential book on work and leisure in the United States. She determined that a weakened labor movement and the erosion of workers power were largely responsible for setbacks in converting productivity gains into a shorter workweek for workers Americans in the labor market now work longer hours have less sick leave and take fewer vacations than those in other wealthy nations In hours of work and labor market participation rates were similar in the United States and Europe. But by there was a large gap in the work effort of the typical person in the United States compared with their counterparts in Europe. While the typical American works as many hours a year as they did in the 1970s Europeans generally work much less working fewer hours and weeks throughout the year. As suggested by Schor differences in labor regulation and unionization appear to be the dominant factors explaining differences in annual hours worked per year between the United States and Europe ( Alesina Glaeser and Sacerdote ) Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | Box Deaths of Despair in the United States For white Americans between age and average life expectancy is no longer increasing ; in fact it even declined for several years a pattern not previously seen outside pandemics or wars. This occurred during a period when Black Americans saw gains in life expectancy narrowing the enduring gap in outcomes between these two groups. Increases in mortality rates among whites are largely accounted for by higher rates of suicide opioid overdoses and alcohol abuse ( Case and Deaton ) The term deaths of despair was coined by Case and Deaton ( ) in their influential book which documents the impact of declining economic opportunity on the health and well-being of working-class society in the United States. They explain that these deaths of despair primarily affect white Americans without a four-year college degree living in areas of the country that have a very low share of the workingage population employed While economists usually frame employment as a choice between paid work and alternative uses of time Case and Deaton s ( ) work highlights the importance of good jobs in providing meaning structure and purpose to a community. They write : Destroy work and in the end working-class life can not survive. It is the loss of meaning of dignity of pride and of self-respect that comes with the loss of marriage and of community that brings on despair not just or even primarily the loss of money. Their research shows how the diminished economic prospects of white working-class Americans constitute not only an economic crisis but also a public health crisis Recent papers have challenged the notion that growing deaths of despair are a phenomenon unique to economically disadvantaged whites ; deaths from suicide drug use and alcohol use have risen even more among Indigenous persons living in the United States ( Friedman et al. ) Among Indigenous persons local economic conditions have a heterogenous effect on deaths by suicide and drug use suggesting that improvements in economic conditions alone may not be enough to reduce deaths of despair ( Akee et al. ) an aging population and output is negative ( e.g. Gagnon Johannsen and Lopez-Salido ; Maestas Mullen and Powell ; and Sheiner ) However Acemoglu and Restrepo ( ) find that the impact on technological change dominates and that an older workforce increases economic growth. Eggertsson Lancastre and Summers ( ) similarly find that population aging can increase growth due to increased national savings that accrue as populations age driving down interest rates. However as interest rates approach zero and can not fall further this mechanism is disrupted and | Chapter they find that the impact of aging on growth becomes negative. Overall the evidence suggests that aging populations slow per capita economic growth but the economy s potential to adapt to the tightening of labor supply in ways that spur productivity can not be discounted From an individual perspective the fact that fewer people are engaged in paid labor market activity is not necessarily negative and could simply reflect personal choices. By way of example John Maynard Keynes famously predicted in that technological progress would increase living standards so much that his grandchildren would work just hours a week devoting the rest of their time to leisure ( Keynes ; orig. pub ) As noted in box this prediction did not come to pass for workers in the United States. But evidence suggests that many nonparticipants if not otherwise engaged in schooling or caring for young children are not happier than those who work. Prime-age men who are out of the labor force report low levels of emotional well-being and derive little meaning from how they spend their time ( Krueger ) They are also less likely to be married and much more likely to be living in poverty. Localities where employment rates have fallen the most have also seen a sharper rise in opioid deaths and suicides ( see box ) suggesting significant community stress in these areas Causes of U.S. Labor Supply Challenges Slowing population growth and declining labor force participation are significant headwinds for U.S. labor supply. If these trends persist and offsetting increases in productivity or capital intensity fail to materialize there will not be enough workers to meet long-run demand. Because understanding the causes of current labor supply challenges is necessary to craft effective policy solutions this section provides an overview of the dominant factors driving slower growth of U.S. labor supply since Demographic Trends Demographic trends are the principal cause of near-term U.S. labor supply challenges. Over the next decade the share of the population in their prime working years ( between age and ) will decline in the United States and in many other countries as shown in figure These demographic trends are the result of a sharp decline in fertility rates between and the late 1970s with fertility remaining at or below replacement rates for the last several decades. Additionally life expectancy in the United States has also not kept pace with that of other wealthy nations and was decreasing for some groups even before the COVID-19 pandemic ( see box ) Due to low fertility rates the vast majority of near-term working-age population Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | Figure Percentage of Total Projected Population That Is Prime Age Percent Canada China France Germany United States United Kingdom Sources : World Bank ; United Nations Population Projections Note : Prime age is years Figure Prime-Age versus Overall Labor Force Participation Prime-age participation rate age ( percent ) Overall participation rate age ( percent ) Prime age ( left axis ) Overall ( age ) ( right axis ) Source : Current Population Survey data Note : Prime age is years growth will be accounted for by immigrants and their descendants born in the United States ( Blau and Mackie ) The tightening of labor supply conditions due to these demographic trends was well under way before the pandemic as can been seen in figure Between and prime-age and overall labor force participation moved more or less in tandem. Starting in however the two categories began to diverge as baby boomers began to enter their early | Chapter retirement years. Increases in the participation rate among older workers and slack labor demand conditions in the years after the financial crisis dampened but did not completely offset the initial effect of retirements on the labor supply ( Aaronson et al. ; Abraham and Kearney ) As labor demand recovered and labor markets tightened in the years preceding the COVID-19 pandemic many workers left the sidelines and entered the labor market in response easing concerns about the labor supply. Then the pandemic arrived and COVID-19 a virus that is particularly dangerous for older members of the workforce sped up many of the forces reshaping the labor market. In December the prime-age LFPR was just shy of its prepandemic peak but overall participation had fallen by a full percentage point due primarily to population aging and the increase in the propensity of older workers to retire during the pandemic Declining Labor Market Participation Among Men In addition to population aging another cause of slowing labor supply growth is the decline in participation among men particularly those without a college degree. The participation rate for U.S. men in their prime-age working years peaked in the 1950s and has been falling in earnest since the mid-1960s. This decline is sharper than in other advanced economies Prime-age men in the United States and the United Kingdom had similar rates of participation in the 1980s and 1990s but the participation of men in the United States continued to fall after while the United Kingdom s participation rates remained relatively flat. This trend has particularly significant implications for economic growth because individuals are at their most productive in their prime-age working years The underlying causes of declining male participation have been the subject of much scholarly interest but still remain an open debate. This very large body of research is summarized here to explain the potential causes of declining male participation and to illuminate potential policies to counteract the ongoing decline Spousal income for heterosexual men. Increases in married women s labor supply could reduce male labor force participation by reducing the cost of nonparticipation and increasing responsibilities at home such as childrearing and senior care. However the evidence suggests that this is not a significant factor driving down male participation. Men with working wives and men with children have had the smallest declines in participation among all men ( Juhn and Potter ; CEA ) As discussed in more detail in box nonparticipating men are more likely than other groups to rely on income from other family members usually parents. It is plausible that changing trends in household formation such as more adults living with their parents will reduce male participation. However the causality may go Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | Box On What Income Do Jobless Men Live ? How do men between the age of and who do not work fund food shelter and other necessities ? Figure 6-i documents sources of income for prime-age men who were not in the labor force in For comparison purposes we also provide the composition of household income for men in the labor force and for women. A primary source of income for nonparticipating men is other household members principally parents In contrast income provided by other household members accounts for only a small share of income for other groups. Spousal income available to nonparticipants is smaller than it is for men in the labor force in part reflecting lower marriage rates. Government transfer income particularly disability insurance is a key source of income for some nonparticipating men although as can be seen in figure 6-i it accounts for a relatively small share of income for nonparticipants as a group Figure 6-i. Sources of Annual Income for Prime-Age Workers by Sex and Labor Force Status Average annual income ( thousands of dollars ) Male NILF Wage and salary Male labor force Spouse Female NILF Social insurance and government transfers Female labor force Other Other householder Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : NILF = not in the labor force in the other direction : these trends themselves may be an outcome of higher housing costs and fewer labor market opportunities for young workers ( Fry Passel and Cohn ; Matsudaira ) Disability insurance. Social Security Disability Insurance ( SSDI ) is another candidate for a supply-side explanation of declines in male labor force participation rates. SSDI receipts increased for several decades before peaking in after which their incidence fell ( CBPP ) A substantial body of research indicates that the availability of SSDI benefits lowers participation for workers who are on the margin of eligibility ( e.g. Bound ; Autor and Duggan ; Maestas Mullen and Strand ; and | Chapter Gelber Moore and Strand ) However SSDI receipts do not appear to be an important determinant of declining male participation rates. From until prime-age male participation fell percentage points while the share of prime-age men who received SSDI benefits increased by percentage points ( CEA ) Moreover this 2-percentage-point rise in the SSDI take-up rate among prime-age men should not be interpreted as having caused lower participation given that many of the men receiving SSDI benefits would likely not have participated due to their disabilities An analysis conducted by the CEA finds that under reasonable assumptions holding SSDI receipts constant for prime-age men during the period would only have eliminated between and percentage point of the observed reduction in prime-age men s participation ( CEA ) Rising incarceration rates. As shown in figure Black men have a lower labor force participation rate in the United States than Hispanic or white men and participation among Black men has been falling more steeply than that of other groups. A steep rise in incarceration rates beginning in the 1980s is a potential culprit in the declining employment prospects of Black men who face a much higher risk of incarceration than white men. Because standard labor market statistics exclude institutionalized populations they understate the impact of rising incarceration rates on employment among Black men. Doleac ( ) shows that accounting for the incarcerated population lowered the employment rate ( i.e. the percentage of the population Figure Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation by Race Participation rate age ( percent ) White Black Hispanic Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : Prime age is years. Data are annual averages Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | that is employed ) of Black men in by about percentage points with only a minimal impact on white men s employment Incarceration is also likely to have a negative impact on employment after release an effect that would be reflected in official statistics. Formerly incarcerated people face a number of barriers to formal employment : limited labor market experiences while incarcerated laws preventing them from being employed in certain jobs and employer practices that discourage hiring those with criminal records. R sum -audit studies have found that an applicant s criminal record is a significant barrier to finding employment ( Pager ) Mueller-Smith ( ) finds that for individuals with a previous formal labor market attachment incarceration decreases the probability of subsequent employment especially for those serving longer terms. Some recent papers using administrative data have not found strong evidence of significant scarring effects on postincarceration earnings and employment ( Garin et al. ; Looney and Turner ) However this empirical result is a consequence of poor labor market opportunities preceding incarceration ; formerly incarcerated persons are disproportionately drawn from neighborhoods in extreme economic distress. A reasonable interpretation of these findings is that while incarceration likely does have an impact on future employment and earnings many of the challenges that formerly incarcerated persons face in the labor market start long before their incarceration begins Abraham and Kearney ( ) use estimates of the formerly incarcerated population and Mueller-Smith s ( ) estimates of scarring effects to roughly calculate the impact of rising incarceration rates on declines in the overall employment rate. They estimate that rising incarceration accounted for a decline of percentage point in the employment-to-population ratio between and a period when the ratio declined percentage points. Though admittedly a rough estimate their calculations suggest that rising incarceration accounts for a small part of observed declines in overall employment. However rising incarceration disproportionally affects Black communities so incarceration s role in driving down participation among Black men is likely much larger Geographic mismatches. Labor force participation varies dramatically across the United States with striking gaps even among prime-age adults ( Nunn Parsons and Shambaugh ) Migration flows within the United States were quite high in the mid-20th century. Those picking up stakes generally moved to where they could find work and migration flows redirected population on net from low-income to high-income regions ( Blanchard and Katz ) However since internal migration has declined and moves have become less likely to reallocate population to more prosperous parts of the country ( Ganong and Shoag ) Reduced internal migration may be a result of increased housing costs and/or increased licensing costs | Chapter for certain occupations and industries ( Hsieh and Moretti ; Johnson and Kleiner ) Declines in labor migration may have exacerbated declining labor force participation with workers increasingly exiting the labor market instead of migrating in response to regional shocks ( Dao Furceri and Loungani ) This change has been evident in manufacturing employment declines since ; unlike previous downturns those who lost jobs have been less likely to migrate to other regions and more likely to exit the labor force ( Autor Dorn and Hanson ; Charles Hurst and Schwartz ) However some economists have argued that declining mobility is an appropriate response to improved information about distant labor markets reflecting rational expectations about potential employment success in those locations ( Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl ) and to declines in urban premiums for non-college-educated workers ( Autor ) The extent to which declining geographic mobility has exacerbated declining labor force participation remains an open question. The fact that out-migration responses to regional downturns have declined suggests that it does play a role but the importance of this role can not be fully ascertained with the evidence. However the reduction in domestic migration to areas with better economic opportunities is well established in the literature This indicates that policies designed to pull workers into the labor market will have limited success unless they can also improve job opportunities in regions where participation is currently low Demand factors : import competition and technological change. The labor supply model outlined earlier in the chapter posits another theory for declining participation : wages. In the model adverse demand shocks can have a negative impact on an individual s decision to participate through wages alone. The steepest declines in participation since the 1970s have been among men without a four-year degree ; these men have also experienced declines in wages throughout much of this period. It is reasonable to wonder therefore if declines in labor demand can account for declines in participation particularly among men without a four-year degree Why would demand for labor have fallen disproportionately for men without a college degree ? Possible causes include globalization and technological change. These dual forces are thought to be key drivers of job polarization a term used to describe the relative growth of high- and lowskill jobs and the disappearance of middle-skill opportunities ( Acemoglu and Autor ; Autor and Dorn ) Middle-skill jobs generally include tasks that are most vulnerable to automation and offshoring making it difficult to distinguish the relative impact of each factor on employment. Job losses during the two recessions preceding the COVID-19 pandemic were concentrated among middle-skill jobs and workers who lost those jobs Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | tended to exit the labor market rather than take lower-paying work ( Foote and Ryan ) A number of papers have linked declines in U.S. manufacturing employment to increased import competition from China ( e.g. Autor Dorn and Hanson ; Autor et al. ; Pierce and Schott ; and Acemoglu et al. ) Increased imports from China reduced demand for domestically produced manufacturing goods which reduced demand for U.S. manufacturing workers who are disproportionately less-educated men. More recent research by Bloom and others ( ) suggests that the negative impact of the China shock on U.S. manufacturing employment was sizable between and but has not exacerbated manufacturing declines in more recent years. However increased import competition is not the only cause of manufacturing employment declines ; automation has also increased. Looking specifically at the role of robots in employment declines Acemoglu and Restrepo ( ) estimate that each robot displaces about workers. Using this estimate Abraham and Kearney ( ) tentatively conclude that increases in the stock of robots between and resulted in the loss of million jobs during this period Many economists believe that demand factors are the principal cause of declining male labor force participation. In their comprehensive review and meta-analysis of recent research on declining overall employment rates Abraham and Kearney ( ) state that our review of the evidence leads us to conclude that among the factors whose effects we are able to quantify labor demand factors are the most important drivers of the secular decline in employment over the to period. However their estimates indicate that almost half the fall in employment rates during this period is unexplained after accounting for changes in demand. The CEA ( ) also concluded that low wages were the primary driver of male participation declines with smaller roles for supply factors A seeming puzzle with regard to the view that declining wages are driving participation declines is that real wages for lower-skilled men rebounded in the 1990s and the 2010s periods when the participation of men continued to fall. One possibility suggested by Wu ( ) is that it is not absolute but relative declines in wages that reduce participation. Widening inequality means that relative wages for men without a four-year degree have declined steadily for many decades reducing their status marriage prospects and job satisfaction. Wu finds that changes in relative wages account for almost half the growth in labor force exits among noncollege men between and In a related paper Binder and Bound ( ) argue that supply and demand factors are likely not additive but interactive with negative demand shocks for noncollege men leading to less stable employment and lowering marriage rates in turn leading to changes in household formation that reduce the male labor supply. Together these papers suggest that demand factors | Chapter and rising inequality may together have a negative impact on participation by lowering the relative gain in status attainable through work Summary of the evidence on the declining male LFPR. Despite significant scholarly interest in the decline of male labor force participation questions remain. The evidence suggests that demand factors have played an important role with globalization and automation reducing employment and wages particularly for men without college degrees. However a sizable participation gap remains unexplained by changes in labor demand. Supply factors such as increasing incarceration and disability insurance have also exacerbated the decline although the impact of these factors has been small An open question for research is how changes in gender roles and household formation particularly declining marriage rates and more adults living with their parents interact with demand factors and have exacerbated declines in participation Despite the incomplete nature of the evidence on participation declines the extensive research literature does point to policy measures that could boost participation among men. In particular given the importance of demand factors and rising inequality in driving down participation efforts to improve wages and working conditions for men without a four-year degree would likely draw more of them into the labor market. Several policy options to boost participation by addressing these factors are discussed in greater detail later in the chapter Female Labor Force Participation : The United States Falls Behind Despite declining labor force participation among men the U.S. labor supply grew for much of the last century largely due to the growing participation of women. The many social and economic factors driving the growth of female participation in the last century are the subject of a large body of literature a review of which is beyond the scope of this chapter. What is more relevant for current labor supply challenges is that the growth in women s participation in the United States leveled off in the 1990s and began to decline. This stagnation did not occur in other advanced economies where female participation continued to grow. As shown in figure female participation levels and trends in the United States were similar to those in Canada and the United Kingdom until about Female participation continued to grow in these two countries after unlike in the United States. By U.S female participation rates were below those for women in Japan who were far less likely to work than women in the United States as recently as Most of literature on declining female participation since has focused on factors affecting the maternal labor supply. When discussing why U.S. female participation has fallen behind that of other countries a frequent observation is that the United States lacks publicly provided childcare Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | Figure Prime-Age Female Labor Force Participation Participation rate age selected OECD countries ( percent ) Canada United Kingdom France United States Japan OECD average Source : Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Note : Prime age is to years and paid family and medical leave policies which are common in most advanced economies. The United States spent only $ on care and early education per child under years of age in compared with the EU average of $ ( OECD ) In consequence childcare in the United States consumes a significant portion of family budgets with care costing up to one-third of the average earnings of a single mother ( Ziliak ) Most of the empirical evidence indicates that publicly provided care options for young children boost the maternal labor supply ( e.g. Gelbach ; Baker Gruber and Milligan ; and Haeck Lefebvre and Merrigan ) as discussed in the next section on policy options. Chapter of this Report also discusses more broadly the social and economic benefits of greater public support for early care and education However there is no strong evidence tying childcare costs facing families to declines in female participation since Declines in participation among women are broad-based and are actually steepest among single women without children whose participation declined by percentage points between and ( see figure ) In many ways female participation trends after resemble those of men in the United States who also had declining participation relative to other advanced economies during this period. While the factors driving declining participation among men have been the subject of much research much less attention has focused on declines in women s participation with a few notable exceptions such as Black Schanzenbach and Breitwieser ( ) and Abraham and Kearney ( ) Although research has been understandably focused on the role of | Chapter Figure Prime-Age Female Labor Force Participation Rate Participation rate age ( percent ) Single no children Married no children Single with children Married with children Sources : Bureau of Labor Statistics ; CEA calculations Note : Prime age is years. Data are annual averages care in boosting the maternal labor supply the factors driving declining participation among women without children are also worthy of further investigation The COVID-19 Pandemic s Lingering Effects on the Labor Supply The forces constraining the supply of workers at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic were amplified as countries attempted to mitigate the spread of the virus. Retirements among baby boomers already fueling hiring challenges in many industries spiked as older workers faced new and potentially severe health risks at work. Some employers encouraged workers to take early retirement in order to slash workforces in the face of reduced demand Immigration bans and closed borders halted the flow of foreign-born workers who were critical for many industries particularly food services and agriculture. The pandemic also disrupted the availability of childcare and in-person school making it difficult for many parents to return to work Prime-age participation has mostly rebounded from the pandemic ( see box ) and recent efforts to clear the backlog of applicants have returned immigration flows to prepandemic levels. But the lingering effects on the labor supply remain principally lower participation rates among older workers. While retirements have increased in previous downturns ( Gorodnichenko Song and Stolyarov ; Coile and Levine ) the pandemic-induced recession had a particularly severe impact. Quarterly retirement rates increased by percentage points at the start of the pandemic Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | Box The Missing Prime-Age Workers Early during the COVID-19 pandemic declines in prime-age labor market participation were primarily due to pandemic-related disruptions Layoffs illness and care responsibilities pushed many participants out of the labor market ( Garcia and Cowan ; Goda and Soltas ; Cajner and others ) As businesses and schools reopened and vaccines were rolled out prime-age participation rebounded quickly ( Forsythe Kahn Lange and Wiczer ; Hansen Sabia and Schaller ) Individuals with disabilities actually increased their participation relative to prepandemic levels likely due to increased telework and remote work practices adopted during the pandemic ( Ne eman and Maestas ) Yet despite tight labor markets and steadily rising wages growth in prime-age participation slowed markedly in the latter half of ; at the end of the year it remained percentage point below the level in February As policymakers had hoped that continued prime-age participation growth would ease ongoing inflationary pressures concern about these missing workers grew. But why prime-age participation remained below prepandemic levels three years after the start of the pandemic can not be easily ascertained One possibility is that the level of participation at the end of the last expansion was an exception and not the rule. The last expansion pulled many workers into the labor market and the continued growth in participation between and surprised many economists. It may be that participation rates were well above the trend at the end of the long expansion that preceded the pandemic ( Barkin ) Another possibility is that participation will keep growing as long as the current expansion continues. That participation decisions can respond to favorable economic conditions with a lag is suggested by Cajner Coglianese and Montes ( ) who find that participation declines after a negative shock can last up to four years with nonparticipants who return to school or shift to care responsibilities during the downturn accounting for much of the lagged response. If households adapted to the pandemic in ways that can take a while to unwind it may be that more prime-age workers will return to the labor market over time a much larger spike in the retirement rate than occurred during the financial crisis ( McEntarfer ) Unlike previous downturns the pandemic-induced growth in retirements appears largely unrelated to local economic conditions suggesting that the retirement surge may have been primarily driven by COVID-19 health concerns ( Coile and Zhang ) A recent paper suggests that the increase in housing wealth during the pandemic may have | Chapter also played an important role with more retirements among older workers in housing markets with stronger price growth ( Favilukis and Li ) As of the end of the growth in the retired share of the U.S population accounted for nearly all the shortfall in labor force participation relative to prepandemic levels. In a recent paper looking at the surge in retirements during the pandemic Montes Smith and Dajon ( ) estimate that almost half the retirements since the start of the pandemic have been excess retirements that would likely have not occurred in absence of the pandemic. They find particularly sharp increases in retirements among workers over among whites and among those with a four-year degree Given the advanced age of most excess retirees it seems unlikely that a large proportion will return to the labor force. The authors also find that flows into retirement remained elevated almost three years after the start of the pandemic. They conclude that it may take some time for retirement behavior to return to prepandemic norms Options to Boost the U.S. Labor Supply As detailed in this chapter the United States faces long-run headwinds for its labor supply that may have an impact on future economic growth This section discusses policy options for boosting the U.S. labor supply Although the focus here is on broad-based measures labor supply challenges are often unique to specific markets and policy solutions to increase the labor supply in general may be insufficient to remedy supply issues in specific occupations and industries. To highlight this fact this section also discusses the supply challenges facing two particular labor markets medical care ( box ) and local public education ( box ) in greater detail Increasing Immigration Increasing immigration to the United States is frequently cited as a way to mitigate the consequences of the aging population. Immigration increases potential output by increasing the size of the labor force ; because new immigrants are typically working age it also lessens the effect of the aging population on per capita economic growth. Immigrants also make other important contributions to the U.S. economy. For example given that they often have fewer long-standing family and social ties they are more mobile than workers born in the country and are more responsive to local economic conditions ( Basso and Peri ) Skilled immigrants have been found to boost innovation and technological change which is an added contribution to overall economic growth ( Bernstein et al. ; Hunt and Gauthier-Loiselle ) Overall research also suggests that the effects of newly arrived immigrants on the wages and employment of the Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | Box A Critical Shortfall of Nurses and Physicians Demographic shifts that began before the COVID-19 pandemic had already started to manifest in a noticeable reduction in the supply of health care providers. Researchers have documented the effect of the aging of the U.S. population on the supply of nurses and physicians in certain specialties such as primary care and psychiatry along with geographic misallocation affecting rural areas ( Buerhous Auerbach and Staiger ; Petterson et al. ; Satiani et al. ; Ricketts ) Given that the youngest members of the baby boom generation are just reaching retirement age the aging of the population will continue to affect the availability of health care providers for the foreseeable future by simultaneously reducing the supply of providers and increasing demand for health care Compounding these predictable shifts the pandemic exerted a historic shock on the health care workforce exacerbating existing challenges. Unprecedented rises in the demand for health care overwhelmed providers. Many left their jobs to protect themselves and their families from catching the virus to care for their young children and elderly parents and to focus on their physical and emotional health and lessen burnout ( Galvin ) These actions increased the burden for providers who remained in the system Swift short-term solutions were implemented to stabilize the supply of critical health care workers. Hospitals utilized travel nurses to fill short-term increases in demand ( Gottlieb and Zenilman ) The wages of these traveling nurse positions were set significantly higher than those of other nurses which resulted in many nurses being willing to move to areas of the country with the greatest short-term need Through provider payment incentive modifications access to telehealth services was expanded for many Americans. Many States also relaxed their scope-of-practice restrictions allowing for greater utilization of nurse practitioners and physicians assistants ( Volk et al. ) Although these short-term solutions helped during the crisis improvements in the education and training of health care providers will be required to maintain an adequate supply and distribution of providers in the long run. There are currently too few nurse educators to meet the demand. There are also too few nursing clinical placement spots to provide clinical experience for nursing students. Poor working conditions in many hospitals led to high turnover in the nursing profession well before the pandemic ; improvements in patient-to-nurse staffing ratios and management practices would reduce turnover and improve patient outcomes ( Vahey et al. ; Aiken et al. ) For physicians there is an insufficient number of residency slots. Increasing funding for medical residency programs will also likely be needed to boost the supply of physicians ( GAO ) | Chapter Box Staffing Challenges in K-12 Education Between February and October employment in local education fell by almost workers about percent of this workforce According to survey results from a nationally representative sample of public schools percent indicated that they were entering the academic year understaffed. Among those schools respondents reported that their highest need areas were special education teachers ( percent ) and transportation staff ( percent ) ( U.S. Department of Education ) Declines in education employment since the COVID-19 pandemic have not been broad-based but in fact have been concentrated in lower-income communities as shown in figure 6-ii Understanding the cause of these shortfalls is complicated as there is no single education labor market ( Goldhaber et al. ) Additionally the lack of adequate data makes it difficult to identify areas experiencing difficulties in hiring ( Nguyen Lam and Bruno ) Staffing challenges have long plagued schools that serve high proportions of students living in poverty and who belong to minority groups and hiring challenges are more pronounced in specialty teaching areas such as special education English language learning and high school science technology engineering and mathematics ( Boyd et al. ; Cowan et al. ; Murnane and Steele ) Qualified teachers are not evenly distributed across schools and students with poor Black and Hispanic students being much more likely to experience novice teachers ( James and Wyckoff ) Figure 6-ii. Percent Change in Teacher Employment Change in the 12-month rolling average of employment relative to January Jan-2019 Jul-2019 Jan-2020 Jul-2020 Lower income Jan-2021 Jul-2021 Jan-2022 Jul-2022 Higher income Sources : Current Population Survey ; CEA calculations Note : Teacher employment is limited to government employees and includes preschool and kindergarten teachers elementary and middle school teachers secondary school teachers special education teachers tutors and other teachers and instructors Lower income refers to employment among those living in the half of core-based statistical areas ( CBSAs ) with the highest share of households with total household income under $ Higher income refers to employment among those living in the half of CBSAs with the lowest share of households with total income under $ Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | When properly diagnosed policy remedies emerge for areas with particular teacher and school staffing needs. Addressing these localized challenges requires targeted efforts such as incentives to serve in hard-to-staff schools and high-need areas and innovation and flexibility about alternative pathways into the profession and licensure reciprocity ( Dee and Goldhaber ) The keys to addressing teacher and staffing challenges are facilitating mobility into these local labor markets and encouraging retention in high-need positions once they are filled. Some of these measures such as relaxing licensing requirements have also contributed to meeting long-term goals such as creating a more diverse teacher workforce ( Bacher-Hicks Chi and Orellana ) domestic population are quantitatively very small and that the fiscal effects of immigration are generally positive. For example as new immigrants tend to be working age they pay taxes without incurring the fiscal costs of youth and early education ( for a comprehensive review of the fiscal and economic impact of immigration see Blau and Mackie ) There is also a potential pool of laborers already residing in the United States without legal authorization to work and/or a path to citizenship. Legal permanent residence would expand the employment opportunities for a significant portion of this population. As such immigration reform that provides a path to citizenship for the estimated million undocumented individuals would help to increase the labor supply ( Migration Policy Institute ) Additional immigration reforms could include removing per-country caps on employment expanding diversity lottery visas and expanding the J-1 exchange visa program which would bring additional faculty scientists and students to the United States for training and sharing knowledge and methods Drawing More Adults into the Labor Market Labor force participation among working-age adults in the United States is falling and it is now lower than that in other developed nations. A likely culprit is the lack of public sector support for workers and families in the United States relative to other wealthy countries. Policies directed at improving the labor market prospects of nonparticipants and removing obstacles to their employment could increase participation among prime-age adults. This subsection outlines several policy options for drawing more adults into the labor market Improving care options. Public spending on childcare and senior care in the United States is very low relative to that in other advanced economies | Chapter The United States is also one of the few countries that has no guaranteed paid family and medical leave. In the absence of public support the economic burden of caring for family members falls chiefly on women whose labor market participation and lifetime earnings fall in consequence. Given women s low participation rates relative to men policies that reduce their care burden are a promising avenue for increasing participation and reducing gender disparities The preponderance of empirical evidence suggests that childcare and preschool programs have a positive impact on maternal labor force participation ( e.g. Bauernschuster and Schlotter ; Morrissey ; and Wikle and Wilson ) Some of the evidence arises from research on a policy change in Quebec which introduced highly subsidized universal childcare in the late 1990s. These subsidies led to a very large increase in the use of care and a sizable and long-lasting impact on mothers participation ( Baker Gruber and Milligan ; Haeck Lefebvre and Merrigan ) Morrissey ( ) evaluates a range of studies and concludes that a percent reduction in the cost of childcare would likely increase maternal participation in the range of to percent. Paid family and medical leave can also help workers stay connected to their jobs while addressing family-related needs maintaining good job matches and boosting long-term attachment to the labor market ( Baum and Ruhm ; Anand Dague and Wagner ) Blau and Kahn ( ) estimate that nearly one-third of the gap in U.S. women s participation relative to that in other developed countries can be explained by the relative lack of such family-friendly policies Criminal justice reform and removing barriers to reentry. The United States incarcerates people at a higher rate than any other country in the world ( World Prison Brief ) Reducing the punitiveness of the criminal justice system in the United States would reduce the large fiscal burden of its current system and the collateral damage of incarceration on affected communities. It would also increase the labor supply by reducing both the incarcerated population and the scarring effects of incarceration on employment. In recent decades several States have experimented with criminal justice reforms aimed at reducing incarceration rates with noteworthy success. For example California introduced changes to sentencing for less serious offenses and lessened punitive measures for technical parole violations changes that caused a sharp decline in incarceration ( Lofstrom and Raphael ) A series of reforms in New York to divert drug offenders to treatment facilities and to relax mandatory minimum sentencing practices have also sharply reduced incarceration rates in that State ( Greene and Mauer ) In both States these periods of reduction in incarceration generally coincided with declining crime rates High incarceration rates have also created a large population of formerly incarcerated individuals who face significant barriers to reentry Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | Removing barriers to employment for the formerly incarcerated would likely improve their employment prospects after release. One such reform undertaken by several States in recent years is to remove occupational licensing barriers for people with arrest and conviction records. In many States a prior arrest or conviction no matter how long ago can prevent one from becoming a licensed barber or cosmetologist a drug counselor or a firefighter ( Rodriguez and Avery ) Noting that information about prior arrests or incarceration decades after the event in question is of limited information value to employers Piehl ( ) advocates reforms that would set a time limit on information about past convictions for employment background checks Expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit. The Earned Income Tax Credit ( EITC ) is a large government program that raises the after-tax return to work for low- and moderate-income households particularly those with dependent children. As one factor depressing labor market participation is stagnating wages for non college educated workers the EITC can create additional incentives for participation by increasing the returns to work. A large body of research has shown that the EITC increased the labor supply of low-income mothers a group it principally targeted ( e.g. Bastian ; Eissa and Liebman ; and Meyer and Rosenbaum ) However the maximum credit for families with two or fewer children has remained flat in real terms for many decades ( Hoynes Rothstein and Ruffini ) Increasing the generosity of the current credits and/or expanding the EITC to provide more incentives to low-wage workers without dependent children would likely boost participation Regional economic development. Efforts to improve the economic performance of a particular region usually ( but not always ) target areas that have experienced downturns with the intent of helping its residents. While not explicitly intended to increase participation improving economic opportunities in declining areas would likely improve participation in areas with low employment rates by boosting local labor demand Regional economic development strategies can take many forms. A common form is that of enterprise zones which provide tax incentives and sometimes exemptions from regulations with the intent of spurring business investment and growth. Evidence on the effectiveness of enterprise zones in improving employment opportunities is mixed and uncertainty remains about which policies work how they work and for whom they work ( e.g. Neumark and Kolko ; Neumark and Simpson ; and Ham et al ) However evidence on the effectiveness of regional economic development programs involving infrastructure expenditures and investments in higher education and research is more promising. Kline and Moretti ( ) find positive long-run effects of the Tennessee Valley Authority which | Chapter administers an ambitious regional development plan on manufacturing employment and income in the targeted region The Economic Development Administration ( EDA ) also encourages economic development in regional clusters with notable successes including Milwaukee s water cluster and St. Louis s agricultural technology initiatives ( Feldman ) An expansion of these efforts was included in the American Rescue Plan which funded EDA s Build Back Better Regional Challenge ultimately awarding coalitions the resources to develop emerging regional industry clusters. The recent CHIPS and Science Act also has an explicitly place-based approach to boosting innovation and commercial activity and it authorizes the establishment of the new Regional Technology and Innovation Hub Program at EDA to reduce geographic disparities and promote the growth of technology clusters in underrepresented and promising regions Other regional economic development strategies include workforce development programs that aim to train people in new and emerging industries and occupations. These programs provide skill upgrading and certification programs for displaced workers and others who would otherwise be unable to access ( at reasonable costs ) the training required for employment in these industries or occupations Nonmonetary incentives and job quality. As noted previously in this chapter the classic labor supply model frames work as an exchange of effort for monetary compensation. Implicit in this framing is the notion that money alone motivates participation in the labor market. But the evidence suggests that workers care about nonpecuniary aspects of work such as the meaningfulness of the employer mission social interaction greater scheduling flexibilities and self-direction ( Cassar and Meier ; Nikolova and Cnossen ; Clark ) Preferences for nonpecuniary amenities vary across workers with women and nonwhites tending to value job quality attributes more than white men ( Katz Congdon and Shakesprere ) These preferences can shape lifetime earnings in significant ways. For example Wiswall and Zafar ( ) find that a quarter of the early career wage gaps for women can be explained by a higher preference among women for jobs with greater flexibility and stability Job attributes vary widely across the working population. A national survey of working conditions in the American workplace found that men without a college degree women and younger workers generally experience substantially worse working conditions. Specifically they tend to have less control over their work schedule experience more verbal abuse and harassment and have greater exposure to safety hazards ( Maestas et al. ) Data on preferences indicate that unsurprisingly workers prefer work to have more good job aspects and fewer worse job aspects. This evidence has led many to speculate that improvements in job quality that Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | would improve worker welfare could also potentially increase labor market participation. Some aspects of job quality can be improved through policies such as mandated sick leave or changes to scheduling practices. But many job quality attributes will remain the outcome of business decisions made by employers Improving workers bargaining power. As indicated previously in this chapter stagnating wages and rising inequality are key drivers of declines in labor force participation. Though many of the factors responsible for demand declines are global inequality has risen more in the United States than in other advanced economies. This is at least partially due to declining worker power particularly declines in unionization ( Grossman and Oberfield ; Stansbury and Summers ) Worker power enables workers to negotiate with employers for better pay safe conditions predictable working hours and other aspects of the work environment. Unions have historically been an important force in increasing workers leverage Despite the recent upswing in petitions for union elections union density in the United States continues to decline from about one-third of the private sector workforce in to just over percent today. The consequences of unions decline for workers include lower wages ( e.g. Card ) including for nonunionized workers in the same sector ( Farber ) Union density may also be tied to trends in income inequality with U.S inequality rising as union density has fallen ( Farber et al. ) In short as unionization has fallen workers incomes have stagnated relative to output growth Globalization technological change and employer concentration are commonly cited as key factors driving declining unionization. However many economists have pointed out that these factors do not fully explain why unionization in nontradable goods sectors has fallen at a similar rate or why unionization is lower in the United States than in other Western countries ( Levy and Temin ; Schmitt and Mitukiewicz ) More likely reasons for declining worker power are institutional changes within the United States particularly the expansion of right-to-work States greater employer opposition to organizing efforts and decreased enforcement of labor laws The Biden-Harris Administration supports the Protecting the Right to Organize Act or PRO Act which would help restore that stated policy of the National Labor Relations Act to encourag [ e ] the practice and procedure of collective bargaining and [ protect ] the exercise by workers of full freedom of association self-organization and designation of representatives of their own choosing for the purpose of negotiating the terms and conditions of their employment or other mutual aid or protection by making it easier for workers to unionize by preventing companies from holding mandatory antiunion meetings and by imposing penalties on employers that retaliate | Chapter against organizers ( White House ) The Administration has also taken significant steps to improve workers leverage appointing former union officials to the National Labor Relations Board increasing funding to allow the Board to pursue its statutory remit establishing a task force to promote labor organizing and adding prevailing wage and apprenticeship requirements to the recent CHIPS and Science Act and Inflation Reduction Act Conclusion The United States faces a large shortfall in its labor supply as it continues to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic. This shortfall is not merely a lingering effect of the pandemic but is also due to long-run demographic trends and declines in labor market participation by adults. Without increased immigration and/or efforts to draw more adults into the labor market the labor supply is likely to be constrained for the foreseeable future. The shrinking share of adults in the workforce and the Nation s aging population may have a negative impact on its living standards through slower economic growth. More proactive policies to increase the labor supply such as higher public spending on childcare increasing immigration and improving workers bargaining power are needed to counteract these demographic trends Supply Challenges in U.S. Labor Markets | Chapter Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics Digital markets have become an integral part of Americans daily lives. Over percent of retail shopping now happens digitally ( U.S. Census Bureau ) and digital markets now account for more than $ trillion in value ( over percent of gross domestic product ) and employ million workers in the American economy ( Highfill and Surfield ) The economic forces operating in digital markets are not particularly new ; however when combined with the scale afforded by digital settings the low costs of connecting with others and the large amounts of data being collected the economics of these markets lead to new implications for how these markets look how they operate how they make an impact on the economy and society and how they should be regulated Nearly all digital markets feature positive network effects meaning that the value of a product or service increases as the number of users grows ( i.e. as the network gets bigger ) so having fewer larger service providers can benefit users. A social media website for example is of little value to its users if it has very few users ; it is in fact more convenient to have all your friends accessible via the same website. In addition to network effects digital settings enable a global scale and the unprecedented collection of data which can all favor the rise of dominant firms. These forces can also act as barriers to entry preventing new firms from challenging dominant ones Healthy competition among many firms pushes companies to produce goods at their lowest possible cost offer products and services at the best prices provide better wages and working conditions create new technologies and develop and sell new products that people want to buy. This in turn ensures that economic agents make the best use of society s resources. In contrast dominant firms with significant market power may use this power to increase prices reduce quality and lower output making consumers and other market participants worse off. This is why regulations are necessary to ensure that the competitive process is protected and to maintain a level playing field for all market participants This chapter reviews some of the potential economic benefits delivered by digital markets such as lower search costs and increased variety. The chapter also explores other characteristics of digital markets that differentiate them from their offline counterparts including the ability of firms to gather a huge variety and volume of data on users potentially without their knowledge either by running experiments or simply monitoring users behavior and rapidly process these data to derive significant value. These data can be used to improve firms product offerings which can benefit users or for other purposes such as personalized pricing which may benefit firms but harm users The chapter closes with a discussion of the regulation of digital markets Regulators challenge is to deliver all the benefits of competition such as innovation privacy and low prices in a setting where economic factors may drive markets toward fewer competitors. As a result regulators should seek to lower barriers to entry and also prevent a dominant firm from exploiting its power either in the same or a related market or to engage in practices that harm consumers or other market participants in other ways For regulators overseeing digital markets relative to offline ones new areas of concern include the misuse of consumer data and collusion by pricing algorithms. Overall digital markets present significant opportunities to benefit society if regulators enforcers and courts can adapt to the new digital landscape | Chapter The Benefits of Digital Markets In this chapter the term digital markets encompasses the interfaces that electronically bring together various agents for economic or social purposes Although there is no unanimously accepted definition of digital markets or what goods and services they include the chapter refers to these diverse interfaces including app stores operating systems search engines social media platforms web browsers and online marketplaces. Unlike many offline settings where buyers and sellers typically transact directly with one another most digital markets involve an intermediary that brings together different agents and facilitates their interactions. In addition marketplaces include not only traditional marketplaces where buyers sell tangible items to consumers as would occur in offline markets but also markets where different economic agents are being matched. For example an online job search website would be classified as a market as would a ride-sharing application on a mobile phone that connects drivers with riders In many cases users may value the additional convenience of having interactions facilitated digitally ( Goldfarb and Tucker ) Digital markets have also provided other benefits to consumers by creating new forms of price competition and saving time from travel or searches for goods and services among others. For example one early study ( Brynjolfsson and Smith ) found that Internet retailers prices were to percent lower and that they changed their prices by increments up to times smaller as compared with traditional retailers suggesting that they have lower costs for instituting price changes and that these savings are partially passed on to customers. However other studies have produced more nuanced results such as a more recent study ( Cavallo ) which finds that online and offline prices are often identical among the largest firms. In e-commerce digital markets allow for greatly increased product variety because there is much less of a physical inventory constraint when products are shipped directly to consumers. Digital markets also have benefits for businesses They can potentially compete in markets that would otherwise be too costly to enter. The next sections further explore the value of these aspects of digital markets Reducing Search Costs The seminal work of Stigler ( ) explores the value of lowering search costs. Digital markets theoretically enable perfect price comparisons across the universe of retailers of the same good at low cost and also lower the acquisition costs of information. For example digital marketplaces like eBay and Etsy are able to reduce search costs such as the costs incurred to find a particular product or service including the cost of the time spent looking by bringing together and matching large numbers of buyers and Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | sellers that would otherwise spend a great deal of time searching for one another to transact a unique item. An early study in the digital era ( Brown and Goolsbee ) found that the Internet led to lower prices for term life insurance. Other studies from the same period found that digital markets reduced prices for consumers such as estimates of an average of percent saved by customers of online car-buying referral services ( Scott Morton Zettelmeyer and Silva-Risso ) and an average of percent saved by consumers shopping for electronic products using an online price comparison tool ( Baye Morgan and Scholten ) More recently researchers have investigated the potential trade-offs between reducing search costs and increasing the potential for collusion ; issues related to collusion are addressed later in the chapter In theory digital markets should be inherently more competitive thanks to the low search costs and increased price transparency all else being equal. However one natural response by firms to combat this is to introduce obfuscation. Ellison and Ellison ( ) document that firms face a very high price sensitivity of consumers in online marketplaces that make price comparisons easy. As a result sellers undertake price obfuscation behaviors such as making product descriptions complicated so that comparisons are difficult creating multiple versions of the same product and attempting to upsell consumers who were drawn to an initial low price Such behaviors have been documented in multiple government sources and findings or engage in so-called drip pricing strategies ( Blake et al. ; FTC ; CFPB ; White House ) Increased Variety Consumers have also benefited from increased access to variety in both products and services that has been enabled by digital markets. Brynjolfsson Hu and Smith ( ) estimate that the benefits to consumers attributable to increased product variety among online booksellers may be and times larger than those from increased competition and lower prices. Quan and Williams ( ) estimate that the value of the online footwear market is percent greater than the traditional local retail market due to the increased variety available and Gentzkow ( ) finds that a free online version of a newspaper in Washington was worth $ per reader per day or a total gain of about $ million per year in dollars. One study also found the availability of online services meant that consumers in smaller less densely populated places could be better connected to national markets increasing their access to a larger variety of goods and services ( Sinai and Waldfogel ) It is worth noting however that if a particular firm achieves dominance in a market the variety offered becomes something that this firm can control | Chapter Free Products and Services The set of products and services available in digital markets that appear to be free for consumers is large ( e.g. Internet search engines email digital maps music streaming video streaming price comparison tools and online games ) Research has shown that consumers value online tools like search engines and email services in thousands of dollars per year ( Brynjolfsson et al. ) This phenomenon is not unique to digital markets ; broadcast television and radio are free for those with a television set or radio and some newspapers are offered for free. This apparently free access is often made possible by business models that depend on advertising revenue and collection of user data to subsidize consumer products and services. For example figure shows the exponential growth in advertising revenue for Google and Facebook which enables them to offer a number of ad-supported products and services. A counterpoint to many free goods and services is that they could have negative externalities meaning that there are external costs to society beyond the prices being paid for them. In other words these products may not be free after all ; instead users are paying for them for instance by indirectly selling their data. The chapter elaborates on this dynamic in the next section Given that so many products and services have zero monetary costs for consumers in digital markets and that these markets have become so large and pervasive it is possible that U.S. current national accounts are missing Figure Growth in Advertising Revenue by Digital Platform Millions of dollars Google Facebook/Meta Sources : U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Bureau of Economic Analysis and CEA calculations Note : Google revenue includes advertising revenue across Google Search YouTube and Google Network members. Facebook/Meta revenue includes all advertising revenue. Nominal values are adjusted by the U.S. Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index ( chain ) Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | much of the value that is created in these markets. One paper proposes a way to account for this with a new measure of gross domestic product called GDP-B ( Brynjolfsson et al. ) Many have also argued that some of the innovations in digital markets have had unintended or negative side effects on society more generally. Box explores research on the broader societal implications of digital markets Box The Societal Implications of Digital Markets Many digital services serve not only economic purposes but also important social and political ones. As Americans spend more time online these services are becoming an important conduit for learning and sharing information about contemporary events and social movements both domestically ( Suh Vasi and Chang ; DeLuca Lawson and Sun ; Carney ; Mundt Ross and Burnett ) and internationally ( Gorodnichenko Pham and Talavera ; Aday et al. ) Online services including social media platforms also play an increasingly large role in political campaigns and advertising as evidenced by the growing amount that politicians spend on digital advertising ( Williams and Gulati ; Barrett ) This increase in the political information circulating online has influenced how Americans engage in politics. For instance being exposed to online political information like social media advertisements has changed how people express their beliefs including through their voting behavior ( Beknazar-Yuzkashev and Stalinski ; DiGrazia et al. ) In addition these effects often extend across networks of friends and social contacts ( Bond et al. ; Jones et al. ) Social media platforms may exacerbate political polarization ( Allcott et al. ) One study found that exposure to Twitter bots disseminating opposing views reinforced preexisting political positions ( Bail et al. ) Levy ( ) conducted an experiment showing that social media algorithms limited exposure to news outlets with opposing views increasing polarization. Conversely other studies have suggested that the role of social media platforms in spurring political polarization is limited ( Prior ; Fiorina and Abrams ; Boxell Gentzkow and Shapiro ) Racism sexism and discrimination also exist online and in some cases this can escalate to more hateful content and conduct. In an experiment conducted on eBay Ayres Banaji and Jolls ( ) found evidence of racial discrimination with Black sellers making less than white sellers despite selling the same product : baseball cards. Similar results were found by Doleac and Stein ( ) Expanded broadband Internet access has also been associated with a rise in hate crimes ( Chan Ghose and Seamans ) as has reliance on social media and support | Chapter for Islamophobic policies ( Lajevardi Oskooii and Walker ) One particularly salient example involved Microsoft which launched an artificial-intelligence-powered Twitter bot ( automated online social media accounts are known as bots ) named Tay in that was intended to learn as it interacted with users. The bot lasted one day before it was taken down for tweeting racist misogynistic and transphobic content ( Victor ) A similar fate befell a South Korean chatbot after it began using homophobic slurs ( McCurry ) Another concern involving online services is their ability to easily spread misleading or factually incorrect information. For example one study found that fake news stories were widely circulated during the presidential election with inaccurate stories favoring at least one of the two candidates being shared roughly million times ( Allcott and Gentzkow ) Bots were also found to play a role in spreading and amplifying misinformation during the COVID-19 pandemic ( Himelein-Wachowiak et al. ; Xu and Sasahara ; Ayers et al ) which became factors in COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy ( Garett and Young ; Neely et al. ; Pierri et al. ) Finally as social media plays a more central role in society significant concerns have been raised about their effect on mental health particularly among younger users. In the Surgeon General released a report titled Protecting Youth Mental Health ( U.S. Surgeon General s Advisory ) that specifically cited the dangers that arise when social media companies [ focus ] on maximizing time spent not time well spent. The report called for additional research on the specific risks and harms presented by social media platforms How Is Competition Different in Digital Markets ? Economists are interested in encouraging competition because competition typically results in markets that deliver consumers and other market participants the best choices highest quality and lowest prices among other benefits. When many firms are offering similar products to consumers consumers will choose to buy at the lowest prices which gives firms an incentive to lower their prices. It also gives an incentive for firms to improve the quality of the product they offer by innovating as this may be a means to attract consumers. If instead there is a single firm offering a product that firm is likely able to increase its price or diminish its quality without losing many of its customers as their customers do not have any good alternatives This is why economists typically view a market dominated by a few large firms as unlikely to be good for consumers or other market participants Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | This section introduces the main characteristics of digital markets and discusses how they can lead to markets becoming dominated by only a few large firms. None of these characteristics are unique to digital markets ; but as argued later in this chapter network effects in combination with vast amounts of data and the unlimited scale possible in digital settings can result in concentrated markets Big Data In digital markets huge amounts of data are generated as a by-product of activity. While a traditional retailer can observe what products you decided to purchase digital retailers observe what you searched for what you were shown and what you ultimately decided to buy. Further given that online retailers control search results and site layout for each individual separately they are able to use these data to personalize your experience in a way that traditional retailers could never do. Because of this users data can have increasing returns to scale and scope ( Bergemann and Bonatti ) especially at smaller initial scales. The result is that data can serve as a barrier to entry for new firms that reduces competition In addition the flexibility of the digital setting makes the process of conducting experiments much easier by greatly lowering the cost and increasing the scale at which firms can run experiments ( e.g. Dub and Misra ) The data gathered from experiments can be used to further improve product quality and the user experience but may also be used to set prices manipulate behavior or to pursue price discrimination strategies that ultimately lead to consumers being worse off. This research raises important questions about how consumer data are gathered and used how technology may lead to consumer harm in some settings and whether this suggests a role for regulation Related to the previous discussion of free products users are often paying for services with their data as the price is the associated loss of privacy without further compensation. In fact some products and services exist solely for the purpose of collecting valuable and sensitive user data. These data may be used in ways of which users are unaware ; they may be used for targeted behavioral advertising personalized pricing or sold to firms known as data brokers which aggregate user data from multiple sources to sell as a product. Box explores the types of information collected and sold by data brokers. The existence of data brokers could be negative for consumers if their data are used in inappropriate ways or possibly positive for consumers if data are a barrier to entry and data brokers enable more firms to enter the market. The Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) called attention to the data broker industry as early as with a report calling for greater transparency ( FTC ) | Chapter Box Consumer Data as a Business Model At the nexus of big data are companies known as data brokers which serve two primary functions : acquiring data and monetizing data ( Crain ; Gu Madio and Reggiani ) These firms compile data from a variety of sources including through public government records or through cooperative agreements whereby a data broker and another entity like a retailer mutually share their records. Alternatively brokers can purchase or license consumer data from retailers banks brokerages and other data brokers ( U.S. Senate ; FTC ) Using a combination of information gathered and inferences made based on these data brokers assemble profiles and segments of consumers to predict how they might behave ; for instance their propensity to purchase certain products or services ( FTC ; Mishra ) Although Americans may be aware that their data are being collected to be resold theoretical and empirical studies have suggested that users might be unaware of the scale or degree to which they are being monitored ( Crain ; Choi Jeon and Kim ; Acquisti Taylor and Wagman ) In fact almost every American has had their data collected by one and likely many of the major brokers given that multiple brokers have information on nearly every American. For example by one broker Acxiom had more than data points on nearly every U.S. consumer and information on million people globally ( FTC ) Others had information on percent of all U.S properties or payroll data from million businesses ( Sherman ) One data set used for marketing purposes had over elements Figure 7-i. How Data Brokers Aggregate Data from Government Commercial and Publicly Available Sources to Build In-Depth Profiles of Consumers Identifiers Sensitive information Demographics Name address geolocation contact information Social Security number driver s license number birthdate birthdates of family members Religion language marital status education level veteran in household foreign language household single parent status Court and public record Financials Bankruptcies criminal offenses judgments voter registration party identification Owns stocks and bonds investment interests credit history life insurance net worth indicator types of credit cards tax return transcripts holder of gold or platinum card General interests Apparel preferences gambling life events ( e.g. expecting parent ) magazine subscriptions political leanings preferred music/movie genres membership club activism Social media Purchase behavior Health Buying channel holiday gifts type of entertainment purchased average days between orders dollars spent self-help book purchases Internet shopper Over-the-counter drug purchases tobacco usage propensity to order prescriptions online health/disability insurance brand name preferences allergy sufferer corrective lenses users Previous purchases heavy Facebook user uploaded pictures social media accounts usage Home and neighborhood Type of housing home equity home loan amount and interest rate move-in date neighborhood crime rates presence of home pool Sources : Data from FTC ( ) ; CEA compilation Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | 2/7/2023 including markers for whether someone was a whiskey drinker had life insurance enjoyed romance novels or used yeast infection products ( U.S. Senate ) In some cases these data sets can also identify individuals as financially vulnerable. For example some tags that might be associated with a profile include rural and barely making it tough start : young single parents and zero mobility ( U.S. Senate ) Figure 7-i provides examples of the different types of data that a broker might collect on ( or infer about ) a single individual to build out a profile that it may sell to its clients In August the FTC filed a lawsuit against one of these data brokers Kochava Inc. for selling individuals precise geolocation and movement data including to and from sensitive locations associated with medical care reproductive health religious worship mental health and shelters for at-risk populations ( FTC ) According to the lawsuit Kochava claimed that on average it was observing more than daily transactions per device. The FTC alleged that Kochava s clients who purchased the data would be able to identify or infer an individual s identity ( based on their nighttime location ) as well as whether they visited sensitive locations such as a reproductive health clinic a place of worship or a domestic violence shelter Network Effects Network effects refer to any situation where the value of a product or service to an economic agent depends on the number of users ( i.e. the size of the network ) engaging with it. For example the value of a messaging app depends on the number of users it has. Or the value of an e-commerce website for buyers depends on the number of sellers on the website and vice versa. In many markets with network effects the principal economic benefit comes from interactions between different types of participants ( Rochet and Tirole ) Research has demonstrated the importance of network effects in many digital and traditional markets ( Gandal ; Saloner and Shepard ; Rysman ) ; and with the proliferation of digital markets network effects have become increasingly salient. A central feature of digital markets for determining competitive outcomes is the strength of network effects Network effects can be categorized in two ways : direct and indirect Direct network effects are benefits or costs derived from the total number of users that belong to the network and the benefit or cost to a user increases with the number of other users. Take for instance a video-conferencing service. There is little incentive for users to join if there are few other users ; but as the user base grows the service becomes more and more appealing to | Chapter consumers. This is an example of a positive network effect which is common to social media and instant messaging among others. In contrast congestion is a common form of negative network effect in telecommunications networks. Cellular data networks suffer from reduced speeds when a large number of users are accessing the network simultaneously for instance Indirect network effects occur when groups of different users interact and a given user benefits ( or suffers ) from having more users on the service from the other group ( s ) This situation exists for services such as e-commerce marketplaces app stores job-matching services and food delivery services. For example if a certain job-posting website has the most applicants looking for jobs employers will find that site most appealing for posting jobs. Similarly applicants will be more likely to look for openings on the website that has the most employers posting jobs on it. This creates a reinforcing cycle of more job applicants looking for jobs and more employers posting job openings. Another example would be marketplaces either digital or brick-and-mortar where more sellers attract more buyers and vice versa. This dynamic is illustrated using a neighborhood farmers market in figure A farmers market exhibits indirect network effects because the benefits for buyers and sellers increase with the number of agents of the other type present. As the farmers market attracts more sellers offering more varieties the value of going to the market increases among potential buyers. And because more buyers are circulating in the market the value of going to the market for potential sellers of additional goods increases. Of course if the farmers market became too crowded additional buyers and sellers would start to create negative congestion effects. Digital markets do not face this physical space constraint and therefore can continue to grow as more buyers and sellers enter the market Figure Network Effects Are Present in Many Markets Not Just Online Sellers More buyers attract more sellers Farmers Market More sellers attract more buyers Buyers Sources : Eggs honey bread and basket icons from Freepik via flaticon.com ; face icons from Adobe Stock images Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | 2/7 Network effects have been considered a potential source of market power the ability to raise prices without losing many customers since before the rise of digital markets. In general the presence of network effects constitutes a barrier to entry that raises the costs for new competitors to enter the market. If a new firm wanted to start a rival food delivery app to compete with an established firm the new firm would be at a tremendous disadvantage because consumers and restaurants would likely see more value in the established firm s network than in a start-up with a small network. Caillaud and Jullien ( ) describe how network effects create a chicken-and-egg problem that can hinder competition. In order for start-up competitors to attract buyers to a new e-commerce service and away from a Box Glossary for Describing Digital Markets two-sided market network effects multi-homing tipping-point market | Chapter A two-sided market is a market where a firm enables interactions ( i.e. acts as an intermediary or platform ) bringing together two sets of parties ( e.g. buyers and sellers ) to transact and operate. For example a ride-sharing service operates in a two-sided market by connecting riders and drivers Network effects refer to phenomena where the value of a product or service increases or decreases as the number of users increases or decreases. For example as more people sign up for a messaging service it becomes a better service compared with a messaging service that has few users Using more than one competing service provider is referred to as multi-homing For example users may switch between two different ride-sharing services to take advantage of different prices or a shorter waiting time A tipping-point market is a winner-takeall market where consumers flock to one or a few firms as opposed to patronizing many firms. For example the market of social media platforms often tips in favor of dominant social media platforms with many users ( as opposed to numerous platforms with few users ) more established one the competitor needs many sellers ; but to attract sellers they need many buyers. This dynamic can inhibit competition and can make a market susceptible to the phenomenon known as tipping A tipping point is generally defined as a critical juncture beyond which a significant and potentially unstoppable change takes place. The application of tipping points to the economics of firms that bring together two different types of economic agents to intermediate their interaction these markets are referred to as two-sided markets goes back to Fudenberg and Ellison ( ) who identified the role of what we now label as network effects in creating the conditions for dominant firms to emerge. These markets often tip in favor of the leading firms meaning that one or two firms drive out their competitors and dominate the market. Box is a glossary of the terms used to describe digital markets Multi-Homing Another pivotal factor of digital markets for determining competitive outcomes is the degree to which one type of user elects to use only one service among a group of competitors which is referred to as single-homing. In other cases users may be willing to use multiple competing services or multi-home such as when a consumer pulls up two different ride-sharing applications on their phone to compare prices. All else being equal if users are willing to use multiple competing services then these services are less able to raise prices or set terms that are unfavorable to users because they are more willing to take their business elsewhere ( Teh et al. forthcoming ) When one side of the market multi-homes and the other single-homes competition between services for users that only use one will be fierce ( Armstrong ) because the service is the exclusive means by which the multi-homing side can reach those single-homing users allowing higher prices to be charged on the multi-homing side ( Jullien Pavan and Rysman ) Hence users willingness to use multiple competing services can limit market power giving the service an incentive to hinder users from multi-homing ( Scott Morton et al. ) This can be accomplished through the use of switching costs that is costs that users would incur if they tried to transfer their business to a competitor ( Scott Morton et al. ) Firms can impose switching costs through exclusive contracts or agreements loyalty programs termination fees or a lack of data portability When Do Markets Tip ? Tipping occurs more easily in digital markets than offline markets due to their combination of positive network effects valuable data and a potentially massive scale. Whether a market will tip depends however on the willingness of users to switch between different services for the provision Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | of goods and services ( i.e. whether they multi-home ) When positive network effects exist and consumers have a high propensity to use a single service digital firms can often leverage network effects to entrench their market power. For instance a social media platform may be incentivized to limit the ability of nonusers to connect and share content with users. For a consumer this means that if he or she quits the platform it would essentially sever the connections the user has made with other users of the application This can keep the consumer locked in to a service even if they have other concerns for instance regarding their privacy. Ultimately as users are incentivized to join the largest network ( s ) the market can tip in favor of one or more dominant firms ( Kades and Scott Morton ) Once a market has tipped in favor of a dominant firm potential entrants that might want to offer innovative new features or charge lower fees would face a very uphill climb in establishing themselves. That is the benefits of competition we would normally expect will not be realized A dominant firm also has an incentive to acquire any potential entrant to prevent competition in the market. Dominant firms may further exploit their dominance in a market to give themselves an advantage in other markets harming competition. Four factors are credited with preventing tipping in a two-sided market : product differentiation multi-homing interoperability and congestion ( Jullien Pavan and Rysman ) Product differentiation. If a competitor offers a higher-quality experience or other differentiated features beyond its role as an intermediary it can draw enough customers who find these services valuable to enable it to survive. One example of how firms attempt to differentiate is to have superior recommendation algorithms so that they are better able to match consumers with products. Another is how firms make the process of transacting as simple as possible thus requiring less effort on behalf of buyers and sellers Multi-homing. When users of a service are willing to also use competing services neither service has much market power over those users Therefore neither is likely to achieve dominance. Firms know this and thus they actively engage in behavior that makes it more difficult for users to also use a competing service. Their tactics include things like having exclusive content for example among competing streaming services. If all videostreaming services offered the same content consumers would likely choose the one with the lowest price ; but once a streaming service has exclusive content that consumers demand consumers will not be as willing to switch to other services. Another approach might be to have a loyalty program that makes users less willing to use other services Interoperability. Making services interoperable able to exchange data between themselves weakens the network effects of either individual service. With interoperability network effects no longer exist at the firm level ; rather they would aggregate at the market level ( Kades and Scott | Chapter Morton ) Take the example of short-message/messaging service ( SMS ) text messaging. This clearly has a positive network effect given that the value of SMS text messaging increases as more people have mobile phones that can send and receive these messages. This network effect is not firm-specific because the SMS text network is interoperable between cellular carriers and telephone operating systems. In contrast an app like iMessage by Apple is only available on Apple devices and has no interoperability with Android messaging apps so the network effect is firm-specific to Apple. By broadening network effects from only accruing at the firm level to covering the entire market interoperability directly challenges the mechanism that can entrench the market power of dominant firms and spurs competition in the market. Open standards that allow interoperability between different firms products for example the universal serial bus standard are one way to achieve network effects at the market level and encourage robust competition Congestion. Finally congestion a negative network effect tends to make the growth of some services beyond a certain size untenable due to the degradation of services as users are added to the network. In most digital markets this is of less concern as the scale of most services is limitless before encountering congestion ; however as a social network grows it may be subject to greater problems of fraud cybersecurity attacks and content moderation Of these factors firms operating in digital markets have the ability to control their degree of product differentiation and interoperability as well as to influence the tendency toward multi-homing ( Athey and Scott Morton ) Regulators of these digital markets want to bring the benefits of competition to the economy and protect consumers either by acting to prevent markets from tipping in the first place or taking action in markets that have tipped The Role of Law and Regulation in the Digital Market Economists often evaluate the benefits and costs of an action or innovation in terms of its value to society as a whole. When represented mathematically this is called the social welfare function. This function includes the benefits and costs for consumers producers and the government as well as any benefits or costs for society stemming from inefficiency or externalities. These benefits and costs are not only measured in terms of prices and quantities for the economy s goods and services but can also include effects on less tangible things like innovation inequality and well-being. All these concerns may inform the priorities of regulators and law enforcement in digital markets ; this section focuses on the direct implications of the economic model underlying competition in digital markets Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | U.S. antitrust laws seek to promote competition and protect market participants including workers consumers sellers and buyers from anticompetitive mergers and business practices. The enforcement of these laws is conducted by the U.S. Department of Justice ( DOJ ) and the FTC as well as by other Federal and State agencies. In addition agencies such as the Federal Communications Commission and the FTC also have relevant regulatory ( i.e. rulemaking ) authority. The Biden-Harris Administration s competition policy is overseen by the White House Competition Council which was established by the President s Executive Order to Promote Competition in the American Economy which was issued on July ( White House ) The antitrust agencies monitor the conduct of firms with a specific focus on mergers monopolization unfair methods of competition and collusion. Before the 1980s the antitrust agencies focused heavily on mergers and monopolization activity because firms that control a significant share of the market ( or potentially all of it in the case of a monopoly ) generally have a greater ability to raise prices and reduce quantities or engage in other anticompetitive practices in an effort to maximize their profits. Though the focus of antitrust agencies shifted away from monopolization activity for a time enforcement against monopolies has seen renewed attention in the past several years. The FTC also has authority to deter unfair or deceptive acts and privacy and data security degradations which can intersect with competition oversight. A recent example of such practices is the $ billion fine imposed on Facebook in for misleading consumers about their privacy on the platform ( FTC ) The DOJ and FTC are also guided in their enforcement activities by a body of case law that has been developed over the last century. Much of this case law has focused on regulating mergers particularly mergers between competitors selling the same or very similar products ( horizontal mergers ) with the aim of balancing the potential efficiency gains from the combination passed on to consumers against the risks posed by the loss of competition between the merging firms such as higher prices or reduced innovation. As discussed above digital markets in combination with network effects are predisposed to become highly concentrated and be controlled by a few large firms. Though concentration alone is neither procompetitive nor anticompetitive highly concentrated markets are more susceptible to anticompetitive practices. Existing competition laws and regulations written before the emergence of digital markets may not have fully anticipated how these markets would function and may therefore be insufficient to ensure robust competition and protect consumers and other market participants | Chapter Network Effects Create a Competitive Moat If network effects at the firm level are sufficiently strong having larger firms may be better for customers. For example as noted above messaging services may be more useful when they have more users. Competition among many small incompatible messaging services is unlikely to benefit consumers given the fixed costs and returns to scale. And yet left to its own devices a dominant messaging service would likely raise prices above a competitive level provide lower quality potentially innovate less or do all of the above. This would be seen as a market failure which should be addressed via regulation nationalization or antitrust enforcement ( Joskow and Rose ; Joskow ; Smiley and Greene ) Further network effects have long been recognized as potentially becoming an economic moat a protective barrier that guards a profitable business ( the castle ) in that they lead to customers being locked in to certain products making mass migration to a new product unlikely unless accompanied by a simultaneous technological advance somewhere else in the ecosystem ( Bresnahan ) New entrants are less likely to be successful when facing an entrenched firm with network effects or the benefits of scale eliminating some benefits of competition The messaging service example is illustrative in that a potential solution to bringing back the benefits of competition in the presence of network effects may be interoperability although interoperability alone may not suffice to fully restore competition. Interoperability expands the benefits of network effects from the firm level to the market level. Requiring that competing services interoperate is one remedy that can dissolve some of the anticompetitive outcomes of network effects because all competitors would share the same network effect. Thus interoperability would mean that both old and new services would need to compete on other dimensions like quality to keep users on their services Another related tool is data portability the idea that consumers can take or port their data to a different service. This reduces the switching cost created by network effects. For example imagine that a user wants to switch from one music streaming service to another. One barrier for the consumer would be having to give up their playlists and liked songs. Data portability would allow the user to download and port these playlists to another streaming service thereby reducing the barrier to switching. Both data portability and interoperability can make it more appealing for a potential entrant to introduce a competing service and increase the likelihood of new innovations being able to succeed Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | The Challenge of Preserving Competition in Digital Markets Traditional competition policy analysis often focuses on estimating changes in prices to assess effects on consumers. However this approach faces new challenges in digital markets arising from several sources notably the provision of free goods and services and the cross-subsidization in markets with indirect network effects. For free goods with no monetary price in a more competitive market the true price could be negative ( e.g. consumers could be paid to watch ads or fill out surveys with their personal data ) or service could be better. As a result demonstrating anticompetitive harm may require alternative measures rather than prices Research into the effects of mergers in digital markets demonstrates heightened complexity in the expression of competitive effects. Chandra and Collard-Wexler ( ) empirically show that mergers of firms in twosided markets may not lead to higher prices on either side of the market in an application to the Canadian newspaper industry ; and Song ( ) shows that mergers between firms in two-sided markets can lead to either higher or lower prices after the merger but that even agents that experience higher prices may be better off due to increased network effects. Another study of the merger of two platforms for pet-sitting services ( Farronato Fong and Fradkin forthcoming ) found that on average consumers were not substantially better off with one platform than two competing ones because the network effects were not large enough to balance the losses due to higher prices and reduced variety after the acquired platform was shut down. In markets with indirect network effects policies intended to increase competition may need to account for how an intervention on one side will affect the well-being and behavior on both sides of the market because pricing is linked to the costs and price sensitivity of users on both sides ( Evans ; Wright ) These challenges are exacerbated by the scale of the task of protecting competition in digital markets. For example large tech companies are highly acquisitive. Figure shows that the volume and value of mergers and acquisitions among tech firms is large a trend that has drawn the attention of antitrust authorities. Reviewing these acquisitions for anticompetitive harm requires significant resources due to the complexity of the markets the sophistication of the firms and the need to look beyond the impact on retail prices alone Finally digital markets can be highly dynamic appearing and evolving rapidly. This can limit the ability of regulators to use current and historical data to analyze market behavior. In addition it can be quite difficult for regulators to identify nascent competitors and potential entrants in assessing proposed mergers. Further when antitrust authorities do identify such anticompetitive mergers ( DOJ ) the lack of prices for the potential entrant | Chapter Figure Completed Acquisitions by Large Tech Firms LinkedIn Microsoft Motorola Alphabet Beats Apple WhatsApp Meta Whole Foods Amazon Sources : Bloomberg ; Crunchbase ; Mergr ; Alphabet ; Meta ; Amazon ; Google ; Microsoft ; TechCrunch Note : The dark blue circle radius is proportional to the deal size and the small black dots indicate acquisitions with no publicly available price. Deals include completed mergers -and-acquisitions deals by the specified firm as of the fall of or lack of significant market share for the nascent competitor are again problematic for traditional competition analysis since anticompetitive harm has often been demonstrated using economic models showing that mergers would lead to higher prices. These challenges underscore the need for further research and approaches to evaluating competitive effects in complex digital environments. This is work the antitrust agencies are well positioned to do in concert with academics and other stakeholders Preventing the Extension of Dominance into Adjacent Markets Digital markets with network effects big data and a global scale have tended to coalesce on a small number of dominant firms. An obvious concern is that firms could exploit their dominance in one market to gain market power in or dominate adjacent markets. This type of conduct could be illegal under Section of the Sherman Antitrust Act Today there are many examples of digital markets where a dominant firm also competes in an adjacent market : Google and Apple operate app stores in which their own apps compete with other apps ; Amazon operates an e-commerce marketplace where its Amazon Basics brand competes directly with those from other firms ; and Microsoft operates a video game marketplace where they also compete as a video game developer. In these situations one concern is that the dominant firm could have an unfair advantage for its competitive products known as self-preferencing. For example Apple was alleged to give its own apps higher priority when a person searched its app store ( Mickle ) Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | If dominant firms exploit their dominance to give their own offerings an advantage consumers may not get the full benefits of competition. One approach a regulator or legislature might take to improving the functioning of certain markets is to prohibit self-preferencing and similar practices However such a ban could be challenging to enforce as a regulator would need to show that self-preferencing is intentionally built into a service instead of just occurring organically because for example the owner s products have received better reviews A related concern about marketplace operators that compete on their own marketplaces is the issue of how competitors data are used Marketplace operators are able to gather extensive data on competitors products and customers and they may have an incentive to use those data strategically either in the design of their own competing products or in their pricing or promotional strategies. They could also intentionally limit what data from the site are available to competitors. Any of these actions would further put competing firms at a competitive disadvantage. A regulator may want to prohibit the use of competitors data or insist on the fair treatment of marketplace data for all firms in order to reset the competitive landscape although enforcement of such a regulation could be a challenge requiring significant monitoring and oversight The ability of a dominant firm to extend its dominance into adjacent markets is a threat to competition. Society may miss out on certain innovative products if entrepreneurs realize that their product may just get copied by a dominant marketplace operator and therefore decide against investing in developing it. In addition the better product may not win on an uneven playing field. Regulators can address this market failure by clarifying who owns what rights to the data collected and leveling the playing field for all firms in online markets. An overview of some of the approaches that regulators are taking both internationally and in the U.S. is presented in box Preventing the Misuse of Consumer Data Assessing the competitive effects of data usage and policies can be difficult Research suggests that when data can be used to reduce a firm s exposure to risk it can lead to increased innovation or efficiencies potentially driving down prices ( Eeckhout and Veldkamp ; Kirpalani and Philippon ; Competition Bureau Canada ) However data can also become a barrier to entry that insulates firms from competition. Pr fer and Schottm ller ( ) show that under certain conditions a data advantage can lead to market tipping. In addition the ability of firms to collect massive amounts of data about individuals raises clear concerns about privacy and also about data protection as leaks of massive data sets could expose individuals to | Chapter Box International and Subnational Efforts at Regulatory Reform Numerous antitrust and consumer protection efforts are occurring both internationally and in the United States at the State level. For instance the European Commission has proposed a pair of new laws focused on regulating digital markets the Digital Markets Act ( DMA ) and the Digital Services Act ( DSA ) ( Council of the European Union ) The DMA aims to promote competition by establishing rules about the types of conduct in which large gatekeeper firms can engage ( European Parliament and European Commission ) In order to be designated a gatekeeper in each of the last three financial years a firm must have had at least annual business users established in the European Union million monthly users established or located in the European Union and billion ( about $ billion in dollars ) in annual revenue across the EU or a billion market capitalization ( about $ billion in dollars ) It must also provide the same core platform services for example web browsing messaging and social media in at least three EU member states. To foster competition between firms and reduce barriers to entry the DMA lays out requirements by which gatekeepers must abide. For example gatekeepers must allow for data portability and must make messaging services interoperable. They must also be more transparent about their mergers and acquisitions and must allow users to uninstall predownloaded software on the gatekeeper s operating system. At the same time the DMA also restricts gatekeepers from engaging in certain business practices like preferencing their own products over those of competitors on their platform ( self-preferencing ) or combining users personal data across the gatekeeper s different core platform services. The DMA also prohibits gatekeeper firms from engaging in certain price-setting practices and creating operating terms that discriminate against certain businesses and app developers. For instance the DMA makes it illegal for gatekeepers to make business users sign agreements to not offer better terms on other platforms ( known as most-favored-nation clauses ) These agreements have the potential to dampen competition raise prices and fees and reduce entry by competitors offering lower-priced alternatives ( Boik and Corts ; Baker and Chevalier ; Wang and Wright forthcoming ) While the DMA primarily focuses on regulating the conduct of a few very large firms in an effort to promote competition the DSA addresses the wider societal implications associated with digital markets and establishes regulations focused on filtering illegal content and protecting the fundamental rights of consumers online ( European Parliament and Council of the European Union ) For example the DSA requires that firms inform users about how and why advertisements are being targeted to them. It also bans firms from using personal data Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | to target advertisements if the firm is reasonably aware that the user is a minor. In addition the DSA includes numerous other provisions such as requiring online intermediaries to moderate illegal content ( including hate speech ) while giving regulators wide-ranging powers to request access to very large online platforms business practices and algorithms In addition to new laws being passed abroad certain States of the United States are also passing new regulations targeting digital markets with a specific focus on consumers data rights. As of late five States California Colorado Connecticut Utah and Virginia had passed comprehensive State-level regulations on consumer data and privacy rights in digital markets ( NCSL ; Connecticut ) For example Connecticut passed a law in that gave consumers more control over how their data could be collected used or accessed ( Connecticut ) Once the law takes effect in July consumers will have the right to access correct and delete records of their personal data. Connecticut residents will also be able to opt out of having their personal data sold or used for targeted advertising identity theft or other financial harm ( Ichihashi ; Chapman and Bodoni ; O Sullivan ) For all these concerns about the misuse of data and protection of privacy a practical intervention is to regulate how data can be collected used shared and stored. The authors of one study explore mediated data sharing to reduce the correlation between users data and thus to mitigate externalities that create excessive data sharing ( Acemoglu et al. ) They propose sharing data with a third party that would transform their data to remove correlation with other users before sharing it with services requested by the user. Other policies that might impose fewer costs include right-tobe-forgotten provisions which create time limits on data retention ( Chiou and Tucker ) Monitoring Pricing Algorithms and Collusion Concerns have been raised that pricing algorithms could facilitate explicit price collusion by reducing uncertainty about consumer demand. O Connor and Wilson ( ) suggest that this improved forecasting could either lead to lower prices and increased consumer benefits or enhance the ability of firms to support collusive arrangements. Other studies of retail gasoline markets have raised concerns about online price disclosure and experimentation facilitating the coordination of prices across firms ( Luco ; Byrne and de Roos ) A simple example would be the use of posted prices | Chapter Box Artificial Intelligence and Digital Markets A fundamental aspect of the operation of digital markets is using artificial intelligence ( AI ) to translate the data available to firms into actionable predictions recommendations and decisions ( OECD ) Many of the features that make digital markets so appealing to users are powered by machine learning and other algorithmic tools ( Brown ) Indeed many of the key features of digital markets efficient matching low search costs an unmatched variety of products and personalization of prices are made possible by a combination of data availability and the application of AI techniques like neural networks natural language processing or other forms of machine learning. Though the use of these algorithms can improve the experience of users and increase firms profitability there are ongoing concerns that they will displace workers ; introduce racial or other sorts of bias into these systems ; make digital marketplaces even harder to regulate ; and meaningfully impact individuals or communities rights opportunities or access to critical resources or services For ride-sharing companies like Uber and Lyft machine learning is the key to their ability to set prices to assure that there are enough drivers on the road to meet customer demand ( Liu et al. ) AI also allows social media platforms to optimize their content. TikTok relies on its algorithm s ability to use its wealth of data to select content that will keep users engaged longer ( Smith ; Wall Street Journal ) Further the ability of firms like Amazon to have the products that a customer is looking for in stock without having to maintain a surplus inventory is driven by AI-based predictions about demand at any given point in the future ( Amazon ) All these features of digital markets are made possible because of the combination of data and algorithms However the reach of AI in digital markets raises concerns that there could be a wave of automation of jobs ( Sisson ) Even in cases where AI augments existing labor as with Uber s algorithmic management of its drivers or Amazon s of its warehouse workers some workers report deep levels of frustration and resentment due to such concerns as the degree of surveillance and the lack of transparency about AI decisionmaking ( M hlmann and Henfridsson ) AI also has been shown to perpetuate and potentially exacerbate biases already present in society. There is a robust literature on this relationship with findings of discrimination based on race alone found in algorithmic risk assessments in the health care space facial recognition systems and natural language processing ( Obermeyer et al. ; Furl Phillips and O Toole ; Caliskan ) Major players in the digital market have long struggled with these issues ; for example Amazon s attempt to build an AI-based hiring program resulted in a system that taught itself to prioritize male candidates and penalize r sum s that Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | mentioned women s colleges and made other references to women ( Dastin ) These biases can be both intentional as when Facebook s AI-based advertising made it possible for advertisers to exclude specific users based on their race and unintentional as when women were shown fewer career ads because the cost to advertise to women was higher online ( Zang ; Lambrecht and Tucker ) Even when an algorithm itself does not increase bias differential rates of utilization of the algorithm can deepen racial and gender disparities as in the case of Airbnb s Smart Pricing tool ( Zhang et al. ) As governments around the world consider how best to regulate digital markets they are confronting the fact that AI s role in this market introduces levels of opacity and complexity that can hinder reasonable efforts at oversight ( European Parliament ; Kroll ) Further complexities emerge in assessing the intent of firms which can be an important part of many regulatory systems ( Chin ) Processes like algorithmic audits have been proposed as tools to overcome the black box features of AI that can create substantial information asymmetries between firms and regulators ( Guszcza et al. ) These audits have received attention in areas related to hiring and they are being actively considered both internationally and within the United States ( Lee and Lai ; Engler ; Digital Regulation Cooperation Forum ) In the Biden-Harris Administration released the Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights ( White House ) which outlines five principles to guide AI system design that will protect the American public online to institute price matching enabling firms to potentially achieve a higher price than they could achieve if their rivals price was uncertain as price-matching policies remove the incentive for competitors to lower prices. There is evidence that artificial-intelligence-based algorithms can potentially adapt to raise prices in a coordinated fashion even if they have not been explicitly programmed to do so ( Harrington ) This form of tacit collusion may be difficult to detect. In addition to the possibility of collusion through the use of algorithmic pricing the use of automated software can support prices above competitive levels. This can intensify merger price effects in ways that are not accounted for in a traditional merger analysis and also generate greater price dispersion in the market ( Brown and MacKay forthcoming ) In order to guard against the threats of tacit collusion and explicit price fixing enabled by pricing algorithms antitrust authorities may require additional resources ( i.e. computing personnel and financial resources ) Box explores other ways in which artificial intelligence affects the functioning of digital markets | Chapter Conclusion Although the basic economics of digital markets are well understood when combined with the effects of scale and the data collection potential of the digital world they raise new concerns. Many digital markets have become dominated by a few firms or even one firm and these dominant firms have incentives to protect their existing position to extend their market power into other markets and to exploit the huge amounts of data being gathered on their users Governments must ensure that the benefits of competition such as innovation privacy choice and low prices are realized while protecting market participants and promoting a fair and contestable playing field Competition regulation and enforcement must adapt to the changes brought on by the digital revolution given that harm to competition market participants workers and consumers is now being manifested in novel ways Creating digital markets that work for everyone would allow their full potential to be shared by all Americans Competition in the Digital Economy : New Technologies Old Economics | Chapter Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles Multiple financial crises have struck the United States during the last two centuries. Many of these crises have been caused by institutions that function like banks but are not registered or regulated as banks so-called shadow banks. For example the crisis then called a panic was mainly caused by trust companies which were State-chartered entities that competed with banks for deposits. Because these trusts were not part of the central payments system and thus processed only a small amount of payments they did not hold a large amount of cash relative to deposits. To earn profits they made as many loans as possible. After a series of events in October set off a rush for withdrawals several trusts faced a run and were forced to suspend credit and liquidate assets acting as a catalyst for a larger fire sale in financial markets. To save the financial system J. P Morgan owner of the eponymous bank and a small number of other financial leaders individually chose which banks to bail out ( Moen and Tallman ) This helped government policymakers realize that when faced with a crisis the financial system as then constituted would rely on a privileged group of individuals seeking to maximize their own profits rather than on institutions that had an obligation to protect the public s interest. This realization helped lead to the creation of the Federal Reserve the centralized entity that first aimed to serve as the lender of last resort and over time also obtained the exclusive power to issue U.S. dollar notes and manage the Nation s monetary policy Fast forward years and digital asset proponents are now aspiring to create a decentralized financial system without relying on governments and their regulatory frameworks which were shaped by important lessons learned from multiple previous crises including the panic. Digital assets are electronic representations of value and operate as part of a complex and interconnected digital ecosystem. Crypto assets are a subset of digital assets that use cryptographic techniques and distributed ledger technology ( DLT ) but exclude central bank digital currencies ( U.S. Department of the Treasury 2022a ) DLTs rely on networks to store and process transactions This chapter primarily examines crypto assets whose proponents have been relearning the lessons from previous financial crises the hard way. In addition to the decentralized custody and control of money it has been argued that crypto assets may provide other benefits such as improving payment systems increasing financial inclusion and creating mechanisms for the distribution of intellectual property and financial value that bypass intermediaries that extract value from both the provider and recipient. Looking under the hood at these arguments however shows a more complicated picture So far crypto assets have brought none of these benefits. Meanwhile the costs generated by several of their aspects such as those for consumers the physical environment and the financial system are not only substantial but are also being accrued in the present. Indeed crypto assets to date do not appear to offer investments with any fundamental value nor do they act as an effective alternative to fiat money improve financial inclusion or make payments more efficient ; instead their innovation has been mostly about creating artificial scarcity in order to support crypto assets prices and many of them have no fundamental value. This raises the question of the role of regulation in protecting consumers investors and the rest of the financial system from panics crashes and fraud related to crypto assets. Even so as companies and governments experiment with DLT it is conceivable that some of their potential benefits may be realized in the future | Chapter The Perceived Appeal of Crypto Assets This section reviews the potential benefits that crypto assets may offer as often touted by their proponents while the next section evaluates what they have actually achieved. To introduce the digital asset landscape figure illustrates certain types of digital assets. The label cryptocurrency is used in the industry to connote a crypto asset that is promoted to be an alternative payment instrument. Stablecoin is also an industry label for a form of crypto asset that is purportedly backed by a portfolio of underlying assets and claimed to have a stable exchange value with these assets. While some stablecoins mainly aim to become payment instruments other stablecoins mainly aim to provide returns from investments. Regardless of the label used a crypto asset may be among other things a security a commodity a derivative or another type of financial product depending on the facts and circumstances. Nonfungible tokens are the other primary type of crypto asset ; they use DLT to track ownership of digital goods but are not a main focus of this chapter The term crypto asset excludes digital currencies that may be issued by a central bank. Though central bank digital currencies might be designed to operate using DLT there is no requirement for them to be on DLT and a central bank digital currency does not necessarily involve using DLT ( White House 2022a ) Figure A Taxonomy of Digital Assets and Central Bank Money Central bank money Digital assets Crypto assets CBDCs NFTs Cash Cryptocurrencies Stablecoins Sources : CEA analysis ; Hoffman ( ) Note : NFTs = nonfungible tokens. Not drawn to scale. Cash represents currency as well as reserves. Regardless of the label used a crypto asset may be among other things a security a commodity a derivative or other financial product depending on the facts and circumstances Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | Crypto assets have gained substantial popularity in recent years particularly since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic in As shown in figure the estimated market values of selected crypto assets have increased significantly in recent years and reached a collective peak of nearly $ trillion in November As of the end of December crypto assets collectively had a reported market value of a little under $ trillion due to a large downturn in prices over the year and largely reflecting the failures of certain prominent crypto asset projects and firms The development of crypto assets and their underlying distributed ledger technology have the potential to transform industries and business models. Recognizing both the potential opportunities and actual risks of crypto assets in March President Biden signed Executive Order Ensuring Responsible Development of Digital Assets ( White House 2022b ) which tasked the Administration to study the effects of these novel assets. As a result departments and agencies of the Federal Government have produced nine reports examining the implications of crypto assets for consumers businesses financial stability national security and the physical environment ( White House 2022c ) The first crypto asset Bitcoin was launched in shortly after the global financial crisis as something of a repudiation of the existing financial intermediaries that caused the crisis ( Nakamoto ) Bitcoin was Figure Market Capitalization of Selected Crypto Assets Trillions of dollars ( nominal ) Jan-2020 Jun-2020 Nov-2020 Bitcoin Apr-2021 Ether BNB Sep-2021 Cardano Feb-2022 XRP Source : Coin Metrics Inc ; Federal Reserve Board of Governors Financial Stability Report Note : Total market cap figures are subject to revision from Coin Metrics | Chapter Other Jul-2022 Dec-2022 Box What Are the Functions of Money ? In early history bartering was a common way for people to exchange goods and services. Bartering however takes time because individuals need to find another person who is willing to trade one physical good or service for another. A workaround for this was the invention of money ; some of the earliest forms of money appeared in about BCE ( Tikkanen n.d. ) Money s key innovation was to facilitate trade between individuals by using an item that had a common representation of value that was widely agreed upon by members of society. That is instead of having to take a goat everywhere and hoping to find someone who wanted the goat money enabled individuals to carry something that everyone valued such as polished beads which could be exchanged for a wide variety of goods and services ( Jordan ) The first money was in the form of things like seashells beaver pelts and even large stones ( Tikkanen n.d. ; Hudson s Bay Company History Foundation ; Goldstein and Kestenbaum ) Eventually money took the form of specie or coins such as gold and silver which could be produced to a specific standard of weight ( Velde ) While money like specie money was decidedly more convenient than carrying around a goat it was still cumbersome to transport. To get around this paper money was created which was substantially easier to transport To ensure that paper money still had financial value it was backed by specie ( Tikkanen n.d. ) That is the paper money essentially served as a promissory note for specie sitting in a bank and it could be freely redeemed This system worked well but it had a key vulnerability that became a common theme of many crises : banks could earn higher profits by issuing more paper currency than the amount of specie they held in their vault. For example a bank could hold gold coins but could issue units of a paper currency each giving the holder the right to gold coin Then if all holders of the currency demanded their money back at the same time the bank would not have enough gold coins to meet the holders redemptions ( Diamond and Dybvig ) This dynamic referred to as a bank run also has a long history dating back to as early as the fourth century BCE ( Flood ) Eventually institutions and faith in currencies particularly the U.S. dollar became strong enough that specie was not needed to assuage investors concerns about what was backing the currency. This led to the creation and adoption of fiat currency or currency issued by the government that is not redeemable for specie. Fiat currency s value is largely a function of ( ) the currency being the only instrument with which individuals can pay taxes ; ( ) the strength of the government s institutions such as the legal system and military ; and ( ) a shared social trust in the value of the money itself ( Bank of England ) Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | Money as defined in the Uniform Commercial Code and certain other specialized sources is a medium of exchange currently authorized or adopted by a domestic or foreign government ( U.S. Commercial Code n.d. ) In contrast here the economic functions and common understanding of money are considered. For a type of money to actually be useful in the economic sense there must be wide agreement about its value either derived from assets backing it ( e.g. the gold standard ) or from things like institutions and social trust. Money serves three core functions : as a medium of exchange as a unit of account and as a store of value ( U.S. Department of the Treasury 2022b ) First money can serve as a medium of exchange if it can be used widely to trade for goods and services. For example the U.S. dollar can be used for purchasing anywhere in the country and even in many places abroad. In contrast for example while cigarettes are often used inside prisons to trade for goods and services they can not be used to purchase groceries or buy plane tickets ( Lankenau ) Second money can be considered a unit of account if it acts as a benchmark upon which the values of different goods and services can be compared. For example instead of estimating how many chickens it would take to trade for one cow a person can instead simply express the value of chickens relative to cows through their respective monetary values so if chicken costs $ and cow costs $ then a person can simply use their relative dollar values to conclude that chickens are worth the same as cow Finally money can be a store of value if its purchasing power does not fluctuate dramatically over short intervals of time. For example the number of apples a $ bill can buy does not vary much from one day to the next. This is one reason why very high levels of inflation socalled hyperinflation can create uncertainty in the purchasing power of money Sovereign money is money issued by the governing authority of an independent country. Sovereign money can easily satisfy money s functions to serve as a medium of exchange and as a store of value over time. This is because sovereign money is an information-insensitive asset ; it is unlikely that one side of a transaction is acting based on private information about the value of sovereign money ( Gorton and Zhang ) The more information-sensitive an asset is the less likely it is to be a medium of exchange. For example if there is a high possibility that someone is buying gold to protect themselves against losses from holding another asset the gold seller may decide that it is better not to exchange gold for that asset. Sovereign money is also a liability of the central bank meaning that its value is backed by the bank. The U.S. dollar is widely accepted as a medium of exchange and it is also a store of value. Indeed roughly half of all international trade is invoiced | Chapter in dollars ( CRS ) This does not mean that all sovereign currencies have the features of money. For example Zimbabwe s currency lost its role as a store of value in when its annual inflation rate rose to over percent ( Siegel ) In Zimbabwe s case consumers and firms shifted toward the widespread use of other sovereign currencies which effectively replaced Zimbabwe s currency ( Noko ) Bank deposits can also act as money. Banks offer deposit accounts to their customers and these deposits are pegged one-for-one against sovereign currencies. The value of this private form of money is generally supported by a nexus of regulatory and supervisory requirements such as capital and liquidity requirements designed to protect the customer against a possible bank run. This account-based private money is linked to an individual person or entity. In contrast to sovereign currencies there are limits on account-based money to circulate. For example if Jeff writes a check to Greta to pay rent Greta s check from Jeff represents money that belongs to Jeff ( i.e. the money is linked to his deposit account ) and she can redeem it in exchange for circulating currency ( cash ) Although Greta is legally allowed to exchange Jeff s check for gasoline third-party checks are not widely accepted as a payment method. Hence in reality Greta first needs to cash the check and then purchase gasoline designed as a purported peer-to-peer payment system that does not rely on intermediation by a trusted authority to keep track of transactions. Instead Bitcoin uses cryptography to record transactions across an open ( permissionless ) network of computers.1 These transactions are recorded digitally on a blockchain which uses cryptographic techniques to link transactions to each other in a manner that makes it challenging to edit or tamper with previous transactions. Because the Bitcoin blockchain is a public ledger network participants can view and validate transactions as they happen in real time.2 The supply of bitcoins is capped to ensure that each unit retains value since digital assets otherwise could be reproduced perfectly forever and they would have no value if there were an unlimited supply. This artificial scarcity was one important feature of Bitcoin and has been replicated by many new crypto assets introduced since Bitcoin There are also permissioned DLTs where all nodes have to be given permission to participate in the network. However if the trust in the network is established by authentication that runs counter to the purpose of the trustless system Formally the network tracks the unspent transaction output from transactions for each account which represents the transfer of specific units ( e.g. like coins being transferred between individuals ) or by how much available funds exceed withdrawals Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | Both the number of crypto assets and their combined market value have risen over time reflecting their increasing popularity around the world There are several possible benefits that proponents claim for this popularity of crypto assets. These claims are reviewed in the next subsections Claim : Crypto Assets Could Be Investment Vehicles People invest in assets with the hope of making returns on their investments by accepting a certain level of risk of loss. For example traditional investments such as equities and bonds offer a certain level of expected returns for their risk exposure. Similar to these traditional types of assets it has been argued that crypto assets are also investment vehicles that offer an expected return for a given risk exposure. Hence depending on the risk appetite of investors one might invest in crypto assets with the hope of quickly making a large profit. Moreover some have argued that crypto assets can serve as a hedge against inflation hoping their value will keep pace with or rise more than the rate of inflation Claim : Cryptocurrencies Could Offer Money-like Functions without Relying on a Single Authority One stated goal of cryptocurrencies has been to create a financial system that is censorship resistant and unable to be controlled by a government instead distributing control among pseudonymous global actors that do not rely upon any trust in existing financial institutions. In particular some cryptocurrencies aim to replace central authorities that issue money by instead relying on a distributed network with benefits spread across the network that issues representation of value that can be minted and transacted without central authorities. For example when implementing monetary policy governments can profit from issuing money because the value of money is generally higher than the cost of issuing it ( this is called seigniorage ) In contrast many cryptocurrencies aim to distribute the profit from issuing a cryptocurrency by rewarding participants that can verify a transaction through a consensus mechanism ( Acemoglu ) In this process participants can be rewarded with the new issuance of a cryptocurrency as well as transaction fees earning them a profit for supporting the distributed network that maintains the cryptocurrency. This could be seen as a novel way to distribute the profits from issuing new assets. Box discusses the functions of money Claim : Crypto Assets Could Enable Fast Digital Payments In recent years the usage of cash has declined dramatically as the usage of digital payments has increased substantially. Figure demonstrates the trends in cash and check transactions against those in debit/credit payments | Chapter Figure Payment Types Used in the United States Over Time Percentage of payments in a typical month Cash and check Debit/credit card Other Sources : Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta ; CEA calculations which are forms of digital transactions. In the last decade payments in cash and checks have declined dramatically while digital payments have notably increased As the demand for digital payments increases it has been argued that stablecoins could be used as near-instant 24/7 payment instruments ( Liao and Caramichael ) As of December there were about stablecoins with an estimated market size of roughly $ billion. The two crypto assets Tether and USD Coin alone accounted for roughly percent of the total market of stablecoins.3 Since stablecoins try to be pegged to a reference asset such as the U.S. dollar ( or another currency or a basket of currencies ) proponents argue that stablecoins could eliminate exchange risk when used as a settlement method. That is if one stablecoin is always worth $ then an individual using a stablecoin to buy or sell goods has the expectation that its nominal purchasing power will not change dramatically after their transaction. Stablecoins have been suggested as a possible way to simplify cross-border transactions and remittances Claim : Crypto Assets Could Increase Financial Inclusion Some segments of the U.S. population are unbanked meaning they do not own a bank account. Others are underbanked that is they own bank accounts but often use expensive nonbank financial services. Black households have disproportionately higher rates of being unbanked and underbanked ( FDIC ) Crypto assets often are promoted as a tool for Market capitalizations exhibit volatility. See e.g. CoinMarketCap ( ) Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | reaching these populations to improve their access to financial services and build wealth to achieve upward mobility. For example many crypto assets do not impose minimum account requirements or charge overdraft fees in contrast to some traditional banking institutions. Unbanked individuals cite such attributes as primary reasons they do not have bank accounts ( FDIC ) A recent report found that minority households are more likely to have invested in crypto assets than other households ( Faverio and Massarat ) Claim : Crypto Assets Could Improve the United States Current Financial Technology Infrastructure The distributed ledger technology that underlies many crypto assets is based on a number of technological advances. It addresses the problem in certain circumstances of establishing trust and a consensus on the true history of transactions among a group of mutually suspicious parties. It is effectively a shared database whose contents can generally be trusted even though it is operated by entities that generally do not have a reason to trust one another. For crypto assets the database stores the set of transactions that have occurred among network participants. In addition more recent developments in DLT have enabled new features and improved efficiency such as smart contracts which automatically trigger particular actions without the need for ongoing oversight. Box further describes how Bitcoin and distributed ledgers work The Reality of Crypto Assets This section investigates the claimed benefits reviewed earlier in the chapter and presents the risks and costs of crypto assets Crypto Assets Are Mostly Speculative Investment Vehicles As shown in figure compared with many other asset types crypto assets are very volatile and hence highly risky. Because they are very volatile crypto assets can be used for speculation an investment strategy that seeks to make a profit from short-run trading. One reason many crypto assets are highly volatile is that many of them do not have a fundamental value. For example stocks are claims on the future profits of firms and debt is a claim on interest and principal payments. Even commodities such as gold and silver have fundamental values because they can be used in jewelry and for special manufacturing purposes ( Nogrady ) Conversely unbacked crypto assets are traded without fundamental anchors suggesting that their market prices only reflect speculative demand or market sentiment not claims on cash flow. Relatedly the U.S. Department of Labor ( ) issued | Chapter Box How Does Bitcoin Work ? This box explains how Bitcoin functions as it was the first crypto asset Subsequent crypto assets have often incorporated key features from this design. Bitcoin relies on several innovations including the novel use of a hash function a well-established cryptographic technique What is a hash function ? A hash function which is sometimes called a one-way algorithm or trap-door algorithm uses a mathematical algorithm to take an input ( e.g. a number a string of letters ) and produce an output that satisfies three requirements : ( ) reproducibility or running the algorithm on the same input always produces the same output ; ( ) irreversibility or even knowing the algorithm it is not possible to easily invert the output to recover what the input was ; and ( ) collision avoidance or any unique input string must produce exactly one unique output. This is a one-way function in that there is no efficient way to recover the input from just the output ; the only way would be to hash every possible input to see if it matches the output Figure 8-i gives examples of hashed output The hash function is usually quick and has many applications For example most websites do not store a person s actual password on their servers ; instead they store a hash of the password. That way if there were ever a hack of their systems the hackers would only have the hashed versions which would not work as passwords and could not easily be used to determine passwords. When you log onto a website its server hashes the password you enter and compares that with what is stored in its database and only lets you in if they match. Note that a change of the input as seemingly small as from hello to Hello usually creates a drastically different hash and that a vastly different phrase produces a hash that is equally random. Two key participants in the Bitcoin space are users and miners Users. Crypto assets generally require a user to have a wallet. A digital wallet is a software application piece of hardware or other device or service that stores a user s public and private cryptographic Figure 8-i. Examples of Hashed Output Input Text Hashed Output ( in hexadecimal using the SHA-256 algorithm ) hello 2cf24dba5fb0a30e26e83b2ac5b9e29e1b161e5c1fa7425e73043362938b9824 Hello 185f8db32271fe25f561a6fc938b2e264306ec304eda518007d1764826381969 The quick brown fox jumps over the d7a8fbb307d7809469ca9abcb0082e4f8d5651e46d3cdb762d02d0bf37c9e592 lazy dog Source : CEA analysis Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | keys which allow users to interact with one or more blockchains and send and receive crypto assets. Users can have custodial wallets which are provided and maintained by an intermediary or third-party provider or non-custodial wallets also known as unhosted wallets for which users are responsible for their own wallets and private keys. For Bitcoin wallets have an associated private key typically a randomly generated string of digits which can be hashed to derive a public key. The public key similarly can be used to generate the wallet s address using a different known hash function. Anyone can initiate a transfer to a wallet if they know its address. This is used as either the source or destination of transfers on the Bitcoin blockchain. However to send crypto assets one needs to know the private key for the wallet that is sending ( Outten ) In particular someone wanting to send crypto assets can construct the transaction create a hash of it and combine that with a private key to create a digital signature of the transaction. A useful analogy is that the public key is akin to your home address while the private key is the physical key to your home. It is the difference between letting someone know where you live versus giving them access to your house. Any node of the network can then compare the hash of the digital signature with the public key and with the hash of the transaction data and determine if the transaction is valid. Nodes will reject any invalid transactions so private keys are required to transfer crypto assets From the perspective of the user who typically uses a wallet app to manage this process all that is needed is the knowledge of the addresses of the sending and receiving accounts the private key if sending the amount and a fee. The fee incentivizes miners to include the user s transaction in an upcoming block. A transaction with a high fee is more likely to be included in upcoming blocks than one with a low ( or zero ) fee. This means that transactions with low fees may takes days to be processed or may not be processed at all Miners. The key part of the Bitcoin ecosystem that is different from physical currency is that there are no central trusted arbiters of truth. Instead the system operates by consensus among nodes of the network about what the truth is ( i.e. the distribution of bitcoins across all wallets ) This means in theory that governance of the cryptocurrency is arbitrated by network participants not a central authority although control in some blockchains is more centralized as there may be a significant concentration among network participants that effectively consolidates governance between a few parties The Bitcoin blockchain uses what is called the SHA-256 algorithm ( developed by the National Security Agency and the National Institute of Standards and Technology ) which for any text input always produces a 64-digit ( 256-bit ) hexadecimal output string ( Brown ) The Bitcoin | Chapter blockchain and many other cryptocurrencies use a proof-of-work method to achieve a consensus among all the nodes of the network Miners monitor the network and maintain a pool of transactions that are yet to be validated. In a proof-of-work network the network s miners are competing to be the ones to successfully mine the next block of transactions in the chain. The actual way this is accomplished is that the miner puts together a candidate block of transactions to include as well as a block header or some metadata for the block ( Rybarczyk ) These metadata include the hash of the last successfully mined block of the chain the version of software used and some technical parameters that are explained just below : the target difficulty a digital signature unique to the block of transactions they are including ( the Merkle root ) and the nonce. They then take all the information in the block header combine it into one string and push it through the SHA-256 algorithm to get the hash of that information Here is the competition aspect : the nonce field is a number that miners can choose arbitrarily. Their goal is to pick a nonce such that the resulting hash a hexadecimal number is less than the target also a hexadecimal number currently set by the blockchain. Given how the hashing process works there is no way to do this efficiently ; a miner must continue trying different numbers until they are successful. Since the nonce must be an 8-digit hexadecimal number a little over billion nonces can be tried. If no possibility is successful the miner needs to get creative in how to try new hashes against the target such as changing the set of transactions that are included in the block which changes the Merkle root in the header thus changing the proposed block s hash While finding a valid nonce and set of transactions requires a large amount of brute-force computing power verifying that a proposed block is valid is trivial nodes just need to compute the hash of the proposed block and compare it with the target and this means that once a block is found to be valid and is broadcast across the network a consensus can be quickly reached that it is a valid block. At that point it is added to the chain and competition commences on adding the next block of transactions the next element of truth in the system Miners receive two types of compensation for the work that they do : the fees that are included in the transactions they choose to put in a block ; and the miner reward defined by the blockchain s protocol For Bitcoin the mining reward was initially bitcoin for every mined block but this has diminished due to a halving rule. This rule limits the total supply of bitcoins to million over the lifetime of the coin and means that every four years the payout for mining a new block falls in half. The reward was bitcoin as of December ; but given prevailing prices this was worth over $ ( Coindesk ) The target difficulty parameter is adjusted every two weeks to ensure that a Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | new coin is mined roughly every minutes. As the number of resources dedicated to mining has increased higher levels of difficulty have been required to keep pace. In the five years before October the number of attempts to mine a typical block of the Bitcoin chain increased by a factor of ( BTC ) Once the maximum supply of million bitcoins is reached ( which is projected to occur in about ) miners will only benefit from transaction fees ( Tim n ) Why does the blockchain mechanism work ? Once the blockchain is running suppose a bad actor wanted to modify the history of the blockchain by for example inserting a fraudulent transaction in an earlier block. In theory this would not work since any other node of the network could immediately verify that this block did not previously belong in the chain because no subsequent block would point to its ( changed ) hash as being its predecessor. So a bad actor would need to recompute the entire chain from the fraudulent block to the current one 2/21/2023 with new hashes which would require an inordinate amount of computing power. This highlights the origins of blockchain technology in ensuring trust among mutually suspicious groups ( Chaum ) Figure 8-ii demonstrates how a blockchain is formed Many other blockchains have a design similar to that of Bitcoin although with different parameters and features such as smart contracts Ethereum for example allows more daily transactions than Bitcoin is calibrated to have blocks added every seconds and recently switched its consensus protocol to be less energy-intensive ( Etherscan ) An important criticism of crypto assets is their energy intensity. A more complete discussion of the technological options of blockchain design is beyond the scope of this chapter Figure 8-ii. Blockchain Blocks Linked by Hashed Values of Their Contents Transactions : Block # Bitcoin version : Previous block hash : Merkle root hash : Time Bits : Nonce : Transactions : Hash of this block Block # Hash of this block Block # Bitcoin version : Previous block hash : Merkle root hash : Time Bits : Nonce : Bitcoin version : Previous block hash : Merkle root hash : Time Bits : Nonce : Transactions : Source : CEA compilation Note : Bits refer to the current difficulty level of mining a new coin. It is stored in an encoded manner but a lower target implies a higher difficulty. As of October it required testing approximately trillion nonces to mine a block of Bitcoin | Chapter Figure Volatility of Crypto Assets versus Certain Traditional Assets Thirty-day rolling standard deviation of daily returns Crypto assets High-yield bonds Real estate Foreign exchange U.S. equities Investment-grade bonds Emerging market equities Commodities Sources : Bloomberg L.P. ; CEA calculations guidance to protect investors retirement plans with respect to this asset type Recall that one of the purported benefits of crypto assets like Bitcoin was to hedge against inflation meaning that their value does not erode as inflation increases. But as inflation increased globally in the second half of and in the prices of crypto assets collapsed proving them to be at best an ineffective inflation hedge Cryptocurrencies Generally Do Not Perform All the Functions of Money as Effectively as Sovereign Money such as the U.S. Dollar As discussed in box money serves three functions : as a unit of account which means that it acts as a benchmark upon which the values of different goods and services can be compared ; as a medium of exchange which means that it can be used to trade goods and services ; and as a store of value which means that the amount of goods and services that a unit of the money can buy does not fluctuate dramatically over short intervals of time Although cryptocurrencies currently serve each of these functions they only do so in limited ways in the United States so they do not serve from an economic perspective as an effective alternative to the U.S. dollar For the first monetary function question cryptocurrencies can serve as a unit of account given that the relative values of goods and services can be expressed in cryptocurrency ( e.g. a single chicken in commerce is worth roughly bitcoin ) However individuals would likely need to first convert bitcoins or other cryptocurrencies to dollars to understand relative values as cryptocurrencies are not as effective as the U.S. dollar as a medium Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | of exchange ( discussed below ) Thus cryptocurrencies currently do not fully serve as units of account The second question is whether cryptocurrencies can serve as a medium of exchange. The answer is that in the United States they are not as effective a medium of exchange as the U.S. dollar. This is because they can be used to purchase other cryptocurrencies and to buy goods and services at a smaller number of firms relative to the U.S. dollar ( Modderman ) The strength of the U.S. dollar is derived from several important factors such as faith in government institutions and the legal system but cryptocurrencies lack these factors Third cryptocurrencies currently experience substantial amounts of volatility and thus are not stable stores of value. For example the value of a bitcoin ( relative to the U.S. dollar ) increased by over percent from March to March and then decreased by over percent from November to October This volatility means that anyone who is using bitcoins to store their savings is subject to high-volatility risk in their purchasing power. As figure shows the volatility of cryptocurrencies outpaces those of many other financial asset types. Cryptocurrencies regularly exhibit a similar amount of volatility as U.S. equities experienced at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic There is also tension in an asset being promoted as both money and an investment vehicle. As money the instrument should have a stable value suggesting limited price volatility. But as a risky asset it should experience price volatility for which an investor would be compensated with a high expected return. Holding everything else constant the riskier an asset is the less likely it can effectively serve as money In sum in addition to generally being speculative assets cryptocurrencies currently are not effective alternatives to sovereign money such as the U.S. dollar. As mentioned above most cryptocurrencies do not have fundamental value but that is not a requirement for them to function as money In fact sovereign money does not have a fundamental or intrinsic value ( Berentsen and Sch r ) Even so sovereign money can easily satisfy money s requirements as discussed in box The main reason for this is that the value of sovereign money is backed by a trusted institution the central bank. One important feature of many cryptocurrencies is validating transactions through consensus mechanisms which are a way to distribute profits from new issuance among participants such as cryptocurrency miners that verify the cryptocurrency transactions. ( See box for the impact of cryptocurrency mining on the physical environment. ) Hence the supply of cryptocurrency generally increases with the number of verified cryptocurrency transactions. In the case of a new issuance of sovereign money monetary policy reasons play a major role and the resulting profits from the new issuance of sovereign money accrue to governments. In advanced | Chapter Box Crypto Asset Mining as a Risk to the Environment The growth of trading in crypto assets has necessitated a corresponding increase in the mining of crypto assets. As discussed in box crypto asset mining ( cryptomining for short ) is a process by which highpowered computers perform calculations to verify transactions using distributed ledger technology for some kinds of crypto assets ( White House 2022d ) Cryptomining can be lucrative for successful miners which are compensated with the crypto assets they are mining but which also consume large amounts of energy. According to recent estimates by Goldman Sachs cryptomining accounted for more than percent of U.S power consumption as of early The amount of electricity used to mine bitcoins in the United States is similar to what is used to power all the country s home computers or residential lighting ( White House 2022d ) A recent inquiry by Congress into the electricity consumption of cryptominers found that just seven of the largest cryptomining operations in the United States had a combined capacity of megawatts as of February with plans to expand capacity significantly in the coming months and years. For comparison these miners alone could use roughly as much power as all residential units in Houston the Nation s fourth-largest city ( Tabuchi ) While comparing usage across different types of activities is difficult because not all activity is recorded on-chain some have estimated that in mining a single bitcoin used roughly the same amount of electricity as nine years worth of the average American household s consumption ( Huang O Neill and Tabuchi ) Bitcoin additionally uses more energy than several entire countries such as Finland Belgium and Chile ( University of Cambridge ) Globally Bitcoin accounts for percent of all electricity usage. This effectively means that Bitcoin is using the same amount of electricity as a medium-sized advanced economy Not all cryptomining operations consume the same amounts of power. Energy-intensive consensus mechanisms such as a proof-ofwork use substantial amounts of power by encouraging machines in a network to race against each other to solve a mathematical puzzle Bitcoin which accounted for over of a third of all crypto assets value as of December is the most notable crypto asset that is mined using proof-of-work. Ethereum conversely switched in September from a proof-of-work consensus mechanism to a proof-of-stake consensus mechanism that selects specific miners to validate a transaction at a given point in time thereby reducing electricity usage in exchange for reducing the security of the network and increasing the power of individual actors vis- -vis the network s intensity. There are benefits Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | and drawbacks from different consensus mechanisms and they have different energy transparency and security attributes. Despite Ethereum s switch to proof-of-stake Bitcoin has not announced plans to make a similar change Evidence suggests that cryptomining has substantial costs for local communities and has few if any attendant benefits. Cryptomining facilities produce substantial noise pollution which has been compared to a jet-like roar ( Williams ) Cryptomining facilities can also lead to increases in local air and water pollution ( White House 2022d ) Local cryptomining operations also push up community electricity prices as increased electricity consumption forces generators to rely on more expensive energy sources and in the case of communities with hydropower where cryptomining operations are often located reduces electricity surpluses. For example in the Mid-Columbia Basin of Washington State an energy surplus produced by hydroelectric dams originally pushed down electricity prices for both residents and businesses. But after cryptomining facilities began placing additional demand on the energy grid exports of energy surpluses decreased substantially raising residential electricity prices ( Samford and Domingo ) Continuously running an electricity grid at maximum capacity can cause grid equipment that was not designed for such high-intensity usage to degrade over time increasing the risk of fire in vulnerable communities. In places like Texas which expects to add gigawatts of additional cryptomining demand in the next four years equal to roughly percent of the generation capacity of the entire Texas grid cryptomining could increase the likelihood of power crises where demand overwhelms the grid s ability to provide sufficient generation ( Calma ) Furthermore the intensive nature of mining bitcoins requires frequently replacing machines and as the old equipment becomes nonfunctional it can become e-waste which often contains toxic chemicals and heavy metals that can leach into soils if not properly disposed of ( de Vries and Stoll ) Just as mining energy-usage comparisons are difficult comparing e-waste across activities is imprecise especially because old machines used to mine bitcoins may be temporarily retired but then used again if the price increases enough ( White House 2022d ) With that being said some have estimated that it would take as much as Visa transactions to generate the same amount of e-waste as a single bitcoin transaction. Alternatively a single bitcoin transaction may generate more e-waste than iPhones ( Digiconomist ) | Chapter economies such as the United States the profits from the issuance of sovereign currency benefit taxpayers by lowering tax needs as central banks effectively return these profits as government revenue Stablecoins Can Be Subject to Run Risk Some cryptocurrencies specifically stablecoins are promoted to have the potential to be fast digital payment instruments. A fundamental problem with stablecoins is one that has been known in the traditional banking sector for centuries : run risk ( Humphrey ) If stablecoin holders wish to redeem their stablecoins for $ each this will require the stablecoin issuer to liquidate some of its reserves ( Adams and Ibert ) Depending on how liquid these reserves are and the state of broader financial conditions this liquidation may lead to disruptions in the markets for the reserve assets and reduce the market value of the issuer s remaining reserves because the sales of the reserve assets put further downward pressure on the prices of remaining reserves. If reserves are falling in value at the same time holders are seeking redemptions then the issuer may receive less than $ for each $ placed in stablecoins thereby causing the stablecoin issuer to become insolvent. In fact money market funds which have balance sheet characteristics that a number of stablecoins purport to have faced runs during the financial crisis and at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in ( Schmidt Timmermann and Wermers ; Anadu et al. ) Deposits in bank accounts can be used to make payments and banks aim to maintain parity between deposits and dollars ; that is $ deposited in a bank account can be withdrawn for $ at a later point in time. One important distinction between stablecoins and bank deposits is that in the United States bank deposits are subject to a comprehensive set of regulatory and supervisory requirements. In contrast stablecoins are not subject to requirements designed to maintain this exchange rate A different approach to maintaining a stablecoin that does not fully rely on holding reserves is the so-called algorithmic stablecoin of TerraUSD ( and the closely linked Luna token ) which had the stated objective to maintain its exchange rate peg with the U.S. dollar using an algorithm ( Baughman et al ) The idea behind the Terra/Luna coins was that Terra ( known as UST ) was a stablecoin pegged to $ and was maintained through arbitrage ( Wong ) Theoretically UST could always be traded for $ worth of Luna. If the value of Terra ever fell below $ arbitrageurs could exchange Terra for $ worth of Luna a different coin. In theory this would allow the arbitrageur to make a gain decrease the supply of Terra ( the exchanged token was burned ) and raise the value of Terra. If the value of Terra rose above $ arbitrageurs could buy ( mint ) UST in exchange for $ of Luna making a small gain but increasing the supply of Terra and pushing Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | down its value. This was meant to be the mechanism to keep the value of Terra at $ although there was also a reserve of other cryptocurrencies kept to support the peg but not enough to fully cover the market value of Terra At one point Terra was the world s fourth-largest stablecoin in part due to the fact that people who were willing to deposit UST on Anchor a smart contract-lending protocol which promised investors an annual interest rate of percent on their investments ( Briola et al. ) Eventually a run occurred as a few major withdrawals in May knocked UST off its $ peg leading to a stampede out of Terra into Luna depressing Luna s value and ultimately causing the total crash of the two cryptocurrencies Another key risk of stablecoins for U.S. retail users is that redemption may be a secondary concern for liquidity on crypto asset trading platforms As noted in the Financial Stability Oversight Council s Digital Asset Financial Stability Risks and Regulation Report U.S. retail customers can not directly redeem the two largest stablecoins ( Tether and USD Coin ) for dollars ( U.S. Department of the Treasury 2022a ) Stablecoin holders that lack redemption rights may be unable to find willing counterparties to exit their stablecoin positions Gorton and Zhang ( ) evaluate a number of solutions to the run risk of stablecoins. For example they assert that if stablecoins are required to be fully backed by safe assets they would risk attracting funds that would ordinarily go to banks which make loans. This would have the potential to hurt credit availability for individuals and firms. In subsequent research Gorton and Zhang ( ) argue that stablecoins could challenge the government s monetary authority to have an exclusive monopoly on currency issuance and disrupt financial stability Stablecoins currently have a few major impediments against becoming fast payment instruments. For one stablecoins are too risky to satisfy this need at present. Additionally as discussed below general concerns about consumer and investor protections in the crypto asset space also apply to stablecoins ( U.S. Department of the Treasury 2022a ) Nevertheless there is continuing experimentation in using distributed ledger technology for digital payment systems. While crypto assets are currently not payment or settlement technologies for the rest of the financial system it is still possible that in the future their underlying DLT could be adapted into a payment or settlement system for the broader financial system Crypto Assets Can Be Harmful to Consumers and Investors For consumers and investors to use crypto assets to access financial services the crypto asset industry must have sound consumer investor and market protections. However many participants in the crypto asset industry are not acting in compliance with existing laws and regulations and some | Chapter of the most common unlawful activities in the crypto asset industry are scams especially aimed at retail investors ( U.S. Department of the Treasury 2022a ) One of the principal areas where there is mass noncompliance is disclosure surrounding crypto assets that are securities. This lack of disclosure prevents investors from recognizing that most crypto assets have no fundamental value. For example many fraudsters develop intricate and professional-looking websites that purport to offer investors an exciting high-return investment opportunity. When a victim gives crypto assets to the criminal to invest the criminal can simply abscond with the funds Examples of this includes a matter in September when the U.S Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) filed an action against the platform BitConnect for allegedly committing $ billion worth of fraud ( SEC 2021a ) In its action the SEC alleged that BitConnect purported to offer investors a lending program using a proprietary volatility software trading bot but instead simply took investors crypto assets and transferred them into digital wallets controlled by the criminals. To date the SEC has filed charges alleging a number of fraudulent offerings and other types of misconduct involving crypto assets ( SEC ) In May the Federal Trade Commission ( FTC ) released a post detailing the increase in scams involving crypto assets since October ( Fletcher ) Between October and May more than people reported losses from these scams which totaled more than $ million with a median loss of $ One particular type of scam identified by the FTC is giveaway scams where promoters claim to instantly multiply a given number of crypto assets but instead appropriate the crypto assets upon receipt. According to the FTC young people were most susceptible to this type of fraud ; those between and years of age lose far more money to investment fraud than any other type more than half of which was attributable to crypto assets In November the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau ( CFPB ) released a bulletin summarizing the consumer complaints it had received about crypto assets ( CFPB ) In a period of less than four years from October to September the CFPB received more than complaints related to crypto assets with the majority received since In this period roughly percent of crypto asset complaints handled were primarily frauds and scams. Transactional issues with crypto assets and issues with assets not being available when promised made up about another percent of complaints. Other risks identified in the CFPB s bulletin included romance scams and pig butchering difficulty obtaining restitution and fraudulent transactions.4 Pig butchering refers to a practice where scammers develop close personal relationships with a victim in order to convince them to set up crypto asset accounts from which the scammers can steal Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | Furthermore there can be conflicts of interest at crypto asset platforms. For example some crypto asset platforms combine exchange brokerage market making and clearing agency functions. This vertical integration of products and services has long been prohibited in traditional markets and leads to risks to customers. For instance a platform that combines exchange and market making functions would have an incentive to trade ahead of its own customers and would have less incentive to seek out best executions for its customers. FTX one of the largest crypto asset platforms until reportedly transferred billions of dollars in customer accounts to its affiliated trading firm Alameda Research ( Goldstein et al. ) By borrowing against FTT the native token of FTX Alameda Research reportedly made risky bets and lost a large fraction of FTX customers funds ( Tortorelli and Rooney ) In November FTX and its affiliates declared bankruptcy and the price of FTT posted massive losses ; at this time it is unclear whether FTX customers and creditors will get their funds back ( Ge Huang Osipovich and Kowsmann ) There Have Been Limited Economic Benefits from DLT Technology The ability of DLT to solve the difficult problem of ensuring that two parties that do not have a reason to trust each other can nonetheless transact securely is a notable achievement of computer science. This solution has led to excitement about DLT with even some enthusiasm that this technology will change the way business is done ( Iansiti and Lakhani ) DLT and blockchain technology are not necessarily suitable for all applications ; some considerations have been proposed for successful blockchain technology applications ( Yaga et al. ) See box for the proposed DLT use cases However at its core DLT is simply a database and many proposed DLTbased projects do not actually employ decentralization ( as discussed below ) Some have sought to profit from the hyperbole of blockchain it has become a common tactic for non-crypto-related businesses to announce a pivot to blockchain to generate interest in a product or enterprise ( Griffith ) For example in December a beverage maker named Long Island Iced Tea added Blockchain to its name though changing nothing substantive about its business and its stock shares tripled in value ( Cheng ) Ultimately three persons involved with the firm were charged with insider trading by the SEC which alleged that these insiders used the pivot to blockchain tactic to increase the firm s share prices before they sold their stakes in the firm ( SEC 2021b ) In addition many prominent technologists have noted that distributed ledgers are either not particularly novel or useful or they are being used in applications where existing alternatives are far superior. For example Bruce Schneier ( ) a cybersecurity expert has called crypto assets useless | Chapter Box Proposed Uses of Distributed Ledger Technology The excitement generated about DLT has drawn substantial investment capital and has prompted governments and firms outside the crypto asset industry to experiment with its underlying technological processes In some cases this excitement has led to large writedowns or failed projects. Here we review three current cases and give examples of experimentation Walmart Canada and supply chains. A commonly touted use for distributed ledger technology is supply chains where a single distributed ledger could improve traceability throughout a supply chain and reconcile records between a firm and its multiple suppliers ( Laaper n.d. ) In Walmart Canada launched a blockchain that attempted to handle payment disputes between third-party freight carriers. An article in the Harvard Business Review dubbed the experiment a tremendous success noting that before the blockchain system percent of invoices were disputed but after the rollout that share dropped to less than percent ( Vitasek et al. ) Though seemingly impressive the firm that partnered with Walmart Canada to develop the blockchain platform stated in a report describing the project that the platform ran on more than virtual machines ( VMs ) to securely store and manage data points from thousands of transactions per day ( Hyperledger Foundation n.d. ) This implies that each VM is at a maximum handling transactions per day. For reference a minimally configured AWS ( Amazon Web Services ) RDS ( relational data store ) database with two VMs configured with best practices could process thousands if not tens of thousands of transactions per second ( Amazon ) Furthermore a prominent technologist stated that it was not even obvious what functional role blockchain was playing in the system and that the program was more akin to using an existing technology in an inefficient way ( Orosz ) Helium and the decentralized Internet. Helium is a company that is attempting to build a peer-to-peer wireless network by allowing users to buy hotspots small devices that can send data over long distances that can together create a Wi-Fi network. When the company was founded it did not intend to have crypto assets as a central part of its business model ( Roose ) Instead it attempted to use traditional economic incentives for those helping build the network by simply sharing some of the fees from network users to hotspot owners In however the company pivoted and attempted to make crypto assets central to its business model by creating an incentive system where users that purchased hotspots that cost roughly $ ( and thus contributed to the network ) were rewarded with Helium crypto asset tokens. If the prices of tokens rose then so too would the reward for Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | owning a hotspot thus encouraging more users to build out the necessary network infrastructure After this pivot large venture capital firms like Andreessen Horowitz ( also known as a16z ) helped Helium raise hundreds of millions of dollars in equity ( Seward ) Alameda Research ( the failed hedge fund affiliated with FTX ) was also a large investor in Helium Despite the sizable funding and widespread interest Helium came under scrutiny in July when its cofounder tweeted that the company had generated $ million a month in fees from new users joining ( buying hotspots ) but only $ ( percent ) of that was from users actually using the Internet service ( Levine ) Furthermore a Forbes investigation in September found that the executives of the firm gave themselves and their families a windfall in Helium tokens early in the company s history that was not publicly disclosed ( Emerson Jeans and Liu ) Also in September Helium ended the use of its own blockchain which purportedly incentivized broader provision of Internet access as a core feature ( proof of coverage ) and shifted its operations and coins to the Solana blockchain the same technology on which many other speculative crypto assets are traded calling into question whether this use could be distinguished from any other type of crypto asset ( Yaffe-Bellany ) Although these pieces of news may present a significant headwind for Helium s future the Helium token nonetheless has a market value ( as of December ) of over $ million ( CoinMarketCap ) Nonfungible tokens and virtual real estate. Nonfungible tokens ( NFTs ) are digital assets that are not interchangeable. Each NFT is unique with its ownership recorded on a distributed ledger. Ownership of an NFT can pass between two users by recording the transaction and transferring it on a blockchain. NFTs often contain a pointer to a digital object such as an image file. As a famous example in March Jack Dorsey the cofounder and former CEO of Twitter auctioned off an NFT of an image of his first tweet on Twitter from with the winning bid coming in at more than $ million ( Locke ) While anyone could create ( mint ) a new NFT of the same digital image ( and the digital image can be easily reproduced ) the original transaction is maintained on a blockchain so it would not truly be the same ( OpenSea ) This highlights the artificial scarcity view of crypto assets Borri Liu and Tsyvnski ( ) studied the market for NFTs from to and created an index of NFT value based on the repeat sales method. They found the average NFT market return was percent a week in this period although with a weekly standard deviation of percent. This highlights the volatility and variability of NFT returns The market for NFTs cooled in ; the owner of Dorsey s tweet listed | Chapter it for sale in April for $ million but the highest bid as of January was about $ ( OpenSea ) NFTs can be a natural way to track ownership of virtual real estate Several different metaverses have begun offering land in virtual worlds. Ownership of land translates into the title of a virtual property being recorded on a distributed ledger. What one does with their land depends on the platform on Decentraland a large metaverse platform owners are free to develop their land as they see fit : they could open a store selling virtual goods create a game app for visitors build a gallery for their virtual art collection or build a virtual house ( Kamin ) Dowling ( ) studied the value of land in Decentraland and found that the daily values of the virtual land tokens between and changed with extreme volatility. As in the physical world location matters while the average transaction value for a property in the data set is $ a firm paid $ million for land in Decentraland s Fashion District ( Putzier ) Experimentation. The current uses discussed above have demonstrated only limited if any economic benefits so far. Even so proponents still claim that this technology could find productive uses in the future as companies and governments continue experimenting with potential uses ; however they often use permissioned networks of machines that have been authenticated as a trusted member of the network ( Oracle ) For example it is possible that distributed ledger technologies can be used to improve the settlement and clearing processes of banks ( Bech et al. ) In fact as mentioned above banks are experimenting with distributed ledger technology to improve the efficiency of trading clearing settlement and custody ( Yang ) In addition the New York Innovation Center of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York ( ) is participating in an experiment with the notion of a regulated liability network a conceptual financial market infrastructure that could enable transactions between regulated financial institutions potentially using DLT and has noted that despite claims of being decentralized and trustless blockchain-based applications are in practice neither ; often users access their crypto assets by going to a limited set of crypto asset platforms and a small group of miners perform the majority of mining in most crypto assets an activity that has costly implications for the physical environment as discussed in box When it comes to the trustlessness of blockchains Schneier notes that a blockchain does not eliminate the need for trust but simply shifts trust away from individuals and institutions to a technology along with all its features and bugs Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | James Mickens a leading computer scientist who studies distributed systems has stated that in addition to not actually being decentralized and trustless blockchains are often a very poor fit for their purported uses ( Mickens ) This is primarily because the instant that the identity of a person or firm is needed ( as is the case for supply chains medical records and land deeds ) existing technologies can solve the same problem in a much more efficient way. For example many of the cybersecurity benefits of an immutable distributed blockchain can be replicated through existing features like tamper resistance ( the ability to not change digital signatures at a later point in time ) and nonrepudiation ( a receipt of a sender of information s identity that is delivered to both the sender and receiver of information thus guaranteeing that both parties have processed the information ) ( World Bank n.d. ; NIST n.d. ) Proponents of blockchain technology claim that it will not only improve firms performance but also be the backbone of an entirely new Internet. Web3 the so-called new Internet purports to retain all the privacy/networking benefits of the earliest versions of the Internet that existed roughly before ( often called web1 which featured decentralized community-governed open protocols ) while keeping the high functionality of various features of web2 ( the current version of the Internet ) without the existing dependencies on large centralized firms like Google and Apple ( Dixon ) However Moxie Marlinspike ( ) the cryptographer and founder of the messaging app Signal argues that the reason the current Internet features so much centralization is because it makes things easier for two specific reasons. First he argues that a decentralized Internet would require individuals and firms to host their own servers. However centralized hosting of servers can be done much more cheaply and reliably by large entities and therefore benefits from economies of scale. Second he notes that protocols or the rules that Internet systems run on are much more difficult to change than platforms. That is centralized non-open-source protocols can be managed by a single entity ( as opposed to many ) facilitating a wider variety of features that can change with much greater speed than if they were decentralized. Marlinspike also notes that web3 is already trending toward a centralized structure because of the ease and convenience that centralization brings but in a much clunkier way than if traditional technology were being used. He specifically notes that once a distributed ecosystem centralizes around a platform for convenience it becomes the worst of both worlds : centralized control but still distributed enough to become mired in time. | Chapter Table Top Ten Crypto Derivative Platforms by Open Interest Rank ( ) Exchange ( ) BTCEX Binance BTCC Futures Deepcoin BingX Bitget Futures OKX Bybit MEXC Global Bitmart Futures 24-Hour Open Interest ( Nominal $ ) ( ) $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ 24-Hour Volume ( Nominal $ ) ( ) $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ Source : CoinGecko. Data were collected on January The Risks of Financial Innovation While the crypto assets ecosystem and its underlying technology introduce the potential for newfound efficiencies efforts to challenge basic economic principles have frequently resulted in financial calamities. The economist Hyman Minsky hypothesized that financial crises often follow a similar cycle whereby initially strong investments turn increasingly more speculative until a bubble bursts ( Minsky ) Further Minsky stated that this repeatedly happens because regulators are initially vigilant in the immediate aftermath of a crisis ; but as time goes on and the instrument of speculation changes regulators take a less proscriptive approach to not harm innovation ( Minsky ) According to Minsky this relaxed regulatory environment invariably leads to another crisis. Indeed other economists have argued that the most effective financial regulation has been introduced only after a crisis has occurred ( Gorton ) Minsky s theories became popular in the aftermath of the global financial crisis when complicated financial products involving mortgages that exacerbated the crisis were initially hailed as innovative and individuals discussing their risks were labeled Luddites by prominent commentators ( Cassidy ; Wheatley ) Minsky s writings as they apply to past financial crises may prove instructive for policymakers today. Fortunately there has not yet been a systemic crisis caused by crypto assets in part because they are not yet fully integrated with the rest of the financial system giving policymakers time to Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | act appropriately. The risks presented by crypto assets stem from excessive speculation high leverage run risk environmental harm from crypto asset mining and fraudulent activities that harm retail investors and corporations. Because crypto assets appear to be here to stay policymakers should consider these risks to avoid a Minsky moment caused by crypto assets Other Risks from Crypto Assets Some risks that apply to crypto assets require further examination. Many of these risks are not unique to crypto assets ; combined with innovative technology they pose challenges for policymakers and regulators trying to minimize risks while encouraging responsible innovation Leverage risks. Crypto asset derivative platforms where investors can buy and sell financial derivatives linked to crypto assets have seen substantial growth in the past two years ( Damalas et al. ) Table shows that the top platforms for crypto asset derivatives which account for roughly percent of all volume in these derivatives have over $ billion in open interest and roughly $ billion in daily trading as of January According to one international regulator one of the largest platforms Binance refuses to provide adequate and reliable information in response to regulatory requests ( FCA ) Exchanges frequently tout the high amount of leverage they offer clients stating that investors can take up to 100-to-1 leverage ( debt-to-equity ratios ) ( Pechman ) These derivative platforms can create financial instability because positions with high leverage ( debt-to-equity ratios ) can amplify a shock to prices of crypto assets and lead to large losses and even defaults ( U.S. Department of the Treasury 2022c ) In particular leverage leaves little room for prices to fall in a short amount of time as steep price declines could induce brokers to issue large margin calls thus forcing broader liquidation ( Carapella et al. ) A relatively new application of DLT in financial markets where there is a relatively unknown amount of leverage is so-called decentralized finance ( DeFi ) DeFi attempts to offer financial products such as loans on the blockchain through the use of smart contracts ( Carapella et al. ) The basic promise behind DeFi is to replace financial intermediaries instead linking savers directly with borrowers ( or buyers with sellers ) allowing them to save on the spread that traditional intermediaries charge for creating the match with software. Though DeFi applications claim to help broaden access to credit by decreasing intermediation fees they create serious risks to investors and cause at least two risks for the broader financial system : the use of significant leverage and the performance of regulated functions without compliance with appropriate regulations. DeFi platforms acting as unregulated banks broker-dealers exchanges and other entities subject to | Chapter regulation should be operating in compliance with existing regulations and rules. DeFi lending platforms effectively receive funds from investors and use them to generate loans promising interest to investors. This dynamic inherently causes run risks where more investors try to redeem more of their funds than the platform can accommodate at a given time thus causing the platform to either suspend convertibility or fail outright ( Carapella et al ) Furthermore DeFi presents the opportunity for synthetic leverage whereby investors can mask the true amount of leverage they are undertaking from the party from which they are borrowing ( Tian ) If DeFi were limited to small retail investors the failure of a DeFi platform could still hurt these investors but the shock could be relatively contained. Banking agencies issued a statement that expressed concerns with business models that are concentrated in crypto-asset-related activities or have concentrated exposures to the crypto asset sector ( Federal Reserve Board ) Price volatility. Most crypto assets experience substantial price volatility. Holding such volatile assets could present challenges for large financial institutions if they were permitted to hold crypto assets as the volatility would lead to constant changes on the asset side of their balance sheets. This volatility in turn could increase funding costs for banks and other financial institutions thereby requiring banks which fundamentally borrow so as to be able to lend to increase the funding costs ( interest rates ) that they charge leading to tighter credit conditions Currently this contagion risk is relatively muted given that banks are limited in their ability to conduct crypto-related activities such as acting as custodians of crypto assets ( i.e. holding crypto assets for clients not on their own balance sheets ) ( OCC ) Indeed banking regulators such as the Federal Reserve have issued guidance requiring regulated financial institutions to inform their regulator before engaging in crypto-asset-related activity ( Gibson and Belsky ) But other less-regulated financial institutions such as hedge funds are increasingly investing in crypto assets Such activity of lightly regulated or nonregulated entities can lead to liquidity spirals as described by Brunnermeier and Pederson ( ) These spirals occur when a dramatic crash in the price of an asset such as a crypto asset leads a hedge fund to be margin-called requiring the fund to sell off other positions to meet the margin call. If enough funds are exposed to the asset or assets with declining prices then sell-offs could be broad enough to cause a deterioration in market liquidity Illicit finance risks. Crypto assets are the standard form of payment extorted from victims of ransomware whereby a malicious actor hacks an organization and demands payment to release control of the victim s network and often to purportedly forgo leaking the victim s stolen data. Crypto assets remove a critical friction in performing a ransomware hack. Because the attacker can demand that crypto assets be sent to a pseudonymous wallet Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | Figure Nominal Cyber Insurance Prices Over Time Nominal index value : June = Annual change in percent % % % % % % % Jun-2014 Jun-2015 Jun-2016 Jun-2017 Jun-2018 Year-on-year % change ( right axis ) Jun-2019 Jun-2020 Jun-2021 Jun-2022 % Cyber insurance pricing index ( left axis ) Source : Howden Nova Analytics platform instead of a bank account linked to a specific person attackers can more easily launder or obfuscate payments made to them in comparison with fiat currency ( U.S. Department of Justice ) Importantly like other financial assets crypto assets can be misused for a range of illicit activities including ransomware payments. Crypto assets have also been misused by human traffickers by individuals exploiting children for sexual abuse and by drug traffickers and scammers ; to fund the activities of rogue regimes such as the recent thefts by the Lazarus Group which is affiliated with North Korea ; and to finance terrorist activities ( GAO ; U.S. Department of the Treasury 2022d ) The other key illicit financing risks associated with crypto assets come from gaps in implementation of the international Anti-MoneyLaundering/Combating-the-Financing-of-Terrorism ( AML/CFT ) standards abroad ; the use of anonymity enhancing technologies ; in some cases the lack of covered financial institutions as intermediaries and thus the absence of AML/CFT controls in some crypto asset transactions ; and service providers that are noncompliant with AML/CFT and other regulatory obligations including compliance with sanctions obligations. With regard to the last when crypto asset firms fail to register with the appropriate regulator fail to establish sufficient AML/CFT controls or do not comply with sanctions obligations criminals are more likely to exploit their services successfully including to circumvent U.S. and United Nations sanctions Ransomware uses. As hacking to receive crypto assets becomes more widespread more firms will attempt to insure themselves against these attacks by purchasing cyber insurance. However the existence of such insurance may not eliminate the underlying problem and instead may even | Chapter Table Ransomware and Downtime Costs by Country Country ( ) Total Submissions ( ) Minimum Cost ( $ Nominal ) ( ) Estimated Costs ( $ Nominal ) ( ) United States France Spain Italy Germany Canada United Kingdom Australia Austria New Zealand Total Source : Emsisoft Malware Lab create an incentive for hackers to attack insured firms and get paid by insurance. In fact in an interview with The Record a member of the Russian hacking group REvil was explicitly asked if they targeted organizations that have cyber insurance. The member responded : Yes this is one of the tastiest morsels. Especially to hack the insurers first to get their customer base and work in a targeted way from there. And after you go through the list then hit the insurer themselves ( Smilyanets ) One can observe evidence consistent with this vicious cycle from cyber insurance prices. The insurance brokerage Howden compiles a Global Cyber Insurance Pricing Index which broadly measures premiums for cyber insurance ( Howden ) As shown in figure the cost of cyber insurance has increased more than percent since July In addition to paying for ransom costs companies affected by ransomware attacks typically are unable to maintain their business activity until they have made the payment. In its annual State of Ransomware report the cybersecurity firm Emsisoft estimated the combined cost of ransom payments and business downtime to be $ billion in the United States in and roughly $ billion in total across the United States France Spain Italy Germany Canada the United Kingdom Australia Austria and New Zealand ( as shown in table ) ( Emsisoft Malware Lab ) It is crucial to note that the costs described here are direct costs. The indirect costs are likely higher. Instead of engaging in productive activities where firms have comparative advantages they must divert resources to activities and products that help fend off attackers such as buying cyber insurance and adding more personnel for information technology security Thus both welfare and economy-wide production decrease by a multiple of Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | the direct dollar costs of resources that firms are using to stop ransomware attacks Investing in the Nation s Digital Financial Infrastructure The growth of crypto assets has revealed a demand for a faster and more inclusive financial system with a real-time payment system and circulating digital money. Some have hoped that crypto assets could act as a form of decentralized money making the U.S. payment systems faster cheaper safe and more inclusive. This vision has not been realized. That said there are still other ways near-term progress can be made on at least some of these goals. As a regulator of and participant in the Nation s payment systems the Federal Reserve has a historical role in maintaining these systems integrity ( Federal Reserve Board n.d. ) For example in the past decentralized payment systems were costly in part because some banks did not pay the full amount of a check from other banks so-called nonpar collection or nonpar banking ( Federal Reserve Board ) In some cases this was done by levying a fee on checks deposited from other banks. Shortly after the establishment of the Federal Reserve System it started providing payment services to banks and over time it helped eliminate nonpar banking ( Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis ) This section first discusses an upcoming improvement to U.S. payments which will help many consumers and businesses make cheap instant payments. It then discusses the possibility of introducing a central bank digital currency ( CBDC ) which is a digital form of money. While operating under the supervision of a trusted authority both these mechanisms have the potential to realize many of the benefits that crypto asset developers have promised The FedNow Instant Payment System In terms of overall value as of the largest retail payment system in the United States was the Automated Clearinghouse ( ACH ) ( Federal Reserve Board 2022a ) ACH provides an electronic means to exchange funds between banks and other depository institutions ( Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco n.d. ) Typical ACH payments include salaries consumer and corporate bills interest payments dividends and Social Security payments Peer-to-peer payment platforms such as Venmo complete transfers that are in and out of their platforms by accessing ACH network services through a participant bank ( Venmo n.d. ) The regional Federal Reserve banks and the Electronic Payment Network are the country s two national ACH operators ( Federal Reserve Board ) The prevalence of ACH offers many benefits ; but a larger more fast-paced economy is starting to arise. ACH | Chapter payments can be processed in same-day batches between banks throughout the day but a standard ACH transfer can take up to three business days for funds to be settled and available to end users. In addition ACH settlements occur only on business days ( Nacha ) Businesses and individuals alike are increasingly in need of faster payment systems Advances in technology have created an opportunity for significant improvements in the way individuals and businesses make payments in today s economy. In recent years members of Congress staff members of the Department of the Treasury and other experts have called for the Federal Reserve to offer a faster payment system for both businesses and retail users ( Warren ; Mnuchin and Phillips ; Klein ) As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and increased consumer demand for e-commerce options many businesses have also increased their efforts to offer quicker payment options ( Rathjen ) In response the Federal Reserve has prioritized designing and developing a faster payment system ( Federal Register ) The Federal Reserve plans to launch this new system which is called the FedNow Service later in ( Federal Reserve Board 2022b ) Through financial institutions participating in FedNow businesses and individuals will be able to send and receive payments conveniently and recipients will have nearly instant access to funds giving them greater flexibility to manage their money and make time-sensitive payments. This service will be operational hours a day and days a week. This uninterrupted processing of fund transfers is an important improvement over existing payment systems ( Federal Reserve Board 2022b 2022c 2022d ) This service is different from peer-to-peer services such as Venmo in many ways. For example funds transferred via FedNow will be available more quickly than those that must first exit a peer-to-peer payment service and then enter the ACH bank transfer process which can take time to settle Beyond speed and convenience near instant payments can yield real economic benefits for both individuals and businesses by allowing them to make time-sensitive payments whenever needed and providing them with more flexibility in managing their money. In particular near instant payments under FedNow could bring significant benefits to vulnerable segments of the population. Slow payment systems can cost Americans billions of dollars. In addition to incurring bank overdraft fees consumers can be forced to use high-cost alternatives like check cashers and payday lenders ( Klein ) In it was estimated that a fast payment system such as FedNow could reduce these kinds of fees generating savings of more than $ billion a year for American households ( Klein ) Because lowerincome individuals are more likely to be hurt by slow payment systems Note that there is a private faster payment system RTP whose adoption has been low ( Clearing House ) Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | they could especially gain from these savings if FedNow is adopted widely Using innovation productively and responsibly in this way could make banking services more inclusive FedNow requires commitment and active engagement by the private sector to make it interoperable which means connecting and communicating with other payment services ( Federal Reserve Board 2022c ) According to the Federal Reserve interoperability is crucial for payment messages [ to be ] routed or exchanged and settled such that the sender may initiate a payment that will seamlessly reach the receiver. With interoperability an individual or business with a bank account would be able to send a payment to another individual or business without having to choose understand or even be aware of the path taken by the payment. While noting that interoperability can take different forms the Federal Reserve has maintained that it alone can not fully establish the interoperability of FedNow ; achieving this will require active partnership and collaboration with the financial industry ( Federal Reserve Board 2022c ) Some have suggested that near instant digital payment systems like FedNow may reduce the need for circulating digital money ( NAFCU ) In this case the benefits of circulating digital money after FedNow is launched may be minimal. In fact Federal Reserve governor Michelle Bowman commented in August that my expectation is that FedNow addresses the issues that some have raised about the need for a CBDC ( Bowman ) Conversely FedNow is intended to mainly focus on domestic payments and may bring limited improvements to the cross-border payment system at least initially. In addition FedNow is not a digital asset which can be used in settlements or provide transaction programmability roles that circulating digital money could play in the globally integrated financial system Central Bank Digital Currencies It is important to note that money can come both in a physical format ( e.g. cash ) and in a digital format ( e.g. electronic bank accounts ) Thus a central bank s digital currency is a liability of a central bank similar to cash but it exists on a digital platform where it can be exchanged and settled in real time. A CBDC system is made up of the CBDC itself the public and private sector components that work alongside the CBDC and the laws and regulations that apply to these digital assets ( White House 2022a ) A CBDC system can be set up in numerous different ways such as a wholesale CBDC which allows for access only by financial institutions ( e.g. banks ) ; and a retail CBDC which allows for access by individuals. That said certain design features and questions related to the underlying infrastructure | Chapter of CBDC may blur these distinctions to some degree ( U.S. Department of the Treasury 2022e ) As of January countries have launched CBDCs ( Atlantic Council ) In addition a number of foreign central banks including the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan are exploring CBDCs ; and some central banks such as the People s Bank of China are piloting a retail CBDC ( Gorton and Zhang ) While some countries have considered using DLT for their CBDC it is worth noting that many of the pilot programs for CBDC systems are not built on DLT ; instead they rely on a trusted central authority a country s central bank to operate key aspects of the CBDC system. This seems likely to be the case if a U.S CBDC is introduced. A White House assessment of a potential U.S. CBDC system recently noted that while a U.S. CBDC system could in theory be mostly permissionless from a governance standpoint this design choice introduces a large number of technical complexities and practical limitations that strongly suggest a permissionless approach does not make sense for a system that has at least one trusted entity ( i.e. the central bank ) ( White House 2022a ) This is somewhat ironic given that this is different from an oft-cited founding principle of crypto assets like Bitcoin whose purported aim was to create decentralized money without any trusted central authority A U.S. CBDC a digital form of the U.S. dollar would have the potential to offer significant benefits. It could enable a payment system that is more efficient provide a foundation for further technological innovation facilitate faster cross-border transactions and be environmentally sustainable ( White House 2022a ) It could also promote financial inclusion and equity by enabling access for a broad range of consumers ( Maniff ) A potential U.S. CBDC could also help support other policy goals. For example a potential U.S. CBDC could help ensure that such payment systems are aligned with the principles of human rights democratic values and privacy ( U.S. Department of the Treasury 2022e ) There are also some risks from having a CBDC in the financial system Similar to one-to-one backed stablecoins CBDCs may also pose credit availability risks ( U.S. Department of the Treasury 2022b ) That is a widely available CBDC could serve as a substitute for commercial bank deposits Just as in the case of stablecoins that are fully backed by safe assets this substitution effect could reduce the aggregate amount of deposits in the banking system which could in turn increase bank funding expenses and thus could reduce credit availability or raise credit costs for households and businesses. In addition because central bank money is the safest form of money a widely accessible CBDC would be particularly attractive to riskaverse users ( and likely more so than a stablecoin ) especially during times of stress in the financial system. The ability to quickly convert bank deposits into a CBDC could make systemic bank runs more likely or more severe Digital Assets : Relearning Economic Principles | ( Bank of Canada et al. ) In addition CBDCs could cause operational risks. If the CBDC platform could not function due to a system failure or a cyberattack it could erode investors confidence Recognizing the potential benefits and risks from a U.S. CBDC the Biden-Harris Administration has developed Policy Objectives for a U.S CBDC System which reflect the Federal Government s priorities for a potential U.S. CBDC ( White House 2022e ) These objectives flesh out the goals outlined for a CBDC in the Executive Order. According to these objectives the U.S. CBDC system if implemented should protect consumers promote economic growth improve payment systems provide interoperability with other platforms advance financial inclusion protect national security respect human rights and align with democratic values. Conclusion Innovation in financial services brings both risks and opportunities for the broader economy. It can challenge business models and existing industries but it can not challenge basic economic principles such as what makes an asset effective as money and the incentives that give rise to run risk Although the underlying technologies are a clever solution for the problem of how to execute transactions without a trusted authority crypto assets currently do not offer widespread economic benefits. They are largely speculative investment vehicles and are not an effective alternative to fiat currency Also they are too risky at present to function as payment instruments or to expand financial inclusion. Even so it is possible that their underlying technology may still find productive uses in the future as companies and governments continue to experiment with DLT. In the meantime some crypto assets appear to be here to stay and they continue to cause risks for financial markets investors and consumers. Much of the activity in the crypto asset space is covered by existing regulations and regulators are expanding their capabilities to bring a large number of new entities under compliance ( SEC ) Other parts of the crypto asset space require coordination by various agencies and deliberations about how to address the risks they pose ( U.S Department of the Treasury 2022a ) Certain innovations such as FedNow and a potential U.S. CBDC could help bring the U.S. financial infrastructure into the digital era in a clear and simple way without the risks or irrational exuberance brought by crypto assets. Hence continued investments in the Nation s financial infrastructure have the potential to offer significant benefits to consumers and businesses but regulators must apply the lessons that civilization has learned and thus rely on economic principles in regulating crypto assets | Chapter Chapter Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate Global temperatures as high as those in recent years are unprecedented in the time span of human civilization and have likely not been seen in at least the last years of Earth s history ( Gulev et al. ) Many nations including the United States are working ambitiously to limit the impact of climate change by reining in greenhouse gas emissions and harnessing the opportunities of the clean energy transition. However given the time it takes to transform the global energy system and for the climate to respond the climate will continue changing at least until global greenhouse gas emissions fall to zero. In the coming decades more intense and frequent weather extremes and the uncertainty of the changing climate will present a range of economic and financial risks to the U.S. economy and will confront the Federal Government with related fiscal challenges. Physical climate risks can be managed by anticipating and planning for coming changes in climate a process known as adaptation. Adaptation presents opportunities to lower climate change costs over the long-term while also building resilience to natural hazards and weather risks today The design of climate adaptation policies must recognize that actors across the United States including individuals and businesses and all levels of government already face incentives to adapt to climate change. But they also face informational financial and legal constraints that may limit their ability to adapt. Targeting adaptation policies to alleviate these constraints and address related market failures should be most effective in supporting private action The Federal role in climate change adaptation is complicated by the complex nested governance structure of relevant policy areas. Many important areas that are relevant to adaptation from land use planning and zoning to the regulation of insurance markets are governed at the State or local level. The Federal Government however has a strong interest in advancing reforms in these areas to address climate change because of its role in managing risks across the United States from credit and insurance provision to disaster response and recovery to social safety net programs The risks that climate change poses are multidimensional regionally specific and vary based on underlying socioeconomic vulnerabilities Adaptation policies need to be targeted to particular settings and therefore will need to be both varied and complex. This chapter proposes four overarching objectives for structuring further Federal adaptation efforts : Producing and disseminating knowledge about climate risk Long-term planning for the climate transition Ensuring accurate pricing of climate risks Protecting the vulnerable T he United States has joined nations around the world in acting to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. If fully implemented national pledges may limit global warming to F ( C ; Meinshausen et al. ) achieving a primary goal of the Paris Agreement ( United Nations Climate Change n.d. ) The steeply falling costs of low-carbon technologies and the increasingly ambitious climate policies of many countries are bending the global emissions curve rendering worst-case outcomes of F of warming by the end of the century increasingly unlikely ( Hausfather and Moore ) The United States has implemented major domestic legislation to achieve its own goals to reduce emissions to percent below levels by and to reach net-zero emissions by In particular the August Inflation Reduction Act and the November Bipartisan Infrastructure Law together make $ billion in investments in American infrastructure with a focus on the climate challenges facing our Nation ( U.S Department of Energy ) However even given the ambitious action to rein in emissions that will be required to meet these national commitments the climate will | Chapter continue changing for the foreseeable future for two main reasons. First it will take decades to completely transform the global energy system which currently relies heavily on greenhouse-gas-generating fossil fuels. Second the climate system will take years to respond to changes in emissions. At present temperatures across the lower States are about F above their level in ( Vose et al. ) ; even if all nations meet their emission reduction goals global warming will at least double by ( Meinshausen et al. ) The effects of global warming are already apparent across the United States in the form of more extreme heat and longer heat waves ( National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration n.d. ; Lipton et al. ; Guti rrez et al. p. ) ; more extreme rainfall events and associated flooding ( U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ; Davenport Burke and Diffenbaugh ) ; more frequent and intense droughts driving huge wildfires ( Williams Cook and Smerdon ; Borunda ; Burke et al. ) ; and higher sea levels driving coastal flooding and worse storm surges ( Hino et al. ; Marder ) Among the events that have been formally linked to climate change in recent years are the ongoing drought in California ( Diffenbaugh Swain and Touma ) ; exceptionally dry conditions in the Southwest ( Park Williams Cook and Smerdon ) ; extreme heat in the Pacific Northwest ( Bercos-Hickey et al. ) ; flooding in the mid-Atlantic ( Winter et al. ) ; major western wildfires ( Yu et al ) ; the damage caused by Hurricane Harvey which inundated Houston in ( Frame et al. ; World Weather Attribution ) ; and severe rain-induced flooding in Louisiana in ( van der Wiel et al. ) Fluctuating weather conditions have always presented challenges. The inherent variability of the atmospheric system means that specific weather conditions can not be predicted even in principle beyond a to 10-day predictability horizon. In a stable climate however the probability of different weather conditions can be accurately estimated. A stable climate allows actors to understand the risks of weather-dependent outcomes and to plan accordingly in designing infrastructure allocating investments and adjusting daily routines and habits. For example statistical methods currently used to design infrastructure assume a stable and unchanging climate where the probability of extreme weather over the lifetime of the infrastructure remains constant at historical values ( Milly et al. ) With the human-induced climate change of today however it is no longer possible to assume that the future will be like the past and to use unadjusted past experience as a guide for the future. Decisions made using only historical weather records will become increasingly inaccurate and costly as weather patterns change ( Milly et al. ; Electric Power Research Institute ) Weather variability occurring in the context of the Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | changing climate will result in repeated experiences of historically unprecedented weather conditions ( Fisher Sippel and Knutti ) Even small changes in average climate conditions can produce large changes in the probability of previously rare weather events. Social financial and infrastructural systems that manage these risks typically have certain tolerances with steeply increasing costs when these thresholds are exceeded. For instance construction is often designed to standards based on historical weather conditions such as a 1-in-100-years rain event and conditions exceeding these design thresholds can produce dangerous conditions that have high economic and social costs ( American Society of Civil Engineers ) A shifting climate can quickly render these standards obsolete. In the example shown in figure using an illustrative climate distribution the mean changes by just under percent but the probability of an extreme event ( the area of the distribution to the right of the green line ) increases by about percent Modern societies have been and continue to be ordered for a climate that no longer exists ; therefore the projected rapid changes in the climate system will pose major evolving risks for economic social infrastructural and governance systems in coming decades. Recognizing and planning for these risks a process that is often called adaptation can reduce costs improve stability and protect the most vulnerable people and communities Because climate change touches many aspects of economic production and societal well-being adaptation policies need to be equally broad ranging Figure Small Changes in Climate Can Greatly Increase the Probability of Extreme Weather Events Probability of occurrence Past climate System design standard New climate Weather metric ( e.g. five-day cumulative rainfall ) Source : CEA calculations | Chapter from the provision of decision-relevant climate information to the regulation of insurance markets to improved building codes and zoning. Box describes some of the ongoing investments being made by the Biden-Harris Administration to build resilience while reducing and managing the costs of a changing climate Economic Principles of Adaptation Policy and Planning The economic principles that support adaptation planning for climate change are both different from and more varied than those underpinning the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions typically referred to as mitigation Mitigation is a classic example of a public good. The costs of emissions accrue to people all around the world and will last far into the future Because the market prices of fossil fuels do not incorporate these large social costs climate change can be understood as a global externality what Nicholas Stern has termed the greatest market failure the world has ever seen ( Stern ) Private markets have little incentive to provide emissions reduction in the absence of government action. Moreover because the benefits of reducing emissions accrue globally and are not captured within the borders of a single country nations must cooperate to address the climate challenge ( Nordhaus ) Aligning the incentives of private actors and nations throughout the world to account for the climatic effects of fossil fuels requires coordinated action In contrast many adaptation decisions are private goods in that both the costs and benefits are largely internalized by the decisionmaker ( Mendelsohn ; Kahn ; Kolstad and Moore ) For adaptation communities households and businesses all have their own motivations for responding to and planning for climate risks. Examples include a homeowner investing in reinforced windows to defend against stronger storms a farmer choosing what crops to grow in response to changing drought conditions and a business adjusting suppliers to reduce weather-related disruptions that are shifting due to climate change. Though there are public goods problems and other market failures related to adaptation ( discussed in detail later in the chapter ) they are varied specific localized and very different from the global externality problem that characterizes mitigation Indeed there is already evidence that private actors are starting to consider emerging climate risks in their decisions. For example recent research suggests that both the risks of sea-level rise and the productivity effects of extreme heat are reflected in property and agricultural land prices ( Keys and Mulder ; Bernstein Gustafson and Lewis ; Baldauf Garlappi and Yannelis ; Severen Costello and Desch nes ) Climate risk premiums are also showing up in longer-term corporate and municipal bonds ( Painter ; Acharya et al. ; Goldsmith-Pinkham Gustafson Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | Box Adaptation and Resilience Investments of the Biden-Harris Administration The Bipartisan Infrastructure Law ( BIL ) and the Inflation Reduction Act ( IRA ) both contain a number of provisions to build resilience to natural disasters and adapt social and economic systems to reduce the costs of climate change. The Biden-Harris Administration is in the process of implementing these laws making historic investments in climate change resilience. The BIL in particular provides $ billion for adaptive investments such as support for energy-efficiency improvements in low-income households grants to states and territories for resiliency projects and flood mitigation dedicated funding to improve resiliency of transportation systems and funding for wildfire defense and coastal adaptation ( White House 2022g 2022h ; U.S. Department of Transportation ; U.S. Department of Commerce ) Resiliency provisions within the IRA include tax credits and rebates for improving home energy efficiency and funding for addressing droughts and improving water infrastructure ( White House 2022i ) Beyond the investments provided by the BIL and IRA the United States is pursuing a multipronged adaptation strategy that includes : inter-agency coordination on climate extremes building codes and climate-related financial risks ; the provision of climate data tools such as the Climate Mapping for Resilience and Adaptation portal ; and building resilience into Federal procurement ( UN Framework Convention on Climate Change ; Climate Mapping for Resilience and Adaptation n.d. ) Principal agencies are now required to develop and implement Climate Adaptation and Resilience plans and report annually on implementation and progress under the plans ( White House 2022j ) Several programs target assistance to groups that may be particularly vulnerable such as low-income and Tribal communities ( White House 2022g 2022h ) These historic investments are laying the foundation that will be required for building adaption and resilience in the United States This chapter describes both the broad economic principles that underlie adaptation policy generally and that could support future work building on this foundation. For instance spending on adaptation and resilience projects will be most effective when coupled with reforms to zoning building codes and infrastructure standards ( mostly governed at the State and local level ; see figure ) as well as clear communication of strategic priorities for the management of climate risks at all levels of government | Chapter and Lewis ) There is also evidence that property market adjustments are concentrated in regions where more people report believing in climate change which suggests continuing pricing frictions in areas where there is greater skepticism about climate change ( Barrage and Furst ; Bernstein Gustafson and Lewis ; Baldauf Garlappi and Yannelis ; Severen Costello and Desch nes ) The importance of private incentives in shaping climate action has implications for the design of adaptation policy. First effective adaptation policy will recognize that individuals households businesses and communities will act in response to the shifting climate. But these actions will be defined by legal informational and financial constraints along with the sometimes-distorted or perverse incentives that these actors face Government action that targets constraints and market failures that impede adaptation should be most effective in supporting and enabling private action rather than crowding out actions that would have occurred anyway Examples of these constraints and market failures as well as policies that can address them are discussed in detail later in the chapter Second government policies and programs already play a role in determining how the costs of weather-related hazards are distributed through society a role that will likely grow in importance as climate change effects worsen. Individuals with more wealth and a higher income are better able to avoid prepare for and recover from weather-related shocks This means that in the absence of counteracting policies climate change costs will likely be disproportionately borne by the poor and marginalized Programs of public lending insurance grants and welfare can be designed to reallocate some of these risks and thus reduce the regressive nature of climate change costs. However the existing disaster response and social support system is composed of legacy programs that were designed in a pre climate change era and thus may not be adequate for addressing climate change. Programs are distributed across multiple agencies and levels of government often with burdensome applications or complex requirements making their net distributive effect difficult to determine ( Mach et al. ; Howell and Elliott ) In fact there is evidence that postdisaster aid can exacerbate rather than mitigate preexisting inequalities ( Billings Gallagher and Ricketts ) Comprehensive reevaluation and reform of the system composed of these interacting support programs building on the ongoing adaptation work within the Biden-Harris Administration ( box ) will be required to ensure that the system is able to protect the vulnerable as climate change damage grows The next sections first review new evidence on the economic costs and financial risks that climate change poses to the United States and to Federal finances and then outline the role that a Federal adaptation strategy could play in managing and reducing physical climate risk Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | The Economic Costs and Financial Risks of Climate Change in the United States Shifting climate patterns are producing a wide array of risks affecting the well-being of American communities. Earlier research on climate change economics assumed that higher-income countries like the United States would be able to manage the effects of changing weather conditions relatively easily because of the small share of clearly exposed sectors of the economy such as agriculture and forestry and the assumption that adjusting to climate change would be straightforward ( Mendelsohn Nordhaus and Shaw ; Nordhaus ) However this assessment needs to be reconsidered in light of new economic evidence and the increasing intensity and frequency of extreme weather events across the United States that can be formally attributed to climate change ( Seneviratne et al. ) The Costs of Climate Change for the United States Well-Being and Prosperity Weather variability has a range of effects within the United States. For example studies have shown that very hot temperatures have adverse effects including increasing premature mortality and worsening of the health of newborn babies ( Desch nes and Greenstone ; Desch nes Greenstone and Guryan ; Barreca and Schaller ) ; decreasing crop yields ( Schlenker and Roberts ) ; adversely affecting mental health ( Burke et al. ) ; lowering the labor supply in exposed industries ( Graff Zivin and Neidell ) ; increasing violence ( Mukherjee and Sanders ) ; and reducing students ability to learn ( Park et al. ) These effects are not borne equally across geographic regions or economic sectors within the United States and they are felt most acutely among disadvantaged groups with a high vulnerability to natural hazards ( box ) Climate models predict that extreme heat will become more frequent and intense as climate change continues ( IPCC ) Today in many parts of the United States the heat wave season is nearly three times longer than in the 1960s ; in the summer of alone U.S. locations broke their monthly temperature records ( Lipton et al. ; Stevens and Samenow ; U.S. Global Change Research Program figure 1.2b ) There is some evidence that people businesses and communities can adjust to hotter temperatures over time for instance by changing the timing of outdoor activities ( Graff Zivin and Neidell ; Dundas and von Haefen ) or by using more energy for cooling ( Auffhammer ; Desch nes and Greenstone ) But these adaptations are costly do not eliminate climate change costs and may reduce the quality of life ( Desch nes ) | Chapter Box Climate Change Will Most Likely Interact with and Exacerbate Existing Inequalities The effects of climate change are not evenly distributed across the U.S population by income race or ethnicity. Lower-income communities have fewer resources to prepare for or respond to extreme weather events leaving them more vulnerable to their effects. For instance residents of lower-income communities are less likely to evacuate away from the path of hurricanes and tend to live in more vulnerable structures leaving them at a higher risk of mortality or injury ( Deng et al ; Fothergill and Peek ) Low-income Americans are less able to adjust their activities to avoid exposure to wildfire-induced air pollution or to adjust air-conditioning in response to extreme heat ( Burke et al ; Cong et al. ) They are more likely to work in industries such as agriculture and construction that are highly exposed to dangerously high temperatures ( U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ) Major natural disasters are more likely to lead to financial hardships such as debt defaults and bankruptcies in low-income and minority communities ( Billings Gallagher and Ricketts ; Jerch Kahn and Lin ) Injustices throughout U.S. history mean that these effects are also strongly differentiated by race. For instance because of forced relocation away from their tribal homelands many Native American people live on marginal lands that are highly susceptible to wildfires extreme heat and droughts ( Farrell et al. ) Minority and low-income areas within cities including formerly redlined neighborhoods are substantially hotter than wealthier whiter and nonredlined areas ( Hoffman Shandas and Pendleton ; Benz and Burney ) ; Black and Hispanic students are more likely to attend schools without air-conditioning ( Park et al ) ; and minority communities are more likely to be affected by expected increases in extreme heat and coastal flooding due to climate change ( U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ; Wing et al. ) Wealth and assets allow households to avoid prepare for respond to and recover from weather-related shocks leaving minority populations that lack these assets more exposed to intensifying weather extremes Minority populations particularly African Americans were barred from accessing avenues for wealth accumulation for centuries for instance through discriminatory home-lending practices that persisted through much of the 20th century leading to stark disparities today in wealth and assets by race and ethnic group ; the median wealth of white households is almost eight times that of Black households ( Rothstein ; Derenoncourt et al. ; Cook ; Bhutta et al. ) Moreover disadvantaged and racial minority communities have generally received less financial assistance after disasters than affluent white communities ( National Advisory Council ) partly because some of this aid is tied to property ownership from which minorities have Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | been historically excluded. The Biden-Harris Administration is working to address these inequities. The Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) has committed to establishing an equitable and fair distribution of Federal aid and assistance and to increase access for underserved populations ( U.S. Department of Homeland Security ) In response to past inequities the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency recently created the Office of Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights which seeks to coordinate and prioritize environmental justice within the agency and in its partnerships with other Federal agencies ( U.S. Environmental Protection Agency n.d. ) More generally the Biden-Harris Administration is working to direct percent of the benefits of climate and clean energy investments to disadvantaged communities. Several programs in the IRA and BIL most notably the $ billion Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund also target those communities ( U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ; White House n.d. ) Beyond extreme heat climate change is associated with a host of other costly events. About one-third of the cost of major flood events since totaling $ billion has been attributed to climate change ( Davenport Burke and Diffenbaugh ) The western United States is currently having the worst drought in at least years requiring costly cutbacks in water use and endangering the functioning of the Lake Meade and Lake Powell reservoirs ( Wheeler et al. ; Park Williams Cook and Smerdon ; Borunda ) California and the Pacific Northwest have suffered devastating wildfires that blanketed cities under thick smoke undermining decades of air quality gains driven by the Clean Air Act and forcing preemptive blackouts to avoid igniting wildfires temporarily cutting off power to millions of customers ( Burke et al. ; Childs et al. ; Goss et al. ; Chediak ) Hurricane Ian struck Florida in September causing a coastal storm surge of up to feet and widespread inland flooding ; it will end up being one of the costliest storms on record with losses to residential and commercial property estimated at between $ billion and $ billion ( CoreLogic ; Paquette and Kornfield ) Unprecedented extreme events are exposing the weaknesses of aging U.S. infrastructure which was designed to operate in different climate conditions. Multiple infrastructural systems gradually built over many decades including electricity grids dams and irrigation systems coastal and riverine defenses roads and railways and ports will need to be quickly redesigned retrofitted or rebuilt to maintain their functionality in the changing climate And this investment in climate resilience will need to be made while also addressing the estimated $ trillion in deferred infrastructure investments | Chapter required over the next years just to restore existing infrastructure to working order. These costs will likely be borne by cities States and the Federal government along with specific infrastructure user groups such as electric utility customers or irrigation district members ( American Society of Civil Engineers ) The complexity of global supply chains means that extreme weather events around the world can ripple through international trade networks to affect American producers and consumers ( Woetzel et al. 2020a ) Pankratz and Schiller ( ) show how disruption from extreme heat and flooding in supplier locations is transmitted through supply chains to affect the revenues of customer firms. As climate change intensifies the chances of major disruptive weather events occurring simultaneously in multiple regions will increase causing larger and more systemic threats to supply chains. The summer of saw major heat and drought events in the United States Europe and China disrupt global production which prevented the transporting of agricultural products along rivers and shut down electricity generation for car and electronics factories and thus exacerbated supply chain challenges ( Ahmedzade et al. ; Bradsher and Dong ; Plume ) Crop failures and other effects of climate change could also exacerbate volatile conditions in fragile nation-states leading to instability and conflict with spillover effects to the United States via migration and escalation of local conflicts into national security concerns ( Missirian and Schlenker ; Benveniste Oppenheimer and Fleurbaey ; Mach et al. ; White House 2015a ) Studies have suggested that both the conflict in Syria and the flows of migrants from Central America have been exacerbated by climate-related stressors ( Ash and Obradovich ; Kelley et al. ; Lustgarten ) Recent massive flooding in Pakistan led to the inundation of one-third of the country by floodwaters internal displacement of million people massive disruption of the agricultural sector and a sovereign debt downgrade ( Lu ; Fitch Ratings ) By shifting where nonhuman species live and how they interact with humans climate change could even increase the risks of zoonotic disease spillovers ( Carlson et al. ) There is some evidence that climate change could also affect macroeconomic growth. Empirical investigations of the causal relationship between temperature fluctuations and gross domestic product ( GDP ) generally find negative effects from hotter temperatures particularly in poor and hot countries with some indications that this heat depresses growth rates ( Dell Jones and Olken ; Burke Hsiang and Miguel ; BastienOlvera Granella and Moore ) According to modeling and simulation studies of the macroeconomy negative effects of climate change on growth greatly increase both the magnitude and uncertainty of aggregate climate costs ( Moore and Diaz ; Newell Prest and Sexton ) but little is currently understood about the mechanisms connecting weather shocks and Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | long-term climate trends to macroeconomic variables. Plausible mechanisms include faster depreciation of the capital stock resulting from more intense extremes ( Hallegatte Hourcade and Dumas ; Otto et al. ) effects to productivity growth ( Ortiz-Bobea et al. ) or effects on the labor force that either depress the supply of labor or slow the accumulation of human capital via effects on learning ( Graff Zivin and Neidell ; Park et al. ) Improving empirical evidence and modeling capabilities in this area should be a high priority for future research Because climate change affects many aspects of well-being including those not traded in traditional markets the costs of climate change and losses of other natural capital are mismeasured by GDP ( Coyle ; Brunetti et al. ; Svartzman et al. ; NGFS-INSPIRE ) For example production that emits climate-change-causing greenhouse gases adds to GDP and so too do expenditures to adapt to climate damage or reduce emissions Meanwhile many important services that nature provides including reducing risks to health and protection from climate-driven extreme weather events are not reflected in GDP or are misattributed. Examples include the role urban trees play in providing shade and lowering heat extremes or the value of intact wetlands in reducing coastal storm damage. A more complete accounting system than GDP that tracks national wealth the stock of multiple forms of capital that produce flows of both market and nonmarket benefits could provide clearer macroeconomic information on climate change than exclusive reliance on GDP ( Agarwala and Coyle ; Dasgupta ) Including natural capital in measures of wealth would help track climate change costs and nature loss in ways that complement GDP and fill in important blind spots. This is why the Biden-Harris Administration has begun the process of rigorously measuring natural capital in a way that could inform a more complete picture of economic progress and climate change costs ( White House 2022c ) Climate Change and Financial Stability Climate change risks have historically been unpriced in private markets but as these risks become increasingly apparent and investors become more cognizant of the threat price adjustments for exposed assets would be expected. Property and long-lived physical infrastructure are particularly exposed and risk becoming stranded as climate conditions shift beyond their design standard thus causing investments to underperform or fail altogether. There is substantial evidence that current natural hazard risks are undercapitalized in property markets a setting that could produce sudden price shocks in response to new information that reveals underlying risks to buyers ( Bakkensen and Barrage ; Baldauf Garlappi and Yannelis ; Hino and Burke ; Gibson and Mullins ) | Chapter Certain financial instruments such as insurance contracts catastrophe bonds and mortgages that directly or indirectly price weather-related risks are also highly exposed to climate change. Rapid changes in asset prices or reassessments of the risks in response to a shifting climate could produce volatility and cascading instability in financial markets if not anticipated by regulators. Because of the interaction of long-lived investments and direct exposure to weather extremes property insurance against catastrophic natural hazards is at the forefront of climate change risk exposure and is already showing signs of strain in several states ( box ) Governments have typically stepped in to provide coverage when private insurers pull out from particularly risky areas or hazards. More than 2/6/2023 percent of flood policies in the United States are insured through the Federal National Flood Insurance Program ( NFIP ) and the number of policies in State-run insurance plans has more than doubled since ( Kousky et al ) Figure shows the long-run growth in State-run disaster insurance plans combined with a sharp rise following major hurricane strikes in and after which the largest insurance companies pulled out of Florida ( Leefeldt ) Although the State was able to move policies off its rolls and back into the private market in the period Florida s public insurer Florida Citizens is once again the largest property insurer in Figure Count of Policies under U.S. Residual Property Insurance Market with Geographic Breakdown for Policies in force millions Other % Massachusetts % California % Texas % North Carolina % Florida % Sources : Insurance Information Institute n.d. ; Citizens Property Insurance Corporation of Florida n.d Note : Data are linearly interpolated for the years and Policies from North Carolina are included only for ( percent of total policies in that year ) and later Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | Box Disaster Insurance in the Changing Climate : Challenges and Opportunities for Reform Even in the absence of climate change weather-related extremes such as flooding hurricanes and wildfires pose particular challenges to the insurance industry. Losses due to natural disasters are highly concentrated in space and time leaving insurers financially vulnerable to a major weather event ( Wagner ) Moreover the distribution of losses from these events is thick-tailed a statistical property meaning that expected losses are heavily influenced by extremely rare events the risks of which are difficult to quantify and price ( Conte and Kelly ; Kousky ) In the face of these challenges insurers must limit exposure by either exiting from or limiting activity in certain markets or by purchasing reinsurance which raises costs For these reasons even without climate change natural disasters hover on the edge of insurability. Without reforms to improve the functioning of insurance markets and reduce the costs of extremes ( for instance through zoning changes and building code improvements ) climate change could well make many more hazards uninsurable as the frequency and intensity of extremes increase. Climate change increases uncertainty particularly in the tails of the distribution that drive expected losses and raises the risk of completely unprecedented events for which there is no historical analog ( figure ) In the absence of high-quality trusted information on quickly evolving climate risks ambiguity in how to price extreme weather risks could lead insurers to leave certain markets altogether. Major insurers have already stopped offering hurricane wind coverage along the Gulf Coast and are increasingly exiting high fire-risk areas in California ( Sadasivam ; Elliott ; Schuppe ; Querolo and Sullivan ) Moreover the increasing likelihood that multiple catastrophic events could occur concurrently could raise costs or limit the availability of reinsurance A lack of access to insurance makes extreme events more costly because it slows economic recovery in affected communities and raises the probability of cascading financial hardships such as mortgage defaults and debt delinquencies ( Billings Gallagher and Ricketts ; Kousky ; Kousky Palim and Pan ; Otto et al. ) Therefore reforms to address challenges in hazard insurance markets should be a high priority for adaptation policy. A major issue in the U.S. disaster insurance system is that although climate change presents a systemic threat that simultaneously raises the risk of multiple perils ( wind fires and floods ) across the United States hazards are insured on a peril-by-peril basis and are regulated at the State level Alternative models such as those used in France Spain and New Zealand instead create broad diversified risk pools by mandating comprehensive multiperil catastrophe insurance while also providing an | Chapter explicit public reinsurance backstop that limits the exposure of private insurers ( Kousky ) These kinds of reforms will likely be increasingly important to stabilize insurance markets and expand access in the face of climate change the State after seeing a percent growth in policies during ( Florida Citizens ; Insurance Journal ) Other sharp growth in State insurance rolls in recent years has come from California where wildfire risk has led private insurers to pull out and the number of policies on the State s FAIR plan to increase by over percent since ( State of California ; Insurance Information Institute n.d. a ) These programs strain government finances because premiums generally do not cover payouts meaning that losses are covered with general tax revenue or debt issuance ( Hartwig and Wilkinson ) Even with these implicit public subsidies that effectively transfer risks to general State and Federal taxpayers the penetration of natural hazard insurance is low ; for instance only one-third of homes within FEMAdefined 100-year flood zones have flood insurance while fewer than percent outside these flood zones have it despite still being at risk of flooding ( Evan et al. ) Increased risks of delinquencies and defaults after disasters can have subsequent implications for property and mortgage markets particularly in the absence of insurance ( Kousky ; Billings Gallagher and Ricketts ; Kousky Palim and Pan ) Sastry ( ) suggests that mortgage lenders respond to the availability of federally backed flood insurance by requiring higher down payments when public insurance is either limited or not required changing the demographics of eligible home buyers Climate-change-driven weather extremes can have subsequent effects on State and municipal finances through several pathways beyond public insurance plans. First responding to climate change places additional burdens on local budgets which could cause serious financial hardships particularly in communities with smaller budgets. The need to either rebuild damaged infrastructure after disasters or upgrade existing infrastructure to prepare for climate change raises the cost burden for cities States and Tribes. Second repeated occurrences of climate extremes can threaten the property tax base and cause a decrease in revenues. For instance the McKinsey Global Institute has estimated that an extreme storm surge event in would cause damage equivalent to percent of the total market value of properties in Miami Dade County and as much as percent in Lee County which was recently inundated by feet of storm surge Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | from Hurricane Ian ( Woetzel et al. 2020b ; Paquette and Kornfield ) Residential real estate construction has been an important driver of growth in some U.S. coastal communities and declines in response to emerging climate risks could have serious implications for local economies employment and tax revenue ( Brunetti et al. ) Several researchers have found evidence that the municipal bond market is beginning to account for these risks in its pricing of loans to municipalities. Bonds for cities and towns in areas exposed to sea-level rise carry a premium with significantly larger effects on longer-maturing bonds implying that investors expect either a decline in cash flow or increasing volatility in exposed cities ( Painter ; Goldsmith-Pinkham Gustafson and Lewis ) Acharya and others ( ) find evidence for the pricing of extreme heat in municipal and corporate bonds beginning in about and also larger effects on longer-term bonds. Higher borrowing costs strain municipal finances and make it even more challenging for cities to finance disaster reconstruction or adaptive infrastructure investments without either raising taxes or diverting resources from other public services. In areas with local declines in tax revenue and rising climate change costs municipal bankruptcies may be increasingly likely. Jerch Kahn and Lin ( ) find evidence that hurricane strikes decrease tax revenues and raise the risk of municipal default over the following decade with the largest effects being felt in disadvantaged communities. In addition to losses to creditors bankruptcy costs are borne by current and future residents in the form of higher taxes and service fees ( Chapman Lu and Timmerhoff ) The Federal Fiscal Implications of Physical Climate Risk Climate change affects the Federal fiscal outlook via numerous pathways On the revenue side it threatens economic output leading to a lower tax base. One estimate by the White House s Office of Management and Budget ( White House 2022b ) suggests that the Federal Government could see percent lower annual tax revenue by as a result of the adverse effect of climate change on macroeconomic growth. Though some of this could be offset by increasing taxes on income or capital Barrage ( ) points out that the distortionary effects of these revenue-raising mechanisms can be substantial increasing climate change costs by up to about percent Ongoing research within the Biden-Harris Administration is expanding the capacity of the Federal Government to integrate the modeling of both the physical and transition risks of climate change into macroeconomic forecasting in order to better explain and plan for these effects ( White House 2022f ) On the expenditure side many Federal operations are being affected by the changing climate. Though these effects are too extensive to enumerate in detail here this section briefly reviews four primary pathways by which | Chapter the Federal Government is exposed to physical climate risk : risk assumption the operation and financing of climate-exposed assets the provision of national public goods and social safety net programs Risk Assumption By fully or partially assuming certain types of risk the Federal Government is able to attract private investment and support production across broad sections of the economy. One of the most significant examples of this is the Federal role in housing : Through the government-sponsored enterprises ( GSEs ) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac which are privately owned but federally chartered and are currently in conservatorship and Federal agencies ( e.g. the Department of Housing and Urban Development Ginnie Mae and the Department of Veterans Affairs ) the Federal Government guarantees mortgages and securities backed by mortgages. Together the GSEs and Ginnie Mae accounted for more than percent ( $ trillion ) of total outstanding mortgage debt in ( Urban Institute ) The growing damage from hurricanes storm surges and wildfires has implications for defaults recoveries and other key cost drivers and by extension for Federal loss exposure ( Kousky Palim and Pan ; Rossi ; Woetzel et al. 2020b ) There is evidence that private lenders are shifting climate-exposed loans into the GSEs which may bear a substantial share of the increasing climate risk in the absence of policies that manage Federal exposure ( Ouazad and Kahn ) In addition to its support for the housing finance system the Federal Government also directly assumes risk through various insurance programs Flooding is the most frequent and most costly natural disaster in the United States and the Federal Government underwrites essentially all home flood insurance policies via the NFIP ( Federal Emergency Management Agency ; Kousky et al. ; Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration ) Climate change will increase costs from flooding due to both more intense rainfall and higher sea levels which worsen flooding from storm surges and slow drainage in low-lying coastal areas. The NFIP is already at risk of financial insolvency ; it has a debt to the Treasury of $ billion despite the fact that Congress canceled $ billion of its debt in ( Federal Emergency Management Agency n.d. ; Environmental Law Institute ) Without fundamental reforms of the U.S. disaster insurance system and of the Federal Government s role in managing these risks ( box ) these losses will continue to grow ( White House 2022b ) Climate-Exposed Assets The Federal Government owns and operates critical climate-sensitive infrastructure most significantly dams irrigation systems and major flood Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | defenses such as river and coastal levees along with buildings military installations and other physical assets that may be at risk from climate change ( White House 2022b ; U.S. Department of Defense 2021a ) These assets were built over many decades at substantial cost and are now critical foundations for communities and regional economies across the United States The Bureau of Reclamation ( ) is the Nation s largest wholesale water supplier operating reservoirs and maintaining dams that supply water to about percent of U.S. residents as well as supplying hydropower and water for agricultural irrigation. The functioning of some of these systems will be challenged by the changing hydroclimate which is already bringing both more intense rainfall and more droughts including the persistent megadrought currently hitting western States ( Kao et al. ) The Central Valley Project which supplies water to cities and farmers in California has slashed its water deliveries to cities and has completely cut water to many farmers in of the last years ( James ) The project s long-term operation is further threatened by sea-level rise which will increase the salinity of the California Delta and eventually render its water unfit for drinking and irrigation ( State of California ; Fleenor et al ) Water levels in Lake Meade and Lake Powell reservoirs are close to the critical threshold below which they will cease to produce electricity ( Wheeler et al. ) The costs of either maintaining water and power services from Federal facilities in the changing climate or decommissioning projects and finding alternative solutions for dependent communities has not been fully estimated The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers ( n.d. ) is tasked with building certain public infrastructure projects that manage the risks of flooding including riverine and coastal levees and flood control dams throughout the country. More intense rainfall events higher sea levels and stronger storms are expected to increase the costs of maintaining existing flood protection and expanding it to newly at-risk areas. The costs resulting from climate change for Federal flood control could be extremely high. Future expenditures will depend on high-level strategic decisions that have yet to be made regarding what role flood protection infrastructure will play in managing growing coastal and inland flood risks. For example the Corps of Engineers has released a feasibility study for a plan to protect the New York metropolitan area from coastal storms. This plan which includes storm surge barriers floodwalls levees seawalls and other measures would cost upward of $ billion with percent borne by the Federal Government ( New York District ) | Chapter The Provision of National Public Goods A central function of the Federal Government is to provide national public goods most critically national defense which accounted for about percent of Federal discretionary spending in ( CBO 2022a ) Climate change poses threats to U.S. national security which raises questions about its implications for defense spending and the Federal budget ( U.S Government Accountability Office ; National Intelligence Council ) The Department of Defense has identified climate change as a factor in national security planning and as an urgent and growing threat to U.S security ( White House 2015b ; Department of Defense 2021b ) Climate change effects are expected to increase global tensions as nations compete for scarcer resources threatening health and human rights and triggering conflict and mass migration ( White House 2022e ) A second aspect of Federal public goods provision that is substantively affected by climate change is the stewardship of natural resources public lands and biodiversity. By altering the climatic environment to which ecosystems are adapted climate change threatens to degrade ecosystem functioning and species survival ( U.S. Global Change Research Program ) The additional costs of managing public lands in this rapidly shifting environment are not fully known. An example of costs that have been partially quantified are annual Federal wildland fire suppression expenditures which on average have more than tripled since partly driven by intense climate-change-driven droughts in the West ( CBO 2022b ) Moore and others ( ) estimate that direct spending on biodiversity conservation via the Endangered Species Act could increase by percent ( roughly $ billion ) by as unmitigated climate change pushes an estimated one in six species toward extinction ( Urban ) The Programs of the Social Safety Net The various Federal programs known as the social safety net provide benefits and assistance to maintain a minimum level of well-being for the U.S population. Climate change could increase the burden on these programs through a number of pathways most notably health-related expenditures and assistance for disaster response and recovery Federal health programs namely Medicare and Medicaid represented percent of total national health expenditures in or about $ trillion ( Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services ) Several studies have estimated that health-related risks constitute the largest fraction of climate-change-related damage with particularly severe effects on those over years of age who are much more likely to be treated through government programs ( Rennert et al. ; Hsiang et al. ; Carleton et al ) A White House study estimated annual Federal health care costs from Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | the effects of climate change on air quality Valley Fever southwestern dust and wildfires by at between $ million and $ billion ( White House 2022b ) An additional unquantified but likely much higher cost would arise from hospitalizations resulting from extreme heat conditions such as dehydration renal failure and stroke ( Green et al. ; Wondmagegn et al. ) Federal programs play a critical role in supporting communities affected by natural disasters. The Congressional Budget Office ( CBO ) estimates that the expected annual loss from hurricane winds and stormrelated flooding is $ billion or percent of GDP with annual costs to the Federal budget of $ billion through disaster assistance and NFIP claims ( CBO ) However Deryugina ( ) shows that disasters have far larger fiscal implications due to increases in social insurance payments such as Medicaid disability insurance and income maintenance programs which persist for years after a storm hits. The Federal Government supports postdisaster response and recovery not just through the immediate FEMA response but also through low-interest loans from the Small Business Administration and Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery funding from the Department of Housing and Urban Development to aid rebuilding disaster-affected communities ( Howe et al ; U.S. Small Business Administration n.d. ) Market Failures and Distortions That Slow Adaptive Adjustments and Policy Responses As described above shifting weather risks present incentives to private actors to adjust so as to reduce the negative effects of climate change and take advantage of any opportunities it offers. Indeed there is evidence that these adjustments are already happening in prices that seem to be starting to account for climate change risks ( Keys and Mulder ; Bernstein Gustafson and Lewis ; Baldauf Garlappi and Yannelis ; Severen Costello and Desch nes ) as well as other evidence that households and local governments are altering practices in response to or in anticipation of the changing climate ( Berrang-Ford et al. ) Private adaptive adjustments occurring in the United States are subject to market imperfections along with informational institutional legal and financial constraints that could limit or slow adaptation. Public adaptation policy should target these barriers to enable faster and more effective private action. This section reviews major market failures imperfections and distortions that are relevant to managing physical climate risks and describes the policy tools that can address them | Chapter Imperfect Information on Physical Climate Risks Adaptation to the changing climate requires incorporating information about how shifting weather patterns will alter the distribution of future weather risks. This is particularly important for decisions that are highly sensitive to climate change through long-lived investments or exposure to low-probability high-consequence tail risks. A substantial body of literature indicates that individuals consistently underestimate or discount the probabilities of catastrophic events a phenomenon that can lead to low rates of disaster insurance coverage and underinvestment in risk reduction ( Wagner ; Bakkensen and Barrage ; Royal and Walls ) Information on climate risks that is of high quality and is trusted decision-relevant and widely disseminated is foundational for adaptation planning and is urgently needed. Yet it is now largely missing. Modeling tools used to understand the global climate system termed general circulation models are most accurate over large spatial scales and long time frames. Different more fine-tuned tools are needed to make information on specific risks in particular places over short to medium time frames widely available to stakeholders making adaptation decisions ( Fiedler et al. ; Pitman et al. ; American Society of Civil Engineers ) Governments already support a global network of satellites in situ observing systems weather stations modeling facilities and technical workforces that produce public weather forecasts. Similarly as climate change information becomes an essential complement of weather data governments will need to play a role in funding the production of and access to this essential public good to support climate-informed decisionmaking by many actors. This includes not just developing the ability of climate science to provide better information at the spatial and temporal scale at which decisions are made but also supporting the training of highly skilled workers who can translate and disseminate this information to the public and private actors seeking to use it ( Fiedler et al. ; Kopp ) The Biden-Harris Administration has begun this work through development of the Climate Mapping for Resilience and Adaptation tool ( CMRA n.d. ) Information Asymmetries Information asymmetries occur when one party in a transaction has more information than another which can lead to price distortions and market failure ( Akerlof ) In the climate risk context information asymmetries could arise when buyers and sellers have varying knowledge about an asset s climate change exposure such as a property s propensity to flood or wildfire risk. In this regard Keenan and Bradt ( ) and Ouazad and Kahn ( ) find evidence of information asymmetries operating in coastal mortgage markets with lenders shifting risks of flooding-exposed properties Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | onto Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac or to other lenders that have less knowledge of local risk exposure Mandatory disclosure laws are one tool governments can use to correct information asymmetries. These require parties to share particular types of information relevant to asset valuation. A proposed rule by the U.S Securities and Exchange Commission ( ) would add climate-related risks to the required disclosures of publicly traded companies. Disclosure laws related to property transactions are governed at the State level and vary widely in the degree to which they require sellers to disclose climaterelated risks ( particularly flooding ) to buyers ( Hino and Burke ; Natural Resources Defense Council n.d. ) Only a handful of States notably Louisiana and Texas have strong flood disclosure regulations to protect buyers while have no disclosure requirements at all ( Federal Emergency Management Agency ) Building codes and standards can be another way to protect buyers from information asymmetries in property markets. Details of building construction that determine how vulnerable a structure is to water wind and wildfire hazards can be highly technical and not easily understood by home buyers. This creates a market failure if more resilient but also more expensive construction can not command a premium because these qualities are not easily observable. By setting common minimum standards for all construction governments can prevent a race to the bottom in building quality ( White House 2022f ) Adverse selection in insurance markets where buyers know more about their risk than providers leading more risky individuals to opt into insurance at a given price is another form of information asymmetry There is some evidence of adverse selection operating in U.S. disaster insurance markets where those with a lower flood risk ( e.g. from an elevated house ) are less likely to purchase coverage ( Wagner ; Bradt Kousky and Wing ) In the absence of corrective policies adverse selection can lead to an unraveling of insurance markets as insurers raise rates to cover the higher risk driving lower-risk individuals from the marketplace and further concentrating insured risks. This market failure historically has been addressed through purchase mandates that solve the adverse selection problem by requiring everyone to participate in insurance markets thereby pooling the risk. Insurance mandates can also improve welfare in settings without adverse selection but where individuals systematically underestimate their exposure to a catastrophic loss ( Wagner ) Externalities and Public Goods Although many adaptation actions are private goods that result from individual households and firms weighing their own costs and benefits important | Chapter public adaptation goods will also be underprovided without government action ( Mendelsohn ) Examples include building infrastructure for coastal protection ; expanding the tree cover for urban cooling and other nature-based forms of climate adaptation ; basic research relevant to adaptation such as developing improved crop varieties ; and the protection of species or ecosystems threatened by the changing climate. But unlike greenhouse gas mitigation which is a global public good many public adaptation benefits are more local and therefore may be best provided by State Tribal and local governments. The Federal Government may still have a role to play in coordinating supplying information and reducing transaction costs In addition to pure public goods some private adaptations may involve externalities that require collective action by communities or higher levels of government. This is particularly the case for environmental goods and natural resource management where preexisting inefficiencies related to the lack of established property rights can be exacerbated by climate change Examples include the spillover effects of coastal protection onto neighbors and the increasing drawing down of open-access aquifers to meet higher crop water requirements resulting from warmer temperatures ( Beasley and Dundas ; Gopalakrishnan et al. ; Rosa et al. ) Threats to biodiversity are similarly characterized by market failures and problems of public good provision. Though habitat conversion pollution and invasive species are primary drivers of species endangerment climate change further stresses threatened species and exacerbates these drivers ( Tilman et al. ; Moore et al. ; Hashida et al. ) In these settings reforms to more sustainably manage natural resources will have ancillary benefits in reducing climate damage and can be thought of as an important tool for managing climate risks Credit Constraints A number of adaptive actions require upfront capital investments that will pay off gradually. Examples range from homeowners installing airconditioners to farmers adopting irrigation to manage increasing heat and droughts to major community projects to slow or prevent coastal erosion If actors are unable to finance these investments at competitive interest rates they will be underprovided relative to an optimal level meaning that governments may play an important role in alleviating credit constraints to enable adaptation. Examples of relevant government programs include targeted subsidies for home efficiency upgrades such as certain provisions in the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and the Inflation Reduction Act ( box ) This will be particularly compelling for populations that have been historically underserved by financial institutions and for financing adaptations Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | where there is a strong social interest in ensuring adaptation to alleviate climate-related risks Credit constraints do not just apply to individuals and business but may also limit the ability of States and municipalities to fund major public adaptation projects. Most States require voter approval for general obligation bonds backed by future tax revenues or have other constitutional limits on long-term debt issuance constraints that do not apply to the Federal Government ( Kiewiet and Szakaty ) The costs of major infrastructure projects to manage growing climate risks may be beyond the fiscal reach of many local governments particularly if climate risks are simultaneously jeopardizing future tax revenue. Low-cost loans or grants from the Federal Government may therefore be important sources of financing for municipalities and States seeking to make major investments to reduce climate risks a recent example being pilot grants for voluntary relocation of Tribal communities made by the U.S. Department of the Interior ( ) Moral Hazard Moral hazard refers to a phenomenon in insurance markets whereby access to insurance lowers incentives for risk-reducing or risk-avoiding behavior increasing overall hazard costs. Settings with pervasive moral hazard can see higher insurance premiums or an unraveling of private insurance markets. Other programs that shift the costs of hazards whether through subsidized insurance publicly provided protection or loan guarantees can unless carefully structured also create moral hazard distortions. Annan and Schlenker ( ) estimate that the moral hazard associated with subsidized crop insurance has reduced the incentives of farmers to adapt to extreme heat and has led to a higher sensitivity to heat in insured crops. Baylis and Boomhower ( ) find that the implicit subsidy from public wildland fire fighting can reach percent of home values in low-density wildfire-prone areas. Similar indirect subsidies for building in flood-prone areas have likely led to more people and property in these risky areas ( Panjwani ) The moral hazard problem does not only apply to individuals ; it can also apply to State and local governments. Many decisions relevant to reducing the costs of weather-related disasters including zoning building codes and land-use management are made at the State or local level ( figure ) State and local governments making these decisions see benefits in growth and tax revenues but they are shielded from the full costs of risky development because of the Federal Government s assumption of disaster risk through the NFIP and disaster relief programs. Several States have seen rapid development in areas exposed to coastal flooding by sea-level rise with local governments permitting two or three times more construction in these risky areas than in safer regions ( Climate Central and Zillow ) | Chapter Reforming Federal programs and private insurance contracts to incentivize or require risk-reducing activities or to place a higher share of costs on those undertaking the risk ( e.g. through higher deductibles ) can help mitigate issues of moral hazard ( Kousky ) Four Potential Pillars of the Federal Adaptation Strategy and Major Policy Opportunities Adaptation to climate change is characterized by complex governance across multiple scales with relevant decisionmaking operating at the national State Tribal and local levels ( figure ) Given the complex regulatory and planning processes relevant to managing climate risks and the local nature of many adaptation benefits this nested governance structure may be appropriate ( Dietz Ostrom and Stern ) Federal adaptation policy needs to be developed with an appreciation of the multilayered complex regulatory systems that characterize adaptation-relevant policy areas. This final sec2/6/2023 tion outlines four broad cross-cutting roles for further Federal adaptation efforts to support specific policymaking across these many issue areas and it highlights major opportunities for action in each area Producing and Disseminating Knowledge about Climate Risk As firms local governments and individuals increasingly seek to account for climate change in their planning and investments actionable information will be a necessary input. From home buyers deciding where to move to local governments planning new stormwater drainage to businesses looking to disclose their climate risk exposure actors across the economy will Local Trade Defense Immigration Public lands and natural resource management Health and safety Disaster aid and recovery Regulation of insurance markets Real estate disclosure Building codes State Land use planning and zoning Federal Infrastructure planning and regulation Figure Governance of Climate Risk Is Complex and Multiscale Sources : Howe et al. ( ) ; CEA calculations Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | require high-quality trusted and accessible climate impact information This is essential informational infrastructure technical information produced at high fixed costs but with broad applicability and value. Thanks to strong Federal support the United States is a global leader in climate science. But the modeling tools used to understand the global climate system are not yet designed to deliver the decision-specific information needed by most stakeholders to manage climate risk ( Fiedler et al. ; Pitman et al ; ASCE ) Major opportunity : invest in the Federal capacity for catastrophic climate risk modeling. The U.S. government has an opportunity to lead the world in developing a high-performance public capability for catastrophic climate risk modeling. Managing evolving climate risks will require new scientific approaches that combine insights from climate models with other tools such as statistical modeling and detailed engineering data to produce decision-relevant climate information tailored to the needs of stakeholders across the United States ( Pitman et al. ) Catastrophe modeling is used in the insurance industry to understand the risks of extreme events but it is done by just a few companies is expensive to access and can be difficult to evaluate ( ModEx n.d. ) Given both the growing role of the public sector in absorbing climate risk and the need for many actors ranging from State and local governments to homeowners to general businesses to understand their exposure information that is publicly available credible and from trusted sources is urgently needed. The U.S. government has the opportunity to build on its existing foundation of excellence in climate modeling and Earth system sciences to develop this critical capacity Long-Term Planning for the Climate Transition Long-term forward-looking planning that anticipates coming climate change is necessary to avoid unnecessary losses and destabilizing effects Neumann and others ( ) estimate that proactive adaptations that anticipate future climate can reduce the costs of climate change for the United States road rail and coastal infrastructure by a factor of between and by compared with purely reactive adaptation ; Diaz ( ) finds a similar magnitude of savings for forward-looking adaptation for global coastal defenses The Federal Government in a number of its capacities from the Social Security Administration to the management of National Parks has a particular role in the long-term stewardship of U.S. assets. It regularly makes decisions that will have consequences for decades if not centuries into the future. Planning across all affected Federal agencies should recognize the effects of climate change that are already apparent and are expected to intensify well into the future. Exposure to climate hazards should be incorporated | Chapter into an agency s enterprise risk management process. For example the U.S Department of Defense ( 2021b ) is planning to integrate climate risk into all relevant hazard threat assessments In addition high-level strategic planning will be essential to identify critical risks that climate change poses for agencies missions high-priority opportunities to address these risks and the additional resources or legislative changes that may be required to realize these opportunities. Current and future climate change effects may necessitate difficult trade-offs involving many stakeholders with conflicting interests. Timely work to identify principles and priorities that will guide agencies will improve coordination identify necessary reforms that may take a long time to implement and ultimately lower costs and improve effectiveness a motivation behind the ongoing agency climate adaptation planning process ( box ) Clarity at the Federal level regarding priorities for funding public adaptation efforts is important for driving action by State and local governments. Estimated costs just for protection from sea-level rise are large and are likely far beyond the means of many coastal communities ( Diaz ) Other costs of responding to droughts wildfires and inland floods will further strain government budgets. As described above Federal loans and grants will be essential to alleviate credit constraints for State and local governments but these resources are necessarily limited. Establishing clear funding priorities and resolving uncertainty over which protection costs the Federal Government will finance can assist State and local actors in their own planning for the climate transition Major opportunity : use access to Federal funds to incentivize subnational adaptive reforms. Many policies critical to building long-term resilience to natural disasters are controlled at the State or local level ( figure ) However Federal funds flowing through States both directly and indirectly finance long-lived climate-exposed infrastructure and development projects ( CBO ) If physical climate risks are not fully integrated into agency enterprise risk management these investments risk underperforming and becoming stranded. Similarly decisions to convert land subject to wildfires or flooding to developed uses implicates the Federal Government via its various risk-absorbing functions such as mortgage guarantees flood insurance and disaster management and response. Reforms to zoning building codes insurance markets and residential disclosures can all have major benefits in reducing the costs of disasters Climate-relevant Federal investments can be tied to the enactment of adaptive reforms that will protect both affected communities and the Federal budget. For example FEMA has proposed reforms of the NFIP to Congress that would if enacted condition participation in the program on the development of community-level flood disclosure requirements for property transactions ( U.S. Department of Homeland Security ) while Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | provisions of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law lower the non-Federal share of certain grants for transportation projects prioritized in a State s Resilience Improvement Plan ( U.S. Department of Transportation ) Ensuring the Accurate Pricing of Climate Risk Provided that actionable and credible information on climate risk is available prices would be expected to adjust sending accurate signals to actors to reallocate investment and production in response to and in anticipation of the changing climate. However market failures arising from information asymmetries or misaligned incentives can distort these signals and require a policy response. One role of the Federal adaptation strategy should be to identify and correct these market failures to enable stronger market signals that would guide adaptive decisions over the longer term. Specific market failures relevant to adaptation and policy tools to address them were discussed in the previous section ; they include information provision disclosure requirements building standards and insurance purchase mandates. An important example is the recent reform of pricing in the NFIP termed Risk Rating which prices policies based on individualized flood risk assessments while continuing to provide discounts for investments by individuals or communities that lower flood costs ( CRS ) Market mechanisms can play an important role in allocating resources efficiently and sending price signals to market actors on the scarcity of resources. In places where markets are missing or incomplete climatechange-induced scarcity could exacerbate existing distortions meaning that reforms to expand market access or establish property rights over common-pool resources could lower total costs one example being the allocation of water use in California ( Arellano-Gonzalez et al. ) Even in the absence of markets using mechanisms such as auctions to allocate resources cost-effectively could be a useful strategy to manage scarcity under climate change ( Hagerty and Leonard ) Major opportunity : develop quality and transparency standards for climate data and the modeling used in market transactions. An important part of supporting the integration of physical climate risks into market prices will be oversight of the quality of climate information being used. Pricing climate risk requires the use of specialized modeling tools and evaluating the quality of this information is a technical and highly specialized skill Use of proprietary models of natural hazard risk that can not be evaluated by the expert community as an input into significant regulatory decisions has caused tensions in the past particularly in the insurance industry ( Xu Webb and Evans ) Developing minimum standards and reporting requirements for the climate data used to inform significant investment decisions could help build trust ensure quality and enable broader adoption | Chapter This is particularly important when insurance contracts are leveraged into more complex financial instruments such as catastrophe bonds and other insurance-linked securities or when used as input into scenario exercises central banks are beginning to use to evaluate climate risks to the financial system ( Insurance Information Institute n.d. b ; Braun and Kousky ; U.S. Federal Reserve ; Financial Stability Board ) Oversight and evaluation of the Earth system models used for significant economic or regulatory decisionmaking could be important in preventing natural disasters from triggering more systemic failures across the financial system Protecting the Vulnerable Climate change is expected to increase weather-related hazards for many Americans but its effects will not likely be felt equally ( see box above ) Low-income and disadvantaged communities are both more exposed to climate effects ( e.g. through working in industries exposed to extreme heat such as agriculture and construction ) and lack assets that can be drawn on to smooth the costs of weather-related disasters. In the absence of policies addressing the needs of low-income and marginalized communities preexisting vulnerabilities such as inadequate health care poor-quality or overcrowded housing and food insecurity will likely interact with climate change effects to worsen inequalities. Addressing these underlying vulnerabilities and developing policies targeted at disadvantaged populations should be a critical part of an effective U.S. adaptation strategy building on the robust set of existing programs within the Biden-Harris Administration targeted at low-income and disadvantaged communities ( boxes and ) As prices adjust to reflect changing climate risks this could present challenges for low-income communities for whom higher prices are particularly burdensome. For instance low-income households are already less likely to have flood insurance and almost percent of policyholders in FEMA-defined year floodplains pay more than percent of their income for flood insurance premiums and fees ( U.S. Department of Homeland Security ) To the extent possible rather than restricting price adjustments which would blunt the incentive for private risk reduction and increase risks over the long term policies should seek to address these adverse distributional effects via targeted lump sum transfers. More generally policies that seek to accelerate income growth and increase access to wealth-building opportunities for the poorest Americans should be thought of as broadly adaptive. Although by no means the main goal of programs that may be primarily focused on educational opportunities housing affordability or poverty alleviation by increasing resources available to the most vulnerable that can be drawn on to manage the effects of climate shocks Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | they should lower overall vulnerability and decrease climate costs over the long term Major opportunity : develop criteria for public adaptation funding that reflect the social value of investments. Criteria for the prioritization and evaluation of public adaptation projects that accurately reflect the social benefits of these investments should be developed. Historically public investments in flood defenses or community risk reductions have used the value of protected property as a key metric in evaluating project benefits ( McGee ) However inequality in property values and ownership in the United States reflects decades of exclusion of racial minorities from homeownership and public investment ( Rothstein ) Evaluating the benefits of climate protections solely using property values is unlikely to capture the full multidimensional benefits of these projects and risks perpetuating these historical injustices and exacerbating differences in vulnerability ( Martinich et al. ) Additional criteria that capture differential vulnerability and variations in the extent to which communities are able to self-insure and recover from damage could be developed to assess project outcomes Major opportunity : reenvisioning social insurance under climate change. The increasing frequency and intensity of climate-change-related disasters along with the disruptions and dislocations required to adjust to changing conditions will likely challenge the policies and programs that spread risks and protect the vulnerable as never before. Understanding the burden this will place on traditional social insurance programs in the United States and identifying reforms to strengthen the social safety net is essential in this era of climate change. In addition a process for reimagining the public role in catastrophe management and social solidarity in the face of rising risks is also urgently needed. The United States current approach managing catastrophic perils in a piecemeal way with fiscally unstable public insurance programs will only become more problematic as climate change continues. U.S. policymakers should seriously consider models from other countries where governments act as backstop reinsurers capping catastrophic losses in the private sector to crowd in private financing while also spreading the risk broadly through mandated natural disaster coverage ( Kousky ) Conclusion The United States is making historic investments that will transform the American energy system to address the challenge of climate change and meet President Biden s goal of halving U.S. greenhouse gas emissions by These investments are central to the global effort to rein in emissions and limit the effects of climate change | Chapter Even with the massive shift already under way in global energy production models show the climate will continue changing for decades ( IPCC ; Meinshausen et al. ) Shifting weather patterns will likely subject communities to unprecedented extremes making the management of weather risks and natural disasters increasingly difficult. A large body of literature as well as the mounting costs of climate-change-associated extreme events shows that the U.S. economy is sensitive to the effects of climate change Without forward-looking adaptive planning that anticipates changing conditions climate costs will very likely keep growing compounding risks to infrastructural social economic and financial systems across the United States Managing the risks of climate change is a complex challenge across multiple policy areas characterized by varying market failures and nested governance structures. However the particular capacities authorities and interests of the Federal Government mean that it should play an essential role in leading adaptation policy development and structuring the responses of subnational and private actors to emerging climate risk. An effective Federal adaptation strategy includes producing and disseminating knowledge about climate risk long-term planning for the climate transition ensuring accurate pricing of climate risks and protecting the vulnerable. Managing the risks and consequences of the warming planet along with continued efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions will allow the Nation to face the climate challenges of the 21st century Opportunities for Better Managing Weather Risk in the Changing Climate | References Chapter Acemoglu D. D. Autor and D. Lyle. Women War and Wages : The Effect of Female Labor Supply on the Wage Structure at Midcentury. Journal of Political Economy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/383100 ACLU ( American Civil Liberties Union ) How Artificial Intelligence Can Deepen Racial and Economic Inequities. By Olga Akselrod. https : //www.aclu.org/ news/privacy-technology/how-artificial-intelligence-can-deepen-racial-andeconomic-inequities Armstrong M. The Market for Smart Home Devices Is Expected to Boom Over the Next Years. World Economic Forum. https : //www.weforum.org/ agenda/2022/04/homes-smart-tech-market Atasoy H. The Effects of Broadband Internet Expansion on Labor Market Outcomes. ILR Review no. https : //doi.org/10.1177/001979391306600202 Auffhammer M. P. Baylis and C. Hausman. Climate Change Is Projected to Have Severe Impacts on the Frequency and Intensity of Peak Electricity Demand Across the United States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. https : //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1613193114 Bank of England. Key Elements of the Biennial Exploratory Scenario : Financial Risks from Climate Change. https : //www.bankofengland.co.uk/ stress-testing/2021/key-elements-2021-biennial-exploratory-scenariofinancial-risks-climate-change Bastien-Olvera B. and F. Moore. Use and Non-Use Value of Nature and the Social Cost of Carbon. Nature Sustainability no. : https : //doi org/10.1038/s41893-020-00615-0 Blau F. and L. Kahn. Female Labor Supply : Why Is the United States Falling Behind ? American Economic Review no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/aer.103.3.251 BLS ( U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Number and Percent of Eldercare Providers Who Were Parents of Household Children Under Age by Sex and Selected Characteristics Averages for the Combined Years https : // www.bls.gov/news.release/elcare.t09.htm Employment by Detailed Occupation. https : //www.bls.gov/emp/tables/ emp-by-detailed-occupation.htm 2022a. Employee Benefits in the United States. https : //www.bls.gov/ncs/ebs/ benefits/2022/home.htm 2022b. Computer and Information Technology Occupations. https : //www.bls gov/ooh/computer-and-information-technology/home.htm Blunden J. State of the Climate : Carbon Dioxide Tops PPM. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. https : //www.climate.gov/newsfeatures/understanding-climate/2013-state-climate-carbon-dioxide-tops400-ppm Bolt J. and J. van Zanden. Maddison Style Estimates of the Evolution of the World Economy. Groningen Growth and Development Centre. http : //reparti free.fr/maddi2020.pdf Botzen W. J. van den Bergh and L. Bouwer. Climate Change and Increased Risk for the Insurance Sector : A Global Perspective and an Assessment for the Netherlands. Natural Hazards : https : //doi.org/10.1007/ s11069-009-9404-1 Brunetti C. B. Dennis D. Gates D. Hancock D. Ignell E. Kiser G. Kotta A. Kovner R. Rosen and N. Tabor. Climate Change and Financial Stability. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/ econres/notes/feds-notes/climate-change-and-financial-stability-20210319.html Brynjolfsson E. and G. Petropoulos. The Coming Productivity Boom. MIT Technology Review. https : //www.technologyreview.com/2021/06/10/1026008/ the-coming-productivity-boom/ Burke A. A. Okrent and K. Hale. The State of U.S. Science and Engineering National Science Foundation. https : //ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/ nsb20221/u-s-and-global-research-and-development Burke M. S. Hsiang and E. Miguel. Global Non-Linear Effect of Temperature on Economic Production. Nature : https : //doi.org/10.1038/ nature15725 Capka J. Celebrating Years : The Eisenhower Interstate Highway System. U.S. Department of Transportation. https : //www7.transportation.gov/testimony/ celebrating-50-years-eisenhower-interstate-highway-system Carleton T. A. Jina M. Delgado M. Greenstone T. Houser S. Hsiang A. Hultgren R Kopp K. McCusker I. Nath J. Rising A. Rode H. Kwon Seo A. Viaene J Yuan and A. Tianbo Zhang. Valuing the Global Mortality Consequences of Climate Change Accounting for Adaptation Costs and Benefits. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/qje/ qjac020 Carter S. S. Gartner M. Haines A. Olmstead R. Sutch and G. Wright eds. Historical Statistics of the United States. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. https : //hsus.cambridge.org/HSUSWeb/HSUSEntryServlet | References Climate Central and Zillow. Ocean at the Door : New Homes and the Rising Sea. http : //assets.climatecentral.org/pdfs/Nov2018_Report_OceanAtTheDoor pdf ? pdf = OceanAtTheDoor-Report Council of Economic Advisers. Economic Report of the President. https : //www whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/2015-ERP.pdf Council of Economic Advisers and Office of Management and Budget. ClimateRelated Macroeconomic Risks and Opportunities. https : //www.whitehouse gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/CEA_OMB_Climate_Macro_WP_2022430pm.pdf Czernich N. O. Falck T. Kretschmer and L. Woessmann. Broadband Infrastructure and Economic Growth. Economic Journal no. : https : //doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0297.2011.02420.x DeLong B. Slouching Towards Utopia : An Economic History of the Twentieth Century. New York : Basic Books. https : //www.basicbooks.com/titles/jbradford-delong/slouching-towards-utopia/9780465019595/ Dieppe A. The Broad-Based Productivity Slowdown in Seven Charts. World Bank Blogs. https : //blogs.worldbank.org/developmenttalk/ broad-based-productivity-slowdown-seven-charts Digital Competition Expert Panel. Unlocking Digital Competition. https : //assets publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ file/785547/unlocking_digital_competition_furman_review_web.pdf Elliott D. Insurances Woes in Coastal Louisiana Make Hurricane Recovery Difficult. National Public Radio July https : //www.npr org/2022/07/27/1113639292/ insurances-woes-in-coastal-louisiana-make-hurricane-recovery-difficult File T. Computer and Internet Use in the United States : Population Characteristics. U.S. Census Bureau. https : //www.census.gov/content/dam/ Census/library/publications/2013/demo/p20-569.pdf Financial Stability Oversight Council. Report on Climate-Related Financial Risk. U.S. Department of the Treasury. https : //home.treasury.gov/system/files/261/ FSOC-Climate-Report.pdf FRED ( Federal Reserve Economic Data ) Gross Private Domestic Investment ( GPDI ) Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. https : //fred.stlouisfed.org/series/ GPDI Gelzinis G. and G. Steele. Climate Change Threatens the Stability of the Financial System. Center for American Progress. https : //www americanprogress.org/article/ climate-change-threatens-stability-financial-system/ Goldin C. The Quiet Revolution That Transformed Women s Employment Education and Family. AEA Papers and Proceedings https : //scholar harvard.edu/files/goldin/files/the_quiet_revolution_that_transformed_womens_ employment_education_and_family.pdf References | Goldin C. and L. Katz. Why the United States Led in Education : Lessons from Secondary School Expansion to In Human Capital and Institutions edited by D. Eltis F. Lewis and K. Sokoloff. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. https : //scholar.harvard.edu/lkatz/publications/ why-united-states-led-education-lessons-secondary-schoolexpansion-1910-1940 Goodwin D. The Way We Won : America s Economic Breakthrough During World War II. American Prospect. https : //prospect.org/health/ way-won-america-s-economic-breakthrough-world-war-ii/ Gordon R. The Rise and Fall of American Growth. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. https : //press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691147727/ the-rise-and-fall-of-american-growth Graff Zivin J. and M. Neidell. The Impact of Pollution on Worker Productivity. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/ aer.102.7.3652 Groningen Growth and Development Centre. No date. Maddison Database https : //www.rug.nl/ggdc/historicaldevelopment/maddison/releases/ maddison-database-2010 Guiso L. Sapienza P. and L. Zingales. Does Culture Affect Economic Outcomes ? Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //pubs aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.20.2.23 Hernandez R. Online Job Search : The New Normal. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. https : //www.bls.gov/opub/mlr/2017/beyond-bls/online-job-search-thenew-normal.htm Herrnstadt E. and T. Dinan. CBO s Projection of the Effect of Climate Change on U.S. Economic Output. Working paper Congressional Budget Office https : //www.cbo.gov/system/files/2020-09/56505-Climate-Change.pdf Hsieh C. E. Hurst C. Jones and P. Klenow. The Allocation of Talent and U.S Economic Growth. Econometrica no. : https : //doi.org/10.3982/ ECTA11427 Iglesias V. A. Braswell M. Rossi M. Joseph C. McShane M. Cattau M. Koontz J McGlinchy R. Nagy J. Balch S. Leyk and W. Travis. Risky Development : Increasing Exposure to Natural Hazards in the United States. Earth s Future no. https : //doi.org/10.1029/2020EF001795 IPCC ( Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ) Climate Change ( Assessment Review ) : Synthesis Report edited by R. Pachauri L. Mayer and Core Writing Team. Geneva : IPCC. https : //www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/ uploads/2018/02/SYR_AR5_FINAL_full.pdf Jessoe K. D. Manning and J. Taylor. Climate Change and Labour Allocation in Rural Mexico : Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather. Economic Journal no. : https : //doi.org/10.1111/ecoj.12448 | References Kalkuhl M. and L. Wenz. The Impact of Climate Conditions on Economic Production. Evidence from a Global Region of Panels. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management https : //doi.org/10.1016/j jeem.2020.102360 Kao S. M. Ashfaq D. Rastogi S. Gangrade R. Ur a Mart nez A. Fernandez G Konapala N. Voisin T. Zhou W. Xu H. Gao B. Zhao and G. Zhao. The Third Assessment of the Effects of Climate Change on Federal Hydropower. Oak Ridge National Laboratory. https : //info.ornl.gov/sites/ publications/Files/Pub168510.pdf Kober N. and D. Rentner. History and Evolution of Public Education in the U.S. Center on Education Policy. https : //files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED606970.pdf Lan X. P. Tans and K. Thoning. Trends in Globally-Averaged CO2 Determined from NOAA Global Monitoring Laboratory Measurements. Global Monitoring Laboratory. https : //gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends/gl_data.html Lara R. Fact Sheet : Impact of Wildfires on Insurance Non-Renewals and Availability. California Department of Insurance. http : //www.insurance ca.gov/0400-news/0100-press-releases/2019/upload/nr063_factsheetwildfire.pdf Lebergott S. Labor Force and Employment In Output Employment and Productivity in the United States after edited by D. Brady Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/ system/files/chapters/c1567/c1567.pdf Lee J. Lessons of East-Asia s Human Capital Development. Project Syndicate https : //www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/human-capital-east-asiadevelopment-strategy-education-by-lee-jong-wha-2019-01 L thi D. M. Le Floch B. Bereiter T. Blunier J. Barnola U. Siegenthaler D. Raynaud J. Jouzel H. Fischer K. Kawamura and T. Stocker. High-Resolution Carbon Dioxide Concentration Record Years Before Present. Nature : https : //doi.org/10.1038/nature06949 Maiello M. Diagnosing William Baumol s Cost Disease. Chicago Booth Review https : //www.chicagobooth.edu/review/diagnosing-william-baumolscost-disease Mankiw N. Macroeconomics 7th ed. New York : Worth. https : //jollygreengeneral typepad.com/files/n.-gregory-mankiw-macroeconomics-7th-edition-2009.pdf Mauro P. Corruption and Growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/2946696.pdf Mazzucato M. The Entrepreneurial State : Debunking Public vs. Private Sector Myths. New York : Anthem Press. https : //marianamazzucato.com/books/ the-entrepreneurial-state Migration Policy Institute. No date. U.S. Immigrant Population and Share over Time Present. https : //www.migrationpolicy.org/programs/data-hub/charts/ immigrant-population-over-time References | Missirian A. and W. Schlenker. Asylum Applications Respond to Temperature Fluctuations. Science no. : https : //www.science.org/ doi/10.1126/science.aao0432 Morrissey T. Child Care and Parent Labor Force Participation : A Review of the Research Literature. Review of Economics of the Household no. : https : //doi.org/10.1007/s11150-016-9331-3 Muro M. S. Liu J. Whiton and S. Kulkarni. Digitalization and the American Workforce. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/research/ digitalization-and-the-american-workforce/ National Archives. No date. Executive Order : Prohibition of Discrimination in the Defense Industry ( ) https : //www.archives.gov/milestone-documents/ executive-order-8802 National Center for Education Statistics. Years of American Education : A Statistical Portrait. https : //nces.ed.gov/pubs93/93442.pdf National Centers for Environmental Education. United States Billion Dollar Disaster Events ( CPI-Adjusted ) https : //www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/ billions/time-series National Partnership for Women and Families. State Paid Family and Medical Leave Insurance Laws. https : //www.nationalpartnership.org/our-work/ resources/economic-justice/paid-leave/state-paid-family-leave-laws.pdf National World War II Museum. No date. Research Starters : U.S. Military by the Numbers. https : //www.nationalww2museum.org/students-teachers/studentresources/research-starters/research-starters-us-military-numbers Newell R. B. Prest and S. Sexton. The GDP Temperature Relationship : Implications for Climate Change Damages. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2021.102445 OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) 2022a. Gross Domestic Spending on R&D. https : //data.oecd.org/rd/gross-domesticspending-on-r-d.htm 2022b. LFS by Sex and Age : Indicators. https : //stats.oecd.org/index aspx ? r = # Park R. A. Behrer and J. Goodman. Learning Is Inhibited by Heat Exposure Both Internationally and Within the United States. Nature Human Behavior : https : //doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-00959-9 Park R. J. Goodman M. Hurwitz and J. Smith. Heat and Learning. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/ pol.20180612 Partlow J. Disaster Scenarios Raise the Stakes for Colorado River Negotiations. Washington Post December https : //www.washingtonpost.com/climateenvironment/2022/12/17/colorado-river-crisis-conference/ | References Pew Research Center. 2021a. Internet/Broadband Fact Sheet. https : //www.pewresearch org/internet/fact-sheet/internet-broadband/ 2021b. Digital Divide Persists Even as Americans with Lower Incomes Make Gains in Tech Adoption. https : //www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/06/22/ digital-divide-persists-even-as-americans-with-lower-incomes-make-gains-intech-adoption/ 2021c. Home Broadband Adoption Computer Ownership Vary by Race Ethnicity in the U.S. https : //www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/07/16/ home-broadband-adoption-computer-ownership-vary-by-race-ethnicity-inthe-u-s/ Pfeiffer D. Ike s Interstates at : Anniversary of the Highway System Recalls Eisenhower s Role as Catalyst. Prologue Magazine no. https : //www archives.gov/publications/prologue/2006/summer/interstates.html Ramirez R. The West s Historic Drought Is Threatening Hydropower at Hoover Dam. CNN. https : //www.cnn.com/2022/08/16/us/hoover-dam-hydropowerdrought-climate/index.html Ranson M. Crime Weather and Climate Change. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j jeem.2013.11.008 Rennert K. F. Errickson B. Prest L. Rennels R. Newell W. Pizer C. Kingdon J Wingenroth R. Cooke B. Parthum D. Smith K. Cromar D. Diaz F. Moore U. M ller R. Plevin A. Raftery H. Sevcikova H. Sheets J. Stock T. Tan M Watson T. Wong and D. Anthoff. Comprehensive Evidence Implies a Higher Social Cost of CO2. Nature no. : https : //doi org/10.1038/s41586-022-05224-9 Sablik T. Electrifying Rural America. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond https : //www.richmondfed.org/publications/research/econ_focus/2020/q1/ economic_history Shen K. Who Benefits from Public Financing of Home Care for Low-Income Seniors ? Working paper Harvard University. https : //scholar.harvard.edu/files/ kshen/files/caregivers.pdf Siminski P. and R. Yetsenga. Specialization Comparative Advantage and the Sexual Division of Labor. Journal of Labor Economics no. https : //doi org/10.1086/718430 Smith A. U.S. Billion-Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters in Historical Context. U.S. Department of Commerce. https : //www.climate.gov/newsfeatures/blogs/2022-us-billion-dollar-weather-and-climate-disastershistorical-context Spruk R. The Rise and Fall of Argentina. Latin American Economic Review https : //doi.org/10.1186/s40503-019-0076-2 U.S. Census Bureau. Energy. In Historical Statistics of the United States Colonial Times to Washington : U.S. Government Publishing References | Office. https : //www2.census.gov/library/publications/1975/compendia/hist_ stats_colonial-1970/hist_stats_colonial-1970p2-chS.pdf Selected Social Characteristics in the United States. https : //data.census gov/table ? q = DP02 : +SELECTED+SOCIAL+CHARACTERISTICS+IN+THE+ UNITED+STATES&g = 0100000US&tid = ACSDP1Y2021.DP02 Quarterly Retail E-Commerce Sales 3rd Quarter https : //www census.gov/retail/mrts/www/data/pdf/ec_current.pdf U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Meta Platforms Inc. : Form 10-K for Fiscal Year Ended December EDGAR Database. https : //www.sec gov/ix ? doc = /Archives/edgar/data/1326801/000132680123000013/meta20221231.htm # i6df229dad1864210ab76200083e26819_79 Weiss T. Estimates of White and Nonwhite Gainful Workers in the United States by Age Group Race and Sex Decennial Census Years Historical Methods : A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History no. : https : //doi.org/10.1080/01615449909598924 Weller C. Learning Lessons from the 1990s. Economic Policy Institute. https : // www.epi.org/publication/webfeatures_viewpoints_l-t_growth_lessons/ White House. Fact Sheet : White House Releases First-Ever Comprehensive Framework for Responsible Development of Digital Assets. https : //www whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/09/16/ fact-sheet-white-house-releases-first-ever-comprehensive-framework-forresponsible-development-of-digital-assets/ Fact Sheet : Biden-Harris Administration Releases National Strategy to Put Nature on the Nation s Balance Sheet. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ostp/ news-updates/2023/01/19/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-releases-nationalstrategy-to-put-nature-on-the-nations-balance-sheet/ Woetzel J. D. Pinner H. Samandari H. Engel M. Krishnan B. Boland and C. Powis Climate Risk and Response : Physical Hazards and Socioeconomic Impacts. McKinsey Global Institute. https : //www.mckinsey.com/ ~ /media/ mckinsey/business % 20functions/sustainability/our % 20insights/climate % risk % 20and % 20response % 20physical % 20hazards % 20and % socioeconomic % 20impacts/mgi-climate-risk-and-response-full-report-vf.pdf World Bank. The East Asian Miracle : Economic Growth and Public Policy. New York : Oxford University Press. https : //documents1.worldbank.org/curated/ en/975081468244550798/pdf/multi-page.pdf World Economic Forum. Nature Risk Rising : Why the Crisis Engulfing Nature Matters for Business and the Economy. https : //www3.weforum.org/docs/ WEF_New_Nature_Economy_Report_2020.pdf | References Chapter Aladangady A. D. Cho L. Feiveson and E. Pinto. Excess Savings during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System https : //www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/excess-savings-duringthe-covid-19-pandemic-20221021.html Ascari G. and A. Sbordone. The Macroeconomics of Trend Inflation. Journal of Economic Literature : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/ jel.52.3.679 Banerjee R. V. Boctor A. Mehrotra and F Zampolli. Fiscal Deficits and Inflation Risks : The Role of Fiscal and Monetary Regimes. Working paper Bank for International Settlements. https : //www.bis.org/publ/work1028.pdf Bassetto M. Fiscal Theory of Price Level. In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics edited by S. Durlauf and L. Blume. London : Palgrave. http : //users nber.org/ ~ bassetto/research/palgrave/ftheorypost.pdf Belz S. L. Scheiner and S. Campbell. A Guide to the Hutchins Center Fiscal Impact Measure. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings edu/2022/02/17/a-guide-to-the-hutchins-center-fiscal-impact-measure/ Bernanke B. Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting. Transcript of speech delivered at Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute Cambridge MA July https : //www federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/Bernanke20070710a.htm Inflation Expectations and Monetary Policy. Speech delivered at Inflation Expectations : Determinants and Consequences Conference May https : //www.nber.org/lecture/2022-inflation-expectations-determinants-andconsequence-keynote-ben-bernanke-inflation-expectations Biden J. Joe Biden : My Plan for Fighting Inflation. Wall Street Journal May https : //www.wsj.com/articles/my-plan-for-fighting-inflation-joe-biden-gas-priceseconomy-unemployment-jobs-covid-11653940654 ? mod = opinion_major_pos5 Bilbiie F. G. Eggertsson G. Primiceri and A. Tambalotti. Excess Savings Are Not Excessive. Liberty Street Economics Federal Reserve Bank of New York https : //libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2021/04/ excess-savings-are-not-excessive/ Blanchard O. E. Cerutti and L. Summers. Inflation and Activity : Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www nber.org/papers/w21726 Boehm C. and N. Pandalai-Nayar. Convex Supply Curves. American Economic Review no. : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles/pdf/doi/10.1257/ aer.20210811 References | Bordo M. and M. Levy. Do Enlarged Fiscal Deficits Cause Inflation ? The Historical Record. Economic Affairs no. : https : //onlinelibrary wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/ecaf.12446 Br uning F. J. Fillat and G. Joaquim. Cost Price Relationships in a Concentrated Economy. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. https : //www.bostonfed.org/ publications/current-policy-perspectives/2022/cost-price-relationships-in-aconcentrated-economy.aspx Cat o L. and M. Terrones. Fiscal Deficits and Inflation. Journal of Monetary Economics no. : https : //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ abs/pii/S0304393205000139 CBO ( Congressional Budget Office ) The Budget and Economic Outlook : to https : //www.cbo.gov/system/files/2019-03/54918-Outlook-3.pdf Chapter : The Economic Outlook. https : //www.cbo.gov/system/ files ? file = 2022-05/57950-Chapter-2.pdf CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) The Year in Review and the Years Ahead. https : //www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/ERP-2016/pdf/ERP-2016-chapter2.pdf Economic Report of the President. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2022/04/ERP-2022.pdf Chetty R. J. Friedman M. Stepner and Opportunity Insights Team. The Economic Impacts of COVID-19 : Evidence from a New Public Database Built Using Private Sector Data. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/system/files/working_ papers/w27431/w27431.pdf Clark T. and S. Terry. Time Variation in the Inflation Passthrough of Energy Prices. Journal of Money Credit and Banking no. : http : //www jstor.org/stable/40925694 Cochrane J. The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. https : //press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691242248/ the-fiscal-theory-of-the-price-level Congressional Research Service. An Excise Tax on Stock Repurchases and Tax Advantages of Buybacks over Dividends. https : //crsreports.congress.gov/ product/pdf/IF/IF11960 Crawley E. and E. Gagnon. Substitutability between Balance Sheet Reductions and Policy Rate Hikes : Some Illustrations and a Discussion. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //doi org/10.17016/2380-7172.3147 Detmeister A. The Usefulness of Core PCE Inflation Measures. Finance and Economics Discussion Series Federal Reserve Board. https : //www federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2011/201156/201156abs.html | References Donaldson D. and R. Hornbeck. Railroads and American Economic Growth : A Market Access Approach. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjw002 Federal Reserve ( Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ) Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement of Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy. https : //www federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20120125c.htm Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policystrategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals-monetarypolicy-strategy.htm 2022a. Summary of Economic Projections. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/ monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20221214.pdf 2022b. Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement. https : //www.federalreserve gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20221214a1.pdf Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Center for Human Capital Studies. No date. Wage Growth Tracker. https : //www.atlantafed.org/chcs/wage-growth-tracker Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. Median CPI. https : //www.clevelandfed.org/ indicators-and-data/median-cpi Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. No date. Trimmed Mean MCE Inflation Rate. https : // www.dallasfed.org/research/pce Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Fourth Quarter Survey of Professional Forecasters. https : //www.philadelphiafed.org/surveys-and-data/ real-time-data-research/spf-q4-2020 Friedman M. The Counter-Revolution in Monetary Theory. Institute of Economic Affairs Occasional Paper https : //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ pdf/10.1002/9781119205814.app2 Furman J. and W. Powell. What Is the Best Measure of Labor Market Tightness ? Peterson Institute for International Economics. https : //www.piie com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/ what-best-measure-labor-market-tightness Gal J. Monetary Policy Inflation and the Business Cycle : An Introduction to the New Keynesian Framework and Its Applications Second Edition. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. https : //press.princeton.edu/books/ hardcover/9780691164786/monetary-policy-inflation-and-the-business-cycle Gleckman H. and J. Holtzblatt. Cutting Through the Misinformation About the IRS s Plan to Spend $ Billion. Tax Policy Center. https : //www taxpolicycenter.org/taxvox/cutting-through-misinformation-about-irss-planspend-80-billion Gordon R. Alternative Reponses of Policy to External Supply Shocks. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no : https : //www.brookings.edu/ wp-content/uploads/1975/01/1975a_bpea_gordon.pdf References | Gross D. and B. Sampat. America Jump-Started : World War II R&D and the Takeoff of the U.S. Innovation System. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w27375 Guerrieri V. G. Lorenzoni L. Straub and I. Werning. Monetary Policy in Times of Structural Reallocation. Working paper Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium. https : //www.kansascityfed.org/documents/8322/JH_Guerrieri.pdf Hicks J. Mr. Keynes and the Classics : A Suggested Interpretation. Econometrica no. : https : //doi.org/10.2307 % 2F1907242 Jord C. Liu F. Nechio and F. Rivera-Reyes. Wage Growth When Inflation Is High. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. https : //www.frbsf.org/ economic-research/publications/economic-letter/2022/september/ wage-growth-when-inflation-is-high/ Jord and A. Taylor. Riders on the Storm. Working paper Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. https : //doi.org/10.24148/wp2019-20 J rgensen P. and S. Ravn. The Inflation Response to Government Spending Shocks : A Fiscal Price Puzzle ? European Economic Review https : //doi org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2021.103982 Keynes J. The General Theory of Employment Interest and Money. Boston : Houghton Mifflin. https : //archive.org/details/generaltheoryofe00keyn_0/page/ n9/mode/2u Klein L. and A. Goldberger. An Econometric Model of the United States Amsterdam : North Holland. https : //doi.org/10.2307/2227976 Michaillat P. and E. Saez. u * = uv. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w30211 Miranda-Agrippino S. and G. Ricco. The Transmission of Monetary Policy Shocks. American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/mac.20180124 Phillips A. The Relation Between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money Wage Rates in the United Kingdom Economica no : https : //doi.org/10.2307/2550759 Powell J. Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy. Transcript of speech at Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy Symposium,Jackson Hole WY August https : //www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/speech/powell20180824a.htm 2022a. Inflation and the Labor Market. Transcript of a speech at the Hutchins Center of Fiscal and Monetary Policy Brookings Institution Washington November https : //www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/ powell20221130a.htm 2022b. Monetary Policy and Price Stability. Transcript of speech at Reassessing Constraints on the Economy and Policy Symposium Jackson Hole | References WY August https : //www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/ powell20220826a.htm Ramey V. Ten Years After the Financial Crisis : What Have We Learned from the Renaissance in Fiscal Research ? Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/jep.33.2.89 Rankin E. and M. Idil. A Century of Stock-Bond Correlations. Reserve Bank of Australia. https : //www.rba.gov.au/publications/bulletin/2014/sep/pdf/bu-0914-8 pdf Rudd J. Underlying Inflation : Its Measurement and Significance. FEDS Notes Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System September https : //doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2624 Why Do We Think That Inflation Expectations Matter for Inflation ? ( And Should We ? ) Finance and Economics Discussion Series. https : //doi org/10.17016/FEDS.2021.062 Social Security Administration. 2022a. Table V.A2 : Immigration Assumptions. https : // www.ssa.gov/oact/TR/2022/lr5a2.html 2022b. The Annual Report of The Board of Trustees of The Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds. https : //www.ssa.gov/oact/tr/2022/tr2022.pdf Stigum M. and A. Crescenzi. Stigum s Money Market 4E. https : //www mhprofessional.com/stigum-s-money-market-4e-9780071448451-usa Syverson C. Macroeconomics and Market Power : Context Implications and Open Questions. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : // doi.org/10.1257/jep.33.3.23 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Consumer Price Index : Overview. https : //www bls.gov/opub/hom/cpi/home.htm Werning I. Expectations and the Rate of Inflation. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w30260 White House. Remarks by President Biden on the State of the Economy and the Need for the American Rescue Plan. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefingroom/speeches-remarks/2021/02/05/ remarks-by-president-biden-on-the-state-of-the-economy-and-the-need-for-theamerican-rescue-plan/ Yellen J. Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy. Transcript of Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture University of Massachusetts Amherst September https : //www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20150924a.htm References | Chapter Ahmed U. The Importance of Cross-Border Regulatory Cooperation in an Era of Digital Trade. World Trade Review no. S1 : S99 S120. https : //doi org/10.1017/S1474745618000514 Alfaro L. Gains from Foreign Direct Investment : Macro and Micro Approaches. World Bank Economic Review no. S1 : S2 S15. https : //academic.oup.com/ wber/article/30/Supplement_1/S2/2897332 Amiti M. and S. Wei. Service Offshoring Productivity and Employment : Evidence from the United States. IMF Working Paper 05/238. Washington DC : International Monetary Fund. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers cfm ? abstract_id = Aslund A. and M. Snegovaya. The Impact of Western Sanctions on Russia and How They Can Be Made Even More Effective. Atlantic Council. https : //www atlanticcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/The-impact-of-Western-sanctions-onRussia-and-how-they-can-be-made-even-more-effective-5.2.pdf Autor D. D. Dorn and G. Hanson. The Geography of Trade and Technology Shocks in the United States. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.3.220 The China Shock : Learning from Labor-Market Adjustment to Large Changes in Trade. Annual Review of Economics : https : //doi org/10.1146/annurev-economics-080315-015041 On the Persistence of the China Shock. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w29401 Autor D. D. Dorn G. Hanson and J. Song. Trade Adjustment : Worker-Level Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1093/qje/qju026 Baldwin R. The Peak Globalisation Myth : Part Services Trade Did Not Peak. Center for Economic and Policy Research. https : //cepr.org/voxeu/columns/ peak-globalisation-myth-part-4-services-trade-did-not-peak Baldwin R. and R. Freeman. Risks and Global Supply Chains : What We Know and What We Need to Know. Annual Review of Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-051420-113737 Bapat N. and T. Morgan. Multilateral Versus Unilateral Sanctions Reconsidered : A Test Using New Data. International Studies Quarterly no. : https : //doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2478.2009.00569.x Bauer M. H. Lee-Makiyama E. van der Marel and B. Verschelde. The Costs of Data Localisation : Friendly Fire on Economic Recovery. European Centre for International Political Economy Occasional Paper 3/2014. https : //ecipe.org/ wp-content/uploads/2014/12/OCC32014__1.pdf | References BEA ( U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis ) International Data. https : //www.bea gov/itable/international-transactions-services-and-investment-position 2023a. Real Gross Domestic Product Chained Dollars. https : //apps.bea.gov/ iTable/ ? reqid = 19&step = 3&isuri = 1&select_all_years = 0&nipa_table_list = 6& series = q&first_year = 2018&last_year = 2020&scale = -9&categories = survey 2023b. Real Exports and Imports of Goods and Services by Type of Product Chained Dollars. https : //apps.bea.gov/iTable/ ? reqid = 19&step = 4&isuri = 1&1921 = flatfiles # eyJhcHBpZCI6MTksInN0ZXBzIjpbMSwyLDNdLCJkYXRhIjpbW yJDYXRlZ29yaWVzIiwiU3VydmV5Il0sWyJOSVBBX1RhYmxlX0xpc3QiLCIxMzQiXV19 2023c. International Trade in Goods and Services. https : //www.bea.gov/data/ intl-trade-investment/international-trade-goods-and-services 2023d. Price Indexes for Gross Domestic Product. https : //apps.bea.gov/iTable/ ? reqid = 19&step = 2&isuri = 1&categories = survey # eyJhcHBpZCI6MTksInN0Z XBzIjpbMSwyLDNdLCJkYXRhIjpbWyJjYXRlZ29yaWVzIiwiU3VydmV5Il0sWyJOSVBBX1RhYmxlX0xpc3QiLCI0Il1dfQ Berner R. S. Cecchetti and K. Schoenholtz. Russian Sanctions : Some Questions and Answers. Center for Economic and Policy Research. https : //cepr.org/ voxeu/columns/russian-sanctions-some-questions-and-answers Birshan M. T. Devesa H. Samandari J. Seong S. Smit O. White and J. Woetzel. Global Flows : The Ties That Bind an Interconnected World. MicKinsey Global Institute. https : //www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/strategy-and-corporatefinance/our-insights/global-flows-the-ties-that-bind-in-an-interconnected-world BLS ( U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Import/Export Price Indexes ( MXP ) https : //www.bls.gov/mxp/ Bonadio B. Z. Huo A. Levchenko and N. Pandalai-Nayar. Global Supply Chains in the Pandemic. Journal of International Economics https : //doi org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2021.103534 Borusyak K. and X. Jaravel. The Distributional Effects of Trade : Theory and Evidence from the United States. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/system/ files/working_papers/w28957/w28957.pdf Bown C. 2022a. Four Years into the Trade War Are the US and China Decoupling ? Peterson Institute for International Economics. https : //www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economics/four-years-trade-war-are-us-and-china-decoupling 2022b. First Trade War Now Russia s Real War. Why U.S. Exports to China Continue to Suffer. Peterson Institute for International Economics. https : // www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economics/ first-trade-war-now-russias-real-war-why-us-exports-china-continue-suffer 2022c. The WTO and Vaccine Supply Chain Resilience during a Pandemic. Peterson Institute for International Economics Working Paper https : // References | www.piie.com/publications/working-papers/wto-and-vaccine-supplychain-resilience-during-pandemic Bown C. and J. Hillman. WTO ing a Resolution to the China Subsidy Problem. Journal of International Economic Law no. : https : //doi org/10.1093/jiel/jgz035 Brynjolfsson E. J. Horton A. Ozimek D. Rock G. Sharma and H. TuYe. COVID-19 and Remote Work : An Early Look at U.S. Data. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : // doi.org/10.3386/w27344 Capri A. and W. Lehmacher. How COVID-19 Accelerated the Shift Towards TradeTech. World Economic Forum. https : //www.weforum.org/ agenda/2021/01/how-covid-19-has-accelerated-the-shift-towards-tradetech/ Carr B. C. French and C. Lowery. Data Localization : Costs Tradeoffs and Impacts Across the Economy. Institute of International Finance. https : //www iif.com/portals/0/Files/content/Innovation/12_22_2020_data_localization.pdf Caselli F. M. Koren M. Lisicky and S. Tenreyro. Diversification Through Trade. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1093/qje/qjz028 Casalini F. and J. Gonz lez. Trade and Cross-Border Data Flows. OECD Trade Policy Paper Paris : OECD Publishing. https : //doi.org/10.1787/ b2023a47-en Casalini F. J. Gonz lez and E. Mo s Approaches to Market Openness in the Digital Age. OECD Trade Policy Paper Paris : OECD Publishing. https : // doi.org/10.1787/818a7498-en CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) Economic Report of the President Washington : U.S. Government Publishing Office. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ wp-content/uploads/2022/04/ERP-2022.pdf Cerdeiro D. and A. Komaromi. Supply Spillovers During the Pandemic : Evidence from High-Frequency Shipping Data. IMF Working Paper 20/284. https : //www imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2020/12/18/Supply-Spillovers-Duringthe-Pandemic-Evidence-from-High-Frequency-Shipping-Data-49966 CFR ( Council on Foreign Relations ) Confronting Reality in Cyberspace : Foreign Policy for a Fragmented Internet. Independent Task Force Report https : // www.cfr.org/report/confronting-reality-in-cyberspace Chetty R. J. Friedman N. Hendren M. Stepner and Opportunity Insights Team. The Economic Impacts of COVID-19 : Evidence from a New Public Database Built Using Private Sector Data. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w27431 Chetverikov D. B. Larsen and C. Palmer. IV Quantile Regression for GroupLevel Treatments with an Application to the Distributional Effects of Trade. Econometrica no. : https : //doi.org/10.3982/ECTA12121 | References Chivvis C. and E. Kapstein. U.S. Strategy and Economic Statecraft : Understanding the Trade-Offs. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace https : //carnegieendowment.org/2022/04/28/u.s.-strategy-and-economic-statecraftunderstanding-tradeoffs-pub-86995 Choi S. D. Furceri and C. Yoon. Policy Uncertainty and Foreign Direct Investment. Review of International Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1111/roie.12495 Clausing K. Open : The Progressive Case for Free Trade Immigration and Global Capital. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press Comini N. V. Foster and S. Srinivasan. Improving Data Infrastructure Helps Ensure Equitable Access for Poor People in Poor Countries. World Bank Data Blog. https : //blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/improving-data-infrastructurehelps-ensure-equitable-access-poor-people-poor-countries Cooke B. G. Nigatu K. Heerman M. Landes and R. Seely. Global Macroeconomic Developments Drive Downturn in U.S. Agricultural Exports. U.S. Department of Agriculture. https : //www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/ outlooks/35809/59822_aes-94.pdf ? v = Corbeau A. How Deep Is Europe s Dependence on Russian Oil ? Columbia Climate School State of the Planet. https : //news.climate.columbia edu/2022/03/14/qa-how-deep-is-europes-dependence-on-russian-oil/ CRS ( Congressional Research Service ) 2022a. Russia s War on Ukraine : Financial and Trade Sanctions. https : //crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF12062 2022b. Biden Administration Plans for an Indo-Pacific Economic Framework. https : //crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IN/IN11814 U.S. Trade Policy : Background and Current Issues. https : //crsreports congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF10156 D Aguanno L. O. Davies A. Dogan R. Freeman S. Lloyd D. Reinhardt R. Sajedi and R. Zymek. Global Value Chains Volatility and Safe Openness : Is Trade a Double-Edged Sword ? Bank of England Financial Stability Paper https : // www.bankofengland.co.uk/financial-stability-paper/2021/global-value-chainsvolatility-and-safe-openness-is-trade-a-double-edged-sword De Loecker J. P. Goldberg A. Khandelwal and N. Pavcnik. Prices Markups and Trade Reform. Econometrica no : https : //doi.org/10.3982/ ECTA11042 Demertzis M. B. Hilgenstock B. McWilliams E. Ribakova and S. Tagliapietra. How Have Sanctions Impacted Russia ? Bruegel Policy Contribution 18/22 https : //www.bruegel.org/sites/default/files/2022-10/PC % % 202022_1.pdf Dingel J. and B. Neiman. How Many Jobs Can Be Done at Home ? Journal of Public Economics https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2020.104235 DOE ( U.S. Department of Energy ) Poland and U.S. Announce Strategic Partnership to Launch Poland s Civil Nuclear Program. https : //www.energy References | gov/articles/poland-and-us-announce-strategic-partnership-launch-polandscivil-nuclear-program DOL ( U.S. Department of Labor ) U.S. Department of Labor Joins U.S. Trade Representative European Commission to Host First Principals Meeting of the U.S.-EU Trade and Labor Dialogue. https : //www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/ ilab/ilab20221205 Drury A. Revisiting Economic Sanctions Reconsidered. Journal of Peace Research no. : https : //doi.org/10.1177/0022343398035004006 Economist Intelligence Unit. Russia : Forecast Summary. http : //country.eiu.com/ article.aspx ? articleid = 1802639163&Country = Russia&topic = Economy&subtopi c = Forecast&subsubtopic = Forecast+summary Eppinger P. Service Offshoring and Firm Employment. Journal of International Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2019.01.007 Eppinger P. G. Felbermayr O. Krebs and B. Kukharskyy. Decoupling Global Value Chains. Center for Economic Studies and Ifo Institute Working Paper https : //www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/235449/1/cesifo1_wp9079.pdf Eriksson K. K. Russ J. Shambaugh and M. Xu. Reprint : Trade Shocks and the Shifting Landscape of U.S. Manufacturing. Journal of International Money and Finance https : //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0261560621000589 Espitia A. A. Mattoo N. Rocha M. Ruta and D. Winkler. Pandemic Trade : COVID-19 Remote Work and Global Value Chains. World Bank Working Paper https : //documents1.worldbank.org/curated/ en/843301610630752625/pdf/Pandemic-Trade-Covid-19-Remote-Work-andGlobal-Value-Chains.pdf Espitia A. N. Rocha and M. Ruta. How Export Restrictions Are Impacting Global Food Prices. World Bank Private Sector Development Blog. https : // blogs.worldbank.org/psd/how-export-restrictions-are-impacting-globalfood-prices Fan H. Y. Li and S. Yeaple. Trade Liberalization Quality and Export Prices. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1162/ REST_a_00524 Feenstra R. H. Ma and Y. Xu. U.S. Exports and Employment. Journal of International Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j jinteco.2019.05.002 Flanagan M. A. Kammer A. Pescatori and M. Stuermer. How a Russian Natural Gas Cutoff Could Weigh on Europe s Economies. International Monetary Fund Blog. https : //www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2022/07/19/ blog-how-a-russias-natural-gas-cutoff-could-weigh-on-european-economies Foggo J. and B. Mainardi. Boiling the Frog : Russia s Black Sea Aggression Part II the War. Center for European Policy Analysis. https : //cepa.org/article/ boiling-the-frog-russias-black-sea-aggression-part-ii-the-war/ | References Freund C. A. Mulabdic and M. Ruta. Is 3D Printing a Threat to Global Trade ? The Trade Effects You Didn t Hear About. Journal of International Economics https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2022.103646 Georgieva K. G. Gopinath and C. Pazarbasioglu. Why We Must Resist Geoeconomic Fragmentation and How. International Monetary Fund Blog https : //www.imf.org/en/Blogs/Articles/2022/05/22/ blog-why-we-must-resist-geoeconomic-fragmentation Glauber J. and D. Laborde. How Sanctions on Russia and Belarus Are Impacting Exports of Agricultural Products and Fertilizer. International Food Policy Research Institute Blog. https : //www.ifpri.org/blog/how-sanctionsrussia-and-belarus-are-impacting-exports-agricultural-products-and-fertilizer. Goldberg L. and K. Crockett. The Dollar and U.S. Manufacturing. Current Issues in Economics and Finance ( Federal Reserve Bank of New York ) no https : //www.newyorkfed.org/research/current_issues/ci4-12.html Goldberg P. A. Khandelwal N. Pavcnik and P. Topalova. Imported Intermediate Inputs and Domestic Product Growth : Evidence from India. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1162/ qjec.2010.125.4.1727 Goldfarb A. and C. Tucker. Digital Economics. Journal of Economic Literature no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/jel.20171452 Gopinath G. and O. Itskhoki. Dominant Currency Paradigm : A Review. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w29556 Gopinath G. O. Itskhoki and R. Rigobon. Currency Choice and Exchange Rate Pass-Through. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/aer.100.1.304 Grossman G. E. Helpman and H. Lhuillier. Supply Chain Resilience : Should Policy Promote Diversification or Reshoring ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w29330 Grossman G. and E. Rossi-Hansberg. Trading Tasks : A Simple Theory of Offshoring. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/aer.98.5.1978 Gulen H. and M. Ion. Policy Uncertainty and Corporate Investment. Review of Financial Studies no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhv050 Harrell P. E. Rosenberg and E. Saravelle. China s Use of Coercive Economic Measures. Center for a New American Security. https : //www.cnas.org/ publications/reports/chinas-use-of-coercive-economic-measures Higgins M. and T. Klitgaard. How Much Have Consumers Spent on Imports during the Pandemic ? Liberty Street Economics Federal Reserve Bank of New York. https : //libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2021/10/ how-much-have-consumers-spent-on-imports-during-the-pandemic/ References | Huang K. S. Madnick and S. Johnson. Framework for Understanding Cybersecurity Impacts on International Trade. Working Paper Cybersecurity Interdisciplinary Systems Laboratory Sloan School of Management Massachusetts Institute of Technology. https : //papers.ssrn.com/ sol3/papers.cfm ? abstract_id = IBM. Cost of a Data Breach https : //www.ibm.com/reports/data-breach IDC ( International Data Corporation ) Digital Transformation Investments to Represent More Than Half of All ICT Investment by According to IDC FutureScape. https : //www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp ? containerId = prUS48333121 IEA ( International Energy Agency ) 2022a. Frequently Asked Questions on Energy Security. https : //www.iea.org/articles/frequently-asked-questions-onenergy-security 2022b. How to Avoid Gas Shortages in the European Union in : The Need for Action. https : //www.iea.org/reports/how-to-avoid-gas-shortages-in-theeuropean-union-in-2023/the-need-for-action # abstract IMF ( International Monetary Fund ) 2022a. World Economic Outlook April : War Sets Back the Global Recovery. https : //www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/ Issues/2022/04/19/world-economic-outlook-april-2022 # Global-Trade-and-ValueChains-in-the-Pandemic 2022b. World Economic Outlook October : Countering the Cost-of-Living Crisis. https : //www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2022/10/11/ world-economic-outlook-october-2022 Irwin D. 2022a. The Trade Reform Wave of NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau for Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w29973 2022b. Globalization Enabled Nearly All Countries to Grow Richer in Recent Decades. Peterson Institute for International Economics. https : //www.piie.com/ blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/ globalization-enabled-nearly-all-countries-grow-richer-recent Jaravel X. and E. Sager. What Are the Price Effects of Trade ? Evidence from the U.S. and Implications for Quantitative Trade Models. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers cfm ? abstract_id = Jiang H. B. Kenner D. Russell and J. Kaufman. Outlook for U.S. Agricultural Trade : November U.S. Department of Agriculture. https : //www.ers.usda gov/webdocs/outlooks/105356/aes-122.pdf ? v = Julio B. and Y. Yook. Policy Uncertainty Irreversibility and Cross-Border Flows of Capital. Journal of International Economics : https : //www sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0022199616300915 Keller W. and S. Yeaple. Multinational Enterprises International Trade and Productivity Growth : Firm-Level Evidence from the United States. Review of | References Economics and Statistics no. : https : //direct.mit.edu/rest/ article/91/4/821/57821/Multinational-Enterprises-International-Trade-and Klapper L. and M. Miller. The Impact of COVID-19 on Digital Financial Inclusion. World Bank. https : //www.gpfi.org/sites/gpfi/files/sites/default/ files/5_WB % 20Report_The % 20impact % 20of % 20COVID-19 % 20on % digital % 20financial % 20inclusion.pdf Krugman P. Scale Economies Product Differentiation and the Pattern of Trade. American Economic Review no : https : //www.jstor.org/ stable/1805774 # metadata_info_tab_contents Lagarde C. A New Global Map : European Resilience in a Changing World. Transcript of speech at Peterson Institute for International Economics Event Washington April https : //www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2022/html/ecb sp220422 ~ c43af3db20.en.html Mattoo A. P. Mishra and A. Subramanian. Beggar-Thy-Neighbor Effects of Exchange Rates : A Study of the Renminbi. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/pol.20150293 Meltzer J. A WTO Reform Agenda : Data Flows and International Regulatory Cooperation. Brookings Global Economy and Development Working Paper https : //www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/WTO-ReformAgenda_final.pdf Cybersecurity Digital Trade and Data Flows : Rethinking a Role for International Trade Rules. Brookings Global Economy and Development Working Paper https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm ? abstract_ id = Meltzer J. and C. Kerry. Cybersecurity and Digital Trade : Getting It Right. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/research/cybersecurityand-digital-trade-getting-it-right/ Miroudot S. Lessons from the Pandemic for Trade Cooperation on Cross-Border Supply Chains. In Revitalizing Multilateralism : Pragmatic Ideas for the New WTO Director-General edited by S. Evenett and R. Baldwin Washington : Center for Economic and Policy Research. http : //ciwto.uibe.edu cn/docs/2021-07/492701afda8648478dc08aca4231d0bb.pdf # page = Mollenkopf D. S. Peinkofer and Y. Chu. Supply Chain Transparency : Consumer Reactions to Incongruent Signals. Journal of Operations Management no : https : //doi.org/10.1002/joom.1180 Morcos P. and C. Wall. Invisible and Vital : Undersea Cables and Transatlantic Security. Center for Strategic and International Studies. https : //www.csis.org/ analysis/invisible-and-vital-undersea-cables-and-transatlantic-security National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine. Building Resilience into the Nation s Medical Product Supply Chains. Washington : National Academies Press. https : //doi.org/10.17226/26420 References | National Security Council. National Security Strategy. https : //www.whitehouse gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/Biden-Harris-Administrations-NationalSecurity-Strategy-10.2022.pdf OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) Digital Security Risk Management for Economic and Social Prosperity : OECD Recommendation and Companion Document. Paris : OECD Publishing. https : // doi.org/10.1787/9789264245471-en 2020a. Foreign Direct Investment Flows in the Time of COVID-19. https : // read.oecd-ilibrary.org/view/ ? ref = 132_132646-g8as4msdp9&title = Foreigndirect-investment-flows-in-the-time-of-COVID-19 2020b. COVID-19 and Global Value Chains : Policy Options to Build More Resilient Production Networks. https : //www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policyresponses/covid-19-and-global-value-chains-policy-options-to-build-moreresilient-production-networks-04934ef4/ 2022a. FDI in Figures. https : //www.oecd.org/investment/investment-policy/ FDI-in-Figures-October-2022.pdf 2022b. International Investment Implications of Russia s War Against Ukraine ( Abridged Version ) https : //www.oecd.org/ukraine-hub/policy-responses/ international-investment-implications-of-russia-s-war-against-ukraine-abridgedversion-6224dc77/ 2022c. Paying the Price of War : OECD Economic Outlook Interim Report September https : //www.oecd.org/economic-outlook/september-2022/ 2022d. Cross-Border Data Flows : Taking Stock of Key Policies and Initiatives Paris : OECD Publishing. https : //doi.org/10.1787/5031dd97-en 2023a. The Impact of Digitalisation on Trade. https : //www.oecd.org/trade/ topics/digital-trade/ 2023b. FDI Flows. https : //data.oecd.org/fdi/fdi-flows.htm Oldenski L. The Task Composition of Offshoring by U.S. Multinationals. Forum for Research in Empirical International Trade Working Paper. https : //www.freit org/WorkingPapers/Papers/ForeignInvestment/FREIT262.pdf Pei J. G. de Vries and M. Zhang. International Trade and COVID-19 : City-Level Evidence from China s Lockdown Policy. Journal of Regional Science no : https : //doi.org/10.1111/jors.12559 Peksen D. When Do Imposed Economic Sanctions Work ? A Critical Review of the Sanctions Effectiveness Literature. Defence and Peace Economics no : https : //doi.org/10.1080/10242694.2019.1625250 Riker D. Export-Intensive Industry Pay More on Average : An Update. U.S International Trade Commission Office of Economics Research Note 201504A. https : //www.usitc.gov/publications/332/ec201504a.pdf Shivakumar S. C. Wessner and T. Howell. Opportunities and Pitfalls for U.S.-EU Collaboration on Semiconductor Value Chain Resilience. Center for Strategic | References and International Studies. https : //www.csis.org/analysis/opportunities-andpitfalls-us-eu-collaboration-semiconductor-value-chain-resilience Staiger R. 2021a. Does Digital Trade Change the Purpose of a Trade Agreement ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau for Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w29578 2021b. A World Trading System for the Twenty-First Century. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau for Economic Research. https : // doi.org/10.3386/w28947 Sykes A. The Limited Economic Case for Subsidies Regulation. Stanford Law and Economics Olin Working Paper https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers cfm ? abstract_id = Tai K. 2021a. Remarks from Ambassador Katherine Tai on Trade Policy the Environment and Climate Change. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/ press-office/speeches-and-remarks/2021/april/remarks-ambassadaorkatherine-tai-trade-policy-environment-and-climate-change 2021b. Remarks of Ambassador Katherine Tai Outlining the Biden-Harris Administration s Worker-Centered Trade Policy. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/ policy-offices/press-office/speeches-and-remarks/2021/june/ remarks-ambassador-katherine-tai-outlining-biden-harris-administrationsworker-centered-trade-policy Statement from Ambassador Katherine Tai on the Announcement of Additional Economic Actions Against Russia. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/policyoffices/press-office/press-releases/2022/march/ statement-ambassador-katherine-tai-announcement-additional-economicactions-against-russia UNCDF ( United Nations Capital Development Fund ) The Role of Cybersecurity and Data Security in the Digital Economy. https : //policyaccelerator.uncdf.org/ policy-tools/brief-cybersecurity-digital-economy United Nations. The Black Sea Grain Initiative : What It Is and Why It s Important for the World. UN News September https : //news.un.org/en/ story/2022/09/1126811 U.S. Census Bureau. Quarterly Retail E-Commerce Sales. https : //www.census gov/retail/ecommerce.html 2023a. Country and Product Trade Data. https : //www.census.gov/foreign-trade/ statistics/country/index.html 2023b. U.S. International Trade in Goods and Services December and Annual https : //www.census.gov/foreign-trade/Press-Release/ft900/ft900_2212.pdf U.S. Department of Commerce. Jobs Supported by U.S. Exports. https : //www trade.gov/data-visualization/jobs-supported-us-exports Commerce Department Expands Restrictions on Exports to Russia and Belarus in Response to Ongoing Aggression in Ukraine. https : //www References | commerce.gov/news/press-releases/2022/04/ commerce-department-expands-restrictions-exports-russia-and-belarus U.S. Department of State. 2022a. The Passage of the CHIPS and Science Act of https : //www.state.gov/the-passage-of-the-chips-and-science-act-of-2022/ 2022b. Fact Sheet : The Impact of Sanctions and Export Controls on the Russian Federation. https : //www.state.gov/ the-impact-of-sanctions-and-export-controls-on-the-russian-federation/ 2022c. United States Takes Next Step in Supporting Innovative Clean Nuclear Technology in Europe. https : //www.state.gov/united-states-takes-nextstep-in-supporting-innovative-clean-nuclear-technology-in-europe/ 2022d. Special Presidential Envoy for Climate Kerry and Ukraine Minster of Energy Galushchenko Announce Cooperation on a Clean Fuels from Small Modular Reactors Pilot COP27 Climate Conference. https : //www.state.gov/ special-presidential-envoy-for-climate-kerry-and-ukraine-minister-of-energygalushchenko-announce-cooperation-on-a-clean-fuels-from-small-modular-reactors-pilot-cop27-climate-conference/ U.S. Department of the Treasury. 2022a. Updates Related to Price Cap on Russian Oil. https : //home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-sanctions/ recent-actions/20220902_33 2022b. Fact Sheet : Limiting Kremlin Revenues and Stabilizing Global Energy Supply with a Price Cap on Russian Oil. https : //home.treasury.gov/news/pressreleases/jy1141 2022c. OFAC Food Security Fact Sheet : Russia Sanctions and Agricultural Trade. https : //home.treasury.gov/system/files/126/russia_fact_sheet_20220714.pdf USTR ( Office of the U.S. Trade Representative ) Joint Statement on the Results of the Council Meeting of the U.S. Central Asia Trade and Investment Framework Agreement ( TIFA ) https : //ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/pressreleases/2021/march/joint-statement-results-council-meeting-us-central-asiatrade-and-investment-framework-agreement 2022a. Joint Statement on the U.S./U.K. Dialogues on the Future of Atlantic Trade. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2022/ march/joint-statement-usuk-dialogues-future-atlantic-trade 2022b. Ministerial Text for the Trade Pillar of the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity. https : //ustr.gov/sites/default/files/2022-09/IPEF % Pillar % % 20Ministerial % 20Text % ( Trade % 20Pillar ) _FOR % PUBLIC % 20RELEASE % ( ) .pdf 2022c. United States and Kenya Announce the Launch of the U.S. Kenya Strategic Trade and Investment Partnership. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/policyoffices/press-office/press-releases/2022/july/united-states-and-kenya-announcelaunch-us-kenya-strategic-trade-and-investment-partnership 2022d. United States and Taiwan Commence Formal Negotiations on U.S. Taiwan Initiative on 21st Century Trade. https : //ustr.gov/about-us/ | References policy-offices/press-office/press-releases/2022/august/ united-states-and-taiwan-commence-formal-negotiations-us-taiwan-initiative21st-century-trade 2022e. Trade Policy Agenda and Annual Report of the President of the United States on the Trade Agreements Program. https : //ustr.gov/sites/ default/files/2022 % 20Trade % 20Policy % 20Agenda % 20and % % Annual % 20Report % ( ) .pdf Valero P. This Is Why We Should Care About the Free Flow of Data Between Countries. World Economic Forum. https : //www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/07/ free-flow-of-data-between-countries/ Wharton School. Your Data Is Shared and Sold ; What s Being Done About It ? Knowledge at Wharton October https : //knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/ article/data-shared-sold-whats-done/ White House. 2021a. Executive Order on America s Supply Chains. https : //www whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-actions/2021/02/24/ executive-order-on-americas-supply-chains/ 2021b. Fact Sheet : Prioritizing Climate in Foreign Policy and National Security. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statementsreleases/2021/10/21/fact-sheet-prioritizing-climate-in-foreign-policy-andnational-security/ 2022a. Fact Sheet : President Biden and G7 Leaders Formally Launch the Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment. https : //www.whitehouse gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/06/26/fact-sheet-president-biden-andg7-leaders-formally-launch-the-partnership-for-global-infrastructure-andinvestment/ 2022b. Fact Sheet : In Asia President Biden and a Dozen Indo-Pacific Partners Launch the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity. https : //www whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/05/23/ fact-sheet-in-asia-president-biden-and-a-dozen-indo-pacific-partners-launch-theindo-pacific-economic-framework-for-prosperity/ 2022c. Joint Readout of U.S.-EU Task Force Meeting on Energy Security. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/11/07/ joint-readout-of-u-s-eu-task-force-meeting-on-energy-security/ 2022d. Joint Statement between the United States and the European Commission on European Energy Security. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/ briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/03/25/joint-statement-between-theunited-states-and-the-european-commission-on-european-energy-security/ 2022e. A Declaration for the Future of the Internet. https : //www.whitehouse gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/Declaration-for-the-Future-for-the-Internet_ Launch-Event-Signing-Version_FINAL.pdf 2022f. Fact Sheet : President Biden Announces the Americas Partnership for Economic Prosperity. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements- References | releases/2022/06/08/fact-sheet-president-biden-announces-the-americaspartnership-for-economic-prosperity/ World Bank. World Development Report : Trading for Development in the Age of Global Value Chains. Washington : World Bank. https : //doi.org/10.1596/9781-4648-1457-0 World Economic Forum. A Roadmap for Cross-Border Data Flows : Future-Proofing Readiness and Cooperation in the New Data Economy. https : //www3.weforum org/docs/WEF_A_Roadmap_for_Cross_Border_Data_Flows_2020.pdf WTO ( World Trade Organization ) The Carbon Content of International Trade. Trade and Climate Change Information Brief https : //www.wto.org/english/ news_e/news21_e/clim_03nov21-4_e.pdf Yale School of Public Health Humanitarian Research Lab. Ukraine s Crop Storage Infrastructure : Post-Invasion Impact Assessment. Conflict Observatory September https : //hub.conflictobservatory.org/portal/apps/ sites/ # /home/pages/grain-1 Yellen J. 2022a. Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen on Way Forward for the Global Economy. Transcript of speech delivered to Atlantic Council Washington April https : //home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0714 2022b. Remarks by Secretary of the Treasury Janet L. Yellen at LG Sciencepark. Transcript of speech delivered at LG Sciencepark Seoul July https : //home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0880 Chapter Aizer A. H. Hoynes and A. Lleras-Muney. Children and the U.S. Social Safety Net : Balancing Disincentives for Adults and Benefits for Children. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //www.aeaweb.org/ articles ? id = 10.1257/jep.36.2.149 Alaimo K. C. Olson and E. Frongillo Jr. Food Insufficiency and American School-Aged Children s Cognitive Academic and Psychosocial Development. Pediatrics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1542/peds.108.1.44 Almond D. H. Hoynes and D. Schanzenbach. Inside the War on Poverty : The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00089 Asiedu E. J. Freeman and A. Nti-Addae. Access to Credit by Small Businesses : How Relevant Are Race Ethnicity and Gender. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.102.3.532 Athey S. R. Chetty G. Imbens and H. Kang. The Surrogate Index : Combining Short- Term Proxies to Estimate Long-Term Treatment Effects More Rapidly and Precisely. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w26463 | References Bailey M. H. Hoynes M. Rossin-Slater and R. Walker. Is the Social Safety Net a Long-Term Investment ? Large-Scale Evidence from the Food Stamps Program NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w26942 Bailey M. S. Sun and B. Timpe. Prep School for Poor Kids : The Long-Run Impacts of Head Start on Human Capital and Economic Self-Sufficiency. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/ aer.20181801 Baker M. J. Gruber and K. Milligan. Universal Child Care Maternal Labor Supply and Family Well Being. Journal of Political Economy no. : https : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/591908 Banerjee A. E. Gould and M. Sawo. Setting Higher Wages for Child Care and Home Health Care Workers Is Long Overdue. Economic Policy Institute https : //files.epi.org/uploads/237703.pdf Barr A. and C. Gibbs. Breaking the Cycle ? Intergenerational Effects of an Antipoverty Program in Early Childhood. Journal of Political Economy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/720764 Bassok D. T. Dee and S. Latham. The Effects of Accountability Incentives in Early Childhood Education. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : https : //onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pam.22149 Bassok D. J. Doromal M. Michie and V. Wong 2021b. The Effects of Financial Incentives on Teacher Turnover in Early Childhood Settings : Experimental Evidence from Virginia. University of Virginia EdPolicyWorks. https : //files elfsightcdn.com/022b8cb9-839c-4bc2-992e-cefccb8e877e/6de6fd54-e921-4c88a452-ad7cabccc362.pdf Bassok D. M. Fitzpatrick E. Greenberg and S. Loeb. Within- and BetweenSector Quality Differences in Early Childhood Education and Care. Child Development no. https : //doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12551 Bassok D. A. Markowitz L. Bellows and K. Sadowski. 2021a. New Evidence on Teacher Turnover in Early Childhood. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis no. : https : //doi.org/10.3102/0162373720985340 Bauernschuster S. and M. Schlotter. Public Child Care and Mothers Labor Supply : Evidence from Two Quasi-Expirements. Journal of Public Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.12.013 Bhattacharya J. J. Currie and S. Haider. Breakfast of Champions ? The School Breakfast Program and the Nutrition of Children and Families. Journal of Human Resources no. : http : //jhr.uwpress.org/content/XLI/3/445 short Bigelow J. A. Pennington K. Schaberg and D. Jones. A Guide for Using Administrative Data to Examine Long-Term Outcomes in Program Evaluation. OPRE Report https : //www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/documents/opre/ T2P % 20Guide_sept-2021.pdf References | Blau D. The Supply of Child Care Labor. Journal of Labor Economics no. : https : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/298299 Blau D. and J. Currie. Pre-School Day Care and After-School Care : Who s Minding the Kids ? Handbook of the Economics of Education : https : //doi.org/10.1016/S1574-0692 ( ) Blau D. and E. Tekin. The Determinants and Consequences of Child Care Subsidies for Single Mothers in the USA. Journal of Population Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1007/s00148-005-0022-2 Blau F. and L. Kahn. Female Labor Supply : Why Is the United States Falling Behind ? American Economic Review no. : https : //www.aeaweb org/articles ? id = 10.1257/aer.103.3.251 BLS ( U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics ) 2021a. Occupational Employment and Wage Statistics. https : //www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes_stru.htm 2021b. National Compensation Survey : Employee Benefits in the United States. https : //www.bls.gov/ebs/home.htm Table : Families with Own Children : Employment Status of Parents by Age of Youngest Child and Family Type Annual Averages. https : // www.bls.gov/news.release/famee.t04.htm Table B-8 : Average Hourly and Weekly Earnings of Production and Nonsupervisory Employees on Private Nonfarm Payrolls by Industry Sector Seasonally Adjusted. https : //www.bls.gov/news.release/empsit.t24.htm Bod r P. Dynamic Spatial Competition in Early Education : An Equilibrium Analysis of the Preschool Market in Pennsylvania. Working paper New York University Department of Economics. https : //pierrebodere.github.io/content/ bodere_jmp.pdf Boesch T. R. Grunewald R. Nunn and V. Palmer. Pandemic Pushes Mother of Young Children Out of the Labor Force. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. https : //www.minneapolisfed.org/article/2021/pandemic-pushesmothers-of-young-children-out-of-the-labor-force Borowsky J. J. Brown E. Davis C. Gibbs C. Herbst A. Sojourner E. Tekin and M Wiswall. An Equilibrium Model of the Impact of Increased Public Investment in Early Childhood Education. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w30140 Bradley V. S. Kuriwaki M. Isakov D. Sejdinovic X. Meng and S. Flaxman. Unrepresentative Big Surveys Significantly Overestimated U.S. Vaccine Uptake. Nature : https : //www.nature.com/articles/ s41586-021-04198-4 ? s = Brown J. and C. Herbst. Childcare over the Business Cycle. Journal of Labor Economics no. : https : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/ full/10.1086/718189 | References Burnham L. and N. Theodore. Home Economics : The Invisible and Unregulated World of Domestic Work. National Domestic Workers Alliance. https : //www domesticworkers.org/reports-and-publications/ home-economics-the-invisible-and-unregulated-world-of-domestic-work/ Cajner T. L. Feiveson C. Kurz and S. Tevlin. Lessons Learned from the Use of Nontraditional Data during COVID-19. Hamilton Project and Hutchins Center on Fiscal & Monetary Policy at Brookings. https : //www.hamiltonproject.org/ assets/files/Lessons_Learned_from_the_Use_of_Nontraditional_Data_during_ COVID-19.pdf Campbell F. G. Conti J. Heckman S. Moon R. Pinto E. Pungello and Y. Pan. Early Childhood Investments Substantially Boost Adult Health. Science no. : https : //doi.org/10.1126/science.1248429 Cannon J. G. Zellman L. Karoly and H. Schwartz. Quality Rating and Improvement Systems for Early Care and Education Programs : Making the Second Generation Better. Santa Monica CA : RAND Corporation. https : //doi org/10.7249/PE235 Carson J. and M. Mattingly. COVID-19 Didn t Create a Child Care Crisis but Hastened and Inflamed It. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and Carsey School of Public Policy. https : //carsey.unh.edu/publication/child-care-crisis-COVID-19 Cascio E. Maternal Labor Supply and the Introduction of Kindergartens into American Public Schools. Journal of Human Resources no. : https : //doi.org/10.3368/jhr.44.1.140 Cascio E. and D. Schanzenbach. The Impacts of Expanding Access to HighQuality Preschool Education. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings edu/bpea-articles/the-impacts-of-expanding-access-to-high-qualitypreschool-education/ Caven M. N. Khanani X. Zhang and C. Parker. Center- and Program-Level Factors Associated with Turnover in the Early Childhood Education Workforce. U.S. Department of Education Institute of Education Sciences National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance. https : //ies ed.gov/ncee/edlabs/regions/northeast/pdf/REL_2021069.pdf Center for American Progress. U.S. Child Care Deserts. https : //childcaredeserts.org/ Chetty R. J. Friedman N. Hilger E. Saez D. Schanzenbach and D. Yagan. How Does Your Kindergarten Classroom Affect Your Earnings ? Evidence from Project Star. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : // doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjr041 Chien N. Factsheet : Estimates of Child Care Eligibility & Receipt for Fiscal Year Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation U.S Department of Health and Human Services. https : //aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/ files/documents/1d276a590ac166214a5415bee430d5e9/cy2019-child-caresubsidy-eligibility.pdf References | Child Care Aware of America. State Session Round Up Summer https : // info.childcareaware.org/blog/state-session-round-up-summer-2022 Collins C. L. Landivar L. Ruppanner and W. Scarborough. COVID-19 and the Gender Gap in Work Hours. Gender Work Organ : https : // onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/gwao.12506 Davis E. C. Carlin C. Krafft and N. Forry. Do Child Care Subsidies Increase Employment Among Low-Income Parents ? Journal of Family and Economic Issues : https : //doi.org/10.1007/s10834-018-9582-7 Davis E. and A. Sojourner. Increasing Federal Investment in Children s Early Care and Education to Raise Quality Access and Affordability. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/research/increasing-federal-investmentin-childrens-early-care-and-education-to-raise-quality-access-and-affordability/ de Brey C. L. Musu J. McFarland S. Wilkinson-Flicker M. Diliberti A. Zhang C Branstetter and X. Wang. Status and Trends in the Education of Racial and Ethnic Groups U.S. Department of Education NCES https : //nces.ed.gov/pubs2019/2019038.pdf Deming D. Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development : Evidence from Head Start. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/app.1.3.111 Doromal J. D. Bassok L. Bellows and A. Markowitz. Hard-to-Staff Centers : Exploring Center-Level Variation in the Persistence of Child Care Teacher Turnover. Early Childhood Research Quarterly : https : //doi org/10.1016/j.ecresq.2022.07.007 Duncan G. and K. Magnuson. Investing in Preschool Programs. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : http : //dx.doi.org/10.1257/ jep.27.2.109 ECLKC ( Early Childhood Learning & Knowledge Center ) Head Start Program Facts : Fiscal Year https : //eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/about-us/article/ head-start-program-facts-fiscal-year-2021 Head Start Timeline. https : //eclkc.ohs.acf.hhs.gov/about-us/article/ head-start-timeline Finseraas H. I. Hardoy and P. Sch ne. School Enrolment and Mothers Labor Supply : Evidence from a Regression Discontinuity Approach. Review of Economics of the Household : https : //doi.org/10.1007/ s11150-016-9350-0 Fitzpatrick M. Preschoolers Enrolled and Mothers at Work ? The Effects of Universal Prekindergarten. Journal of Labor Economics no. : https : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/648666 # _i2 Revising Our Thinking About the Relationship Between Maternal Labor Supply and Preschool. Journal of Human Resources no. : https : //doi.org/10.3368/jhr.47.3.583 | References Flood S. J. McMurry A. Sojourner and M. Wiswall. Inequality in Early Care Experienced by U.S. Children. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/jep.36.2.199 Frisvold D. Nutrition and Cognitive Achievement : An Evaluation of the School Breakfast Program. Journal of Public Economics : https : //doi org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.12.003 Garc a J. F. Bennhoff D. Leaf and J. Heckman. The Dynastic Benefits of Early Childhood Education. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w29004 Garc a J. J. Heckman D. Leaf and M. Prados. Quantifying the Life-Cycle Benefits of an Influential Early-Childhood Program. Journal of Political Economy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/705718 Garc a J. J. Heckman and V. Ronda. The Lasting Effects of Early Childhood Education on Promoting the Skills and Social Mobility of Disadvantaged African Americans. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w29057 Gelbach J. Public Schooling for Young Children and Maternal Labor Supply. American Economic Review no. : https : //www.jstor.org/ stable/3083335 Ghertner R. and A. Schreier. Young Children s Geographic Access to Head Start Preschool Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https : //aspe.hhs gov/sites/default/files/documents/73453cd79dfe28592a0396ca2a0c75ee/ Geographic-Access-Head-Start-Brief.pdf Glenn E. Forced to Care : Coercion and Caregiving in America. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. https : //www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog php ? isbn = Goldstein D. With Child Care Scarce States Try to Fix a Broken Market. New York Times June https : //www.nytimes.com/2022/06/18/us/child-care-stateregulations.html Gould E. Child Care Workers Aren t Paid Enough to Make Ends Meet. Economic Policy Institute. https : //www.epi.org/publication/child-careworkers-arent-paid-enough-to-make-ends-meet/ Gould E. M. Sawo and A. Banerjee. Care Workers Are Deeply Undervalued and Underpaid. Economic Policy Institute Working Economics Blog. https : //www epi.org/blog/care-workers-are-deeply-undervalued-and-underpaid-estimatingfair-and-equitable-wages-in-the-care-sectors/ Gray-Lobe G. P. Pathak and C. Walters. The Long-Term Effects of Universal Preschool in Boston. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjac036 References | Grunewald R. and P. Davies. Hardly Child s Play : Times Have Been Even Tougher than Usual for District Childcare Providers. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. https : //www.minneapolisfed.org/article/2011/hardly-childs-play Grunewald R. R. Nunn and V. Palmer. Examining Teacher Turnover in Early Care and Education. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. https : //www minneapolisfed.org/article/2022/ examining-teacher-turnover-in-early-care-and-education Gundersen C. B. Kreider and J. Pepper. The Impact of the National School Lunch Program on Child Health : A Nonparametric Bounds Analysis. Journal of Econometrics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom Hatfield B. M. Burchinal R. Pianta and J. Sideris. Thresholds in the Association Between Quality of Teacher Child Interactions and Preschool Children s School Readiness Skills. Early Childhood Research Quarterly : https : //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0885200615300053 Heckman J. Schools Skills and Synapses. Economic Inquiry no. : https : //doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7295.2008.00163.x Heckman J. and T. Kautz. Fostering and Measuring Skills Interventions that Improve Character and Cognition. In The Myth of Achievement Tests : The GED and the Role of Character in American Life edited by J. Heckman J Humphries and T. Kautz. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. https : //doi org/10.7208/chicago/9780226100128.003.0009 Heckman J. and D. Masterov. The Productivity Argument for Investing in Young Children. Review of Agricultural Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1111/j.1467-9353.2007.00359.x Heckman J. S. Moon R. Pinto P. Savelyev and A. Yavitz. The Rate of Return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program. Journal of Public Economics no : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2009.11.001 Heflin C. I. Arteaga and S. Gable. The Child and Adult Care Food Program and Food Insecurity. Social Service Review no. : https : //www.journals uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/679760 Heggeness M. Estimating the Immediate Impact of the COVID-19 Shock on Parental Attachment to the Labor Market and the Double Bind of Mothers. Review of Economics of the Household : https : //link.springer.com/ article/10.1007/s11150-020-09514-x Hendren N. and B. Sprung-Keyser. A Unified Welfare Analysis of Government Policies. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1093/qje/qjaa006 Herbst C. Universal Child Care Maternal Employment and Children s Long-Run Outcomes : Evidence from the U.S. Lanham Act of Journal of Labor Economics no. https : //doi.org/10.1086/689478 | References Child Care in the United States : Markets Policy and Evidence. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. https : //doi.org/10.1002/pam.22436 Herbst C. and E. Tekin Do Child Care Subsidies Influence Single Mothers Decision to Invest in Human Capital ? Economics of Education Review no : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2011.03.006 Hinrichs P. The Effects of the National School Lunch Program on Education and Health. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : https : //doi.org/10.1002/pam.20506 Hoynes H. M. Page and A. Stevens. Can Targeted Transfers Improve Birth Outcomes ? Evidence from the Introduction of the WIC Program. Journal of Public Economics nos. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j jpubeco.2010.12.006 Hoynes H. D. Schanzenbach and D. Almond. Long-Run Impacts of Childhood Access to the Safety Net. American Economic Review no. : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/aer.20130375 Imberman S. and A. Kugler. The Effect of Providing Breakfast in Class on Student Performance. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : https : //doi.org/10.1002/pam.21759 IRS ( Internal Revenue Service ) Child and Dependent Care Credit FAQs. https : // www.irs.gov/newsroom/child-and-dependent-care-credit-faqs Jessen-Howard S. R. Malik and M. Falgout. Costly and Unavailable : America Lacks Sufficient Child Care Supply for Infants and Toddlers. Center for American Progress. https : //www.americanprogress.org/article/ costly-unavailable-america-lacks-sufficient-child-care-supply-infants-toddlers/ Johnson R. and C. Jackson. Reducing Inequality through Dynamic Complementarity : Evidence from Head Start and Public School Spending. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/pol.20180510 King E. A. Johnson D. Cassidy Y. Wang J. Lower and V. Kintner-Duffy. Preschool Teachers Financial Well-Being and Work Time Supports : Associations with Children s Emotional Expressions and Behaviors in Classrooms. Early Childhood Education Journal : https : //link springer.com/article/10.1007/s10643-015-0744-z Knudsen E. J. Heckman J. Cameron and J. Shonkoff. Economic Neurobiological and Behavioral Perspectives on Building America s Future Workforce. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. : https : //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0600888103 Korenman S. K. Abner R. Kaestner and R. Gordon. The Child and Adult Care Food Program and the Nutrition of Preschoolers. Early Childhood Research Quarterly no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.ecresq.2012.07.007 Landivar L. N. Graf and G. Rayo. Childcare Prices in Local Areas : Initial Findings from the National Database of Childcare Prices. U.S. Department of References | Labor Women s Bureau Issue Brief. https : //www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/ WB/NDCP/WB_IssueBrief-NDCP-final.pdf Lefebvre P. and P. Merrigan. Child Care Policy and the Labor Supply of Mothers with Young Children : A Natural Experiment from Canada. Journal of Labor Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/587760 Livingston G. Stay-at-Home Moms and Dads Account for About One-in-Five U.S. Parents. Pew Research Center. https : //www.pewresearch.org/facttank/2018/09/24/stay-at-home-moms-and-dads-account-for-about-onein-five-u-s-parents/ Malik R. K. Hamm L. Schochet C. Novoa S. Workman and S. Jessen-Howard. America s Child Care Deserts in Center for American Progress. https : // www.americanprogress.org/article/americas-child-care-deserts-2018/ Mocan N. Can Consumers Detect Lemons ? An Empirical Analysis of Information Asymmetry in the Market for Child Care. Journal of Population Economics : http : //www.jstor.org/stable/40344407 Moloney M. Ireland s Reform Agenda : Transforming the Early Childhood Education and Care Sector into One of the Best in the World. International Perspectives on Early Childhood Teacher Education in the 21st Century https : //doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-5739-9_7 Morrissey T. Child Care and Parent Labor Force Participation : A Review of the Research Literature. Review of Economics of the Household : https : // doi.org/10.1007/s11150-016-9331-3 Mueller E. Crashing Down : How the Child Care Crisis Is Magnifying Racial Disparities. Politico. https : //www.politico.com/news/2020/07/22/ coronavirus-child-care-racial-disparities-377058 National Household Education Surveys Program. Young Children s Care and Education Before Kindergarten. National Center for Education Statistics https : //nces.ed.gov/nhes/young_children.asp National Women s Business Council. Annual Report https : //cdn.www nwbc.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/21113833/pdf/NWBC-2020-AnnualReport-Final.pdf National Women s Law Center. Family Friend and Neighbor Care : Facts and Figures. https : //d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/rrnetwork/pages/103/ attachments/original/1522790259/family_friend___neighbor_care_fact_sheetfinal.pdf ? NCES ( National Center for Education Statistics ) Teacher Turnover : Stayers Movers and Leavers. Condition of Education U.S. Department of Education Institute of Education Sciences. https : //nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/pdf/coe_slc.pdf Early Childhood Care Arrangements : Choices and Costs. Condition of Education U.S. Department of Education Institute of Education Sciences https : //nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator/tca | References Enrollment Rates of Young Children. Condition of Education U.S Department of Education Institute of Education Sciences. https : //nces.ed.gov/ programs/coe/indicator/cfa NSECE ( National Survey of Early Care and Education ) Home-Based Public-Use Data File. https : //www.childandfamilydataarchive.org/cfda/archives/cfda/ studies/37941/datadocumentation National Survey of Early Care and Education : Household Questionnaire. https : //www.acf.hhs.gov/opre/report/ national-survey-early-care-and-education-2019-household-questionnaire OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) Encouraging Quality in Early Childhood Education and Care. OECD Network on Early Childhood Education and Care Survey for the Quality Toolbox and ECE Portal. https : //www.oecd.org/education/school/48483436.pdf Parental Leave : Where Are the Fathers ? https : //www.oecd.org/policybriefs/parental-leave-where-are-the-fathers.pdf Education at a Glance : OECD Indicators. https : //www.oecdilibrary.org/sites/f8d7880d-en/1/2/3/2/index.html ? itemId = /content/publication/ f8d7880d-en&mimeType = text/html&_csp_ = b2d87f13821f45339443c7ca94aafe 46&itemIGO = oecd&itemContentType = book Public Spending on Childcare and Early Education ? https : //www.oecd org/els/soc/PF3_1_Public_spending_on_childcare_and_early_education.pdf No date. OECD.stat Enrollment Rates by Age. https : //stats.oecd.org/Index aspx ? datasetcode = EAG_ENRL_RATE_AGE Office of Child Care. A Foundation for Quality Improvement Systems : State Licensing Preschool and QRIS Program Quality Standards. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Administration for Children and Families https : //childcareta.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/public/a_foundation_for_ quality.pdf Child Care and Development Fund Reauthorization. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Administration for Children and Families. https : // www.acf.hhs.gov/occ/ccdf-reauthorization No date. Ratios and Group Sizes. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Administration for Children and Families. https : //childcare.gov/ consumer-education/ratios-and-group-sizes Office of Early Childhood Development. Preschool Development Birth through Five ( PDG B ) https : //www.acf.hhs.gov/ecd/early-learning/ preschool-development-grants OESE ( Office of Elementary and Secondary Education ) Preschool Development Grant Birth through Five. https : //oese.ed.gov/offices/office-of-discretionarygrants-support-services/innovation-early-learning/ preschool-development-grants/ References | Olivetti C. and B. Petrongolo. The Economic Consequences of Family Policies : Lessons from a Century of Legislation in High-Income Countries. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/ pdfplus/10.1257/jep.31.1.205 Parker M. Women More Than Men Adjust Their Careers for Family Life. Pew Research Center. https : //www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/10/01/ women-more-than-men-adjust-their-careers-for-family-life/ Pew Research Center. Working Mothers Are More Likely Than Working Fathers to Say They Felt Like They Could Not Give % At Work Needed to Reduce Their Hours During the Pandemic. https : //www.pewresearch.org/facttank/2022/05/06/working-moms-in-the-u-s-have-faced-challenges-on-multiple -fronts-during-the-pandemic/ft_2021-01-26_workingparents_04-2/ Pianta R. Adult Child Relationship Processes and Early Schooling. Early Education and Development no. : https : //doi.org/10.1207/ s15566935eed0801_2 Porter T. D. Paulsell P. Del Grosso S. Avellar R. Hass and L. Vuong. A Review of the Literature on Home-Based Child Care : Implications for Future Directions. Princeton NJ : Mathematica Policy Research. https : //mathematica org/publications/a-review-of-the-literature-on-homebased-child-careimplications-for-future-directions Ritchie L. M. Boyle K. Chandran P. Spector S. Whaley P. James S. Samuels K Hecht and P. Crawford. Participation in the Child and Adult Care Food Program Is Associated with More Nutritious Foods and Beverages in Child Care. Childhood Obesity no. https : //doi.org/10.1089/chi.2011.0061 Ritchie L. S. Sharma G. Gildengorin S. Yoshida E. Braff-Guajardo and P. Crawford Policy Improves What Beverages Are Served to Young Children in Child Care. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jand.2014.07.019 Sabol T. and R. Pianta. Recent Trends in Research on Teacher Child Relationships. Attachment & Human Development no. : https : // doi.org/10.1080/14616734.2012.672262 Schanzenbach D. and M. Zaki. Expanding the School Breakfast Program : Impacts on Children s Consumption Nutrition and Health. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w20308/w20308.pdf Schlieber M. and C. McLean. Educator Work Environments Are Children s Learning Environments : How and Why They Should be Improved. Center for the Study of Child Care Employment. https : //cscce.berkeley.edu/blog/ educator-work-environments-are-childrens-learning-environments-how-andwhy-they-should-be-improved/ | References Shonkoff J. and D. Phillips. From Neurons to Neighborhoods : The Science of Early Childhood Development. Washington : National Academies Press. https : // doi.org/10.17226/9824 Smith L. K. McHenry and H. Mullaly. What Is the Employer-Provided Child Care Credit ( 45F ) ? Bipartisan Policy Center. https : //bipartisanpolicy.org/blog/ what-is-employer-provided-child-care-credit-45f/ Tekin E. Child Care Subsidy Receipt Employment and Child Care Choices of Single Mothers. Economics Letters no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j econlet.2005.03.005 Childcare Subsidies Wages and Employment of Single Mothers. Journal of Human Resources no. : https : //doi.org/10.3368/jhr XLII.2.453 T zemen D. Women Without a College Degree Especially Minority Mothers Face a Steeper Road to Recovery. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City https : //www.kansascityfed.org/Economic % 20Review/documents/8243/ EconomicReviewV106N3Tuzemen.pdf U.S. Census Bureau. CBP and NES Combined Report. https : //www.census.gov/ data/tables/2018/econ/cbp/2018-combined-report.html 2021a. Food Security. https : //www.census.gov/data/datasets/time-series/demo/ cps/cps-supp_cps-repwgt/cps-food-security.html 2021b. School Enrollment in the United States : October : Detailed Tables. https : //www.census.gov/data/tables/2019/demo/school-enrollment/2019-cps html USDA ( U.S. Department of Agriculture ) 2022a. Key Statistics & Graphics. https : // www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-u-s/ key-statistics-graphics/ # children 2022b. Summer Electronic Benefit Transfer for Children ( SEBTC ) https : // www.fns.usda.gov/ops/summer-electronic-benefit-transfer-children-sebtc U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Head Start Impact Study : First Year Findings. Administration for Children and Families. https : //files.eric ed.gov/fulltext/ED543015.pdf National Survey of Early Care and Education : Household Questionnaire. Administration for Children and Families. https : //www.acf.hhs gov/opre/report/national-survey-early-care-and-education-2019-householdquestionnaire ARP Child Care Stabilization Funding State Fact Sheets. https : //www acf.hhs.gov/occ/map/arp-act-stabilization-funding-state-fact-sheets U.S. Department of the Treasury. The Economics of Child Care Supply in the United States. https : //home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/The-Economics-ofChildcare-Supply-09-14-final.pdf References | Vinovskis M. The Birth of Head Start : Preschool Education Policies in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations. Chicago : University Chicago Press https : //press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/B/bo3533726.html Weiland C. and H. Yoshikawa. Impacts of a Prekindergarten Program on Children s Mathematics Language Literacy Executive Function and Emotional Skills. Child Development no. : https : //doi org/10.1111/cdev.12099 Wesnes K. C. Pincock D. Richardson G. Helm and S. Hails. Breakfast Reduces Declines in Attention and Memory Over the Morning in Schoolchildren. Appetite no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2003.08.009 Whitebook M. C. McLean L. Austin and B. Edwards. Early Childhood Workforce Index Center for the Study of Child Care Employment https : //cscce.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/Early-ChildhoodWorkforce-Index-2018.pdf White House. Fact Sheet : American Rescue Plan Funds Provided a Critical Lifeline to Child Care Providers Helping Millions of Families to Work. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statementsreleases/2022/10/21/fact-sheet-american-rescue-plan-funds-provided-a-criticallifeline-to-200000-child-care-providers-helping-millions-of-families-to-work/ Wikle J. and R. Wilson. Access to Head Start and Maternal Labor Supply : Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Evidence. Journal of Labor Economics https : //doi.org/10.1086/720980 Workman S. Where Does Your Child Care Dollar Go ? Center for American Progress. https : //www.americanprogress.org/article/child-care-dollar-go/ Yellen J. The History of Women s Work and Wages and How It Has Created Success for Us All. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/essay/ the-history-of-womens-work-and-wages-and-how-it-has-created-success-forus-all/ Chapter Acton R. Effects of Reduced Community College Tuition on College Choices and Degree Completion. Education Finance and Policy no. : https : // doi.org/10.1162/edfp_a_00313 Agarwal S. J. Driscoll X. Gabaix and D. Laibson. The Age of Reason : Financial Decisions over the Life Cycle and Implications for Regulation. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. https : //www.brookings.edu/wp-content/ uploads/2016/07/2009b_bpea_agarwal-1.pdf Aghion P. L. Boustan C. Hoxby and J. Vandenbussche. The Causal Impact of Education on Economic Growth : Evidence from the U.S. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : https : //scholar.harvard.edu/files/aghion/files/ causal_impact_of_education.pdf | References Alsan M. O. Garrick and G. Graziani. Does Diversity Matter for Health ? Experimental Evidence from Oakland. American Economic Review no : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.20181446 Alpert W. K. Couch and O. Harmon. A Randomized Assessment of Online Learning. American Economic Review : https : //doi.org/10.1257/ aer.p20161057 An B. and J. Taylor. A Review of Empirical Studies on Dual Enrollment : Assessing Educational Outcomes. Higher Education : Handbook of Theory and Research : https : //nacep.org/docs/briefs/An % 20& % 20Taylor % ( ) .pdf Andrews R. J. Li and M. Lovenheim. Quantile Treatment Effects of College Quality on Earnings. Journal of Human Resources no. : https : // doi.org/10.3368/jhr.51.1.200 Armona L. and S. Cao. Redesigning Federal Student Aid in Sub-Baccalaureate Education. Social Science Research Network. https : //ssrn.com/ abstract = Armona L. R. Chakrabarti and M. Lovenheim. Student Debt and Default : The Role of For-Profit Colleges. Journal of Financial Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.12.008 Bahr P. The Earnings of Community College Graduates in California. Working paper Center for Analysis of Postsecondary Education and Employment https : //capseecenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/the-earnings-ofcommunity-college-graduates-in-california.pdf Bahr P. S. Dynarski B. Jacob D. Kreisman A. Sosa and M. Wiederspan. Labor Market Returns to Community College Awards : Evidence from Michigan. Working paper Center for Analysis of Postsecondary Education and Employment. https : //capseecenter.org/labor-market-returns-michigan/ Bailey M. and S. Dynarski. Gains and Gaps : Changing Inequality in U.S. College Entry and Completion. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w17633 Baird M. M. Kofoed T. Miller and J. Wenger. Veteran Educators or For-Profiteers ? Tuition Responses to Changes in the Post-9/11 GI Bill. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : https : //doi org/10.1002/pam.22408 Baker D. Name and Shame : An Effective Strategy for College Tuition Accountability ? Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis no. : https : //doi.org/10.3102/0162373720937672 Baker R. E. Bettinger B. Jacob and I. Marinescu. The Effect of Labor Market Information on Community College Students Major Choice. Economics of Education Review : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2018.05.005 Barnes M. L. Bauer W. Edelberg S. Estep R. Greenstein and M. Macklin. The Social Insurance System in the U.S. : Policies to Protect Workers and Families. References | Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/ Social-Insurance-FP_v4.5.pdf Barr A. L. Kawano B. Sacerdote W. Skimmyhorn and M. Stevens. You Can t Handle the Truth : The Effects of the Post-9/11 G.I. Bill on Higher Education and Earnings. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w29024 Barr A. and S. Turner. Out of Work and Into School : Labor Market Policies and College Enrollment during the Great Recession. Journal of Public Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.12.009 A Letter and Encouragement : Does Information Increase Postsecondary Enrollment of UI Recipients ? American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/26529036 Barr N. Higher Education Funding. Oxford Review of Economic Policy no : https : //doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/grh015 Barr N. B. Chapman L. Dearden and S. Dynarski. The U.S. College Loans System : Lessons from Australia and England. Economics of Education Review : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2018.07.007 Barrow L. and O. Malamud. Is College a Worthwhile Investment ? Annual Review of Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1146/ annurev-economics-080614-115510 Baum S. K. Payea and P. Steele. Trends in Student Aid. College Board. https : // research.collegeboard.org/media/pdf/trends-student-aid-2009-full-report.pdf Belfield C. Weathering the Great Recession with Human Capital ? Evidence on Labor Market Returns to Education from Arkansas. Working paper Center for Analysis of Postsecondary Education and Employment. https : //files.eric.ed.gov/ fulltext/ED562519.pdf Belfield C. and T. Bailey. The Labor Market Returns to Sub-Baccalaureate College : A Review. Working paper Center for Analysis of Postsecondary Education and Employment. https : //capseecenter.org/wp-content/ uploads/2017/04/labor-market-returns-sub-baccalaureate-college-review.pdf Beshears J. J. Choi D. Laibson and B. Madrian. How Are Preferences Revealed ? Journal of Public Economics nos. : https : //doi org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2008.04.010 Bettinger E. and R. Baker. The Effects of Student Coaching : An Evaluation of a Randomized Experiment in Student Advising. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis no. https : //doi.org/10.3102/0162373713500523 Bettinger E. L. Fox S. Loeb and E. Taylor. Virtual Classrooms : How Online College Courses Affect Student Success. American Economic Review no : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/aer.20151193 Bettinger E. B. Long P. Oreopoulos and L. Sanbonmatsu. The Role of Application Assistance and Information in College Decisions : Results from the | References H&R Block Fafsa Experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjs017 Bettinger E. and A. Soliz. Returns to Vocational Credentials : Evidence from Ohio s Community and Technical Colleges. Working paper Center for Analysis of Postsecondary Education and Employment. https : //www.capseecenter.org/ wp-content/uploads/2016/10/returns-to-vocational-credentials.pdf Betts J. and L. McFarland. Safe Port in a Storm : The Impact of Labor Market Conditions on Community College Enrollments. Journal of Human Resources no. : https : //doi.org/10.2307/146230 Bird K. B. Castleman and G. Lohner. Negative Impacts from the Shift to Online Learning during the COVID-19 Crisis : Evidence from a Statewide Community College System. Annenberg Institute EdWorkingPaper https : //www edworkingpapers.com/sites/default/files/ai20-299.pdf Birdsall C. Performance Management in Public Higher Education : Unintended Consequences and Implications of Organizational Diversity. Public Performance & Management Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1080/ Black S. J. Denning and J. Rothstein. Winners and Losers ? The Effect of Gaining and Losing Access to Selective Colleges on Education and Labor Market Outcomes. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w26821 Blagg K. and M. Chingos. Choice Deserts : How Geography Limits the Potential Impact of Earnings Data on Higher Education. Urban Institute. https : //www urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/86581/choice_deserts_3.pdf Bleemer Z. Top Percent Policies and the Return to Postsecondary Selectivity. Working paper University of California. https : //zacharybleemer.com/ wp-content/uploads/2020/10/ELC_Paper.pdf Blume G. E. Meza D. Bragg and I. Love. Estimating the Impact of Nation s Largest Single Investment in Community Colleges. Center on Education and Labor Education Policy. https : //www.newamerica.org/education-policy/reports/ estimating-impact-taaccct/ Boatman A. B. Evans and A. Soliz. Understanding Loan Aversion in Education : Evidence from High School Seniors Community College Students and Adults. Aera Open no. : https : //journals.sagepub.com/doi/ pdf/10.1177/2332858416683649 Bound J. B. Braga G. Khanna and S. Turner. The Globalization of Postsecondary Education : The Role of International Students in the U.S. Higher Education System. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w28342 Bound J. M. Lovenheim and S. Turner. Why Have College Completion Rates Declined ? An Analysis of Changing Student Preparation and Collegiate References | Resources. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/app.2.3.129 Increasing Time to Baccalaureate Degree in the United States. Education Finance and Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1162/EDFP_a_00074 Bound J. and S. Turner. Cohort Crowding : How Resources Affect Collegiate Attainment. Journal of Public Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2006.07.006 Bowen W. M. Chingos K. Lack and T. Nygren. Interactive Learning Online at Public Universities : Evidence from a Six-Campus Randomized Trial. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management : https : //doi.org/10.1002/ pam.21728 Bowen W. M. Chingos and M. McPherson. Crossing the Finish Line : Completing College at America s Public Universities. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. https : //press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691149905/ crossing-the-finish-line Cellini R. Crowded Colleges and College Crowd-Out : The Impact of Public Subsidies on the Two-Year College Market. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/ pol.1.2.1 Cellini S. and L. Chaudhary. Commercials for College ? Advertising in Higher Education. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/research/ commercials-for-college-advertising-in-higher-education/ Cellini S. R. Darolia and L. Turner. Where Do Students Go When For-Profit Colleges Lose Federal Aid ? American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/pol.20180265 Cellini S. and C. Koedel. The Case for Limiting Federal Student Aid to For-Profit Colleges. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : https : //doi.org/10.1002/pam.22008 Cellini S. and N. Turner. Gainfully Employed ? Assessing the Employment and Earnings of For-Profit College Students Using Administrative Data. Journal of Human Resources no. : https : //doi.org/10.3368/ jhr.54.2.1016.8302R1 Century Foundation. Voters Overwhelmingly Support Guardrails on For-Profit Colleges Finds TCF and Data for Progress Poll. https : //tcf.org/content/ about-tcf/voters-overwhelmingly-support-guardrails-profit-collegesfinds-tcf-data-progress-poll/ Chakrabarti R. N. Gorton and M. Lovenheim. State Investment in Higher Education : Effects on Human Capital Formation Student Debt and Long-Term Financial Outcomes of Students. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/ w27885 | References Chetty R. J. Friedman E. Saez N. Turner and D. Yagan. Mobility Report Cards : The Role of Colleges in Intergenerational Mobility. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www nber.org/papers/w23618 Chetty R. J. Friedman E. Saez N. Turner and D. Yagan. Income Segregation and Intergenerational Mobility Across Colleges in the United States. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/qje/ qjaa005 Cohen A. F. Brawer and C. Kisker. The American Community College. Hoboken NJ : John Wiley & Sons. https : //www.wiley.com/en-us/The+American+ Community+College,+6th+Edition-p-9781118449813 Cohodes S. and J. Goodman. Merit Aid College Quality and College Completion : Massachusetts Adams Scholarship as an In-Kind Subsidy. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/app.6.4.251 College Scorecard. U.S. Department of Education. https : //collegescorecard.ed.gov/ CUNY ( City University of New York ) No date. ASAP [ Accelerated Study in Associated Programs ] https : //www1.cuny.edu/sites/asap/about/ Currie J. and E. Moretti. Mother s Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital : Evidence from College Openings. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1162/003355 Dadgar M. and M. Trimble. Labor Market Returns to Sub-Baccalaureate Credentials : How Much Does a Community College Degree or Certificate Pay ? Educational Evaluation and Policy no. https : //files.eric.ed.gov/ fulltext/ED533520.pdf Darolia R. Integrity Versus Access ? The Effect of Federal Financial Aid Availability on Postsecondary Enrollment. Journal of Public Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2013.08.001 Darolia R. C. Koedel P. Martorell K. Wilson and F. Perez-Arce. Do Employers Prefer Workers Who Attend For-Profit Colleges ? Evidence from a Field Experiment. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : https : //doi.org/10.1002/pam.21863 Dee T. Are There Civic Returns to Education ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w9588 Deming D. Increasing College Completion with a Federal Higher Education Matching Grant. Hamilton Project. https : //www.hamiltonproject.org/assets/ files/increasing_college_completion_with_federal_higher_education_ matching_grant_pp.pdf References | Deming D. C. Goldin and L. Katz. The For-Profit Postsecondary School Sector : Nimble Critters or Agile Predators ? Journal of Economic Perspectives no : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/jep.26.1.139 Deming D. and C. Walters. The Impact of Price Caps and Spending Cuts on U.S Postsecondary Attainment. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w23736 Deming D. N. Yuchtman A. Abulafi C. Goldin and L. Katz. The Value of Postsecondary Credentials in the Labor Market : An Experimental Study. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/ aer.20141757 Denning J. E. Eide K. Mumford R. Patterson and M. Warnick. Why Have College Completion Rates Increased ? American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : https : //pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/ app.20200525 Dinerstein M. C. Hoxby J. Meer and P. Villanueva. Did the Fiscal Stimulus Work for Universities ? In How the Financial Crisis and Great Recession Affected Higher Education Chicago : University of Chicago Press https : //www.nber.org/system/files/chapters/c12864/c12864.pdf Dynarski S. C. Libassi K. Michelmore and S. Owen. Closing the Gap : The Effect of Reducing Complexity and Uncertainty in College Pricing on the Choices of Low-Income Students. American Economic Review no.6 : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/aer.20200451 Dynarski S. A. Nurshatayeva L. Page and J. Scott-Clayton. Addressing Non-Financial Barriers to College Access and Success : Evidence and Policy Implications. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w30054 Dynarski S. L. Page and J. Scott-Clayton. College Costs Financial Aid and Student Decisions. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w30275 Education Commission of the States. State Information Request : College Promise Programs. https : //www.ecs.org/wp-content/uploads/State-InformationRequest_College-Promise-Programs.pdf Edmunds J. F. Unlu J. Furey E. Glennie and N. Arshavsky. What Happens When You Combine High School and College ? The Impact of the Early College Model on Postsecondary Performance and Completion. Sage Journals no https : //doi.org/10.3102/0162373720912249 Emmons W. and L. Ricketts. College Is Not Enough : Higher Education Does Not Eliminate Racial Wealth Gaps. Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.20955/r.2017.7-39 Evans W. M. Kearney B. Perry and J. Sullivan. Increasing Community College Completion Rates among Low-Income Students : Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial Evaluation of a Case-Management Intervention. Journal of | References Policy Analysis and Management no. : https : //doi.org/10.1002/ pam.22256 Fairlie R. F. Hoffman and P. Oreopoulous. A Community College Instructor Like Me : Race and Ethnicity Interactions in the Classroom. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.8.2567 Figlio D. M. Rush and L. Yin. Is It Live or Is It Internet ? Experimental Estimates of the Effects of Online Instruction on Student Learning. Journal of Labor Economics no. : https : //www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/ epdf/10.1086/669930 Fishman R. College Decisions Survey : Part I : Deciding to Go to College. New America. https : //static.newamerica.org/attachments/3248-deciding-to-goto-college/CollegeDecisions_PartI.148dcab30a0e414ea2a52f0d8fb04e7b.pdf Fountain J. The Campus-Based Financial Aid Programs : Background and Issues. Congressional Research Service Report R45024. https : //sgp.fas.org/crs/misc/ R45024.pdf G ndara D. and A. Rutherford. Mitigating Unintended Impacts ? The Effects of Premiums for Underserved Populations in Performance Funding Policies for Higher Education. Research in Higher Education no. https : // doi.org/10.1007/s11162-017-9483-x Gallup Lumina Foundation and Strada Education Network. Some College and No Degree : How Individuals Who Attend and Don t Graduate Feel About Education. https : //www.luminafoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/ some-college-no-degree.pdf GAO ( U.S. Government Accountability Office ) For-Profit Colleges : Undercover Testing Finds Colleges Encouraged Fraud and Engaged in Deceptive and Questionable Marketing Practices. https : //www.gao.gov/assets/gao-10-948t.pdf Financial Aid Offers : Action Needed to Improve Information on College Costs and Student Aid. https : //www.gao.gov/assets/gao-23-104708.pdf Gershenson S. M. Hansen and C. Lindsay. Teacher Diversity and Student Success : Why Racial Representation Matters in the Classroom. Cambridge MA : Harvard Education Press. https : //eric.ed.gov/ ? id = ED611696 Gershenson S. C. Hart J. Hyman C. Lindsay and N. Papageorge. The Long-Run Impacts of Same-Race Teachers. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/ pol.20190573 Goldin C. and L. Katz. The Race Between Education and Technology. Cambridge MA : Harvard University Press. https : //www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog php ? isbn = Goodman J. M. Hurwitz and J. Smith. Access to 4-Year Public Colleges and Degree Completion. Journal of Labor Economics no. : https : // doi.org/10.1086/690818 References | Goodman S. and A. Henriques Volz. Attendance Spillovers between Public and For-Profit Colleges : Evidence from Statewide Variation in Appropriations for Higher Education. Education Finance and Policy no. : https : //doi org/10.1162/edfp_a_00281 Goolsbee A. G. Hubbard and A. Ganz. A Policy Agenda to Develop Human Capital for the Modern Economy. Aspen Institute. https : //www.aspeninstitute org/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/1.1-Pgs-16-39-A-Policy-Agenda-to-DevelopHuman-Capital-for-the-Modern-Economy.pdf Greenwood B. R. Hardeman L. Huang and A. Sojourner. Physician-Patient Racial Concordance and Disparities in Birthing Mortality for Newborns. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. : https : //www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1913405117 Grosz M. The Returns to a Large Community College Program : Evidence from Admissions Lotteries. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/pol.20170506 Hemelt S. N. Schwartz and S. Dynarski. Dual Credit Courses and the Road to College : Experimental Evidence from Tennessee. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : https : //doi.org/10.1002/pam.22180 Hemelt S. and K. Stange. Why the Move to Online Instruction Won t Reduce College Costs. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/blog/browncenter-chalkboard/2020/07/28/ why-the-move-to-online-instruction-wont-reduce-college-costs/ Herbst D. The Impact of Income-Driven Repayment on Student Borrower Outcomes. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/app.20200362 Hiler T. and W. Whistle. Creating a Title I for Higher Ed. Third Way. https : // www.thirdway.org/memo/creating-a-title-i-for-higher-ed Hillman N. Geography of College Opportunity : The Case of Education Deserts. American Educational Research Journal no. https : //doi.org/10.3102/0002 Hillman N. and E. Orians. Community Colleges and Labor Market Conditions : How Does Enrollment Demand Change Relative to Local Unemployment Rates ? Research in Higher Education no. : https : //www.jstor.org/ stable/24571744 Hoekstra M. The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on Earnings : A Discontinuity-Based Approach. Review of Economics and Statistics no : https : //doi.org/10.1162/rest.91.4.717 Holzer H. Workforce Training : What Works ? Who Benefits ? Wisconsin Family Impact Seminars. https : //www.purdue.edu/hhs/hdfs/fii/wp-content/ uploads/2015/07/s_wifis28c02.pdf Sector-Based Training Strategies : The Challenges of Matching Workers and Their Skills to Well-Paying Jobs. U.S. Department of Labor Future of | References Work Paper Series. https : //www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/OASP/legacy/files/ Future_of_work_sector_based_training_strategies.pdf After COVID-19 : Building a More Coherent and Effective Workforce Development System in the United States. Hamilton Project. https : //tacc.org/ sites/default/files/2021-02/holzer_coherent_effective_workforce.pdf Hout M. Social and Economic Returns to College Education in the United States. Annual Review of Sociology : https : //doi.org/10.1146/ annurev.soc.012809.102503 Hoxby C. Online Postsecondary Education and Labor Productivity. In Education Skills and Technical Change : Implications for Future U.S. GDP Growth edited by C. Hulten and V. Ramey Chicago : University of Chicago Press. https : //www.nber.org/system/files/chapters/c13709/c13709.pdf Hoxby C. and C. Avery. The Missing One-Offs : The Hidden Supply of HighAchieving Low-Income Students. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. : https : //www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/2013a_ hoxby.pdf Huntington-Klein N. The Search : The Effect of the College Scorecard on Interest in Colleges. Unpublished manuscript. https : //nickchk.com/HuntingtonKlein_2017_The_Search.pdf Hurwitz M. and J. Smith. Student Responsiveness to Earnings Data in the College Scorecard. Economic Inquiry no. : https : //doi org/10.1111/ecin.12530 Hyman B. Can Displaced Labor Be Retrained ? Evidence from Quasi-Random Assignment to Trade Adjustment Assistance. Proceedings Annual Conference on Taxation and Minutes of the Annual Meeting of the National Tax Association : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/26939524 Hyman J. Does Money Matter in the Long Run ? Effects of School Spending on Educational Attainment. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no : https : //doi.org/10.1257/pol.20150249 Institute of International Education. Project Atlas Release : A Quick Look at Global Mobility Trends. https : //iie.widen.net/s/g2bqxwkwqv/project-atlasinfographics-2020 IPEDS ( Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System ) Table Number and Percentage Distribution of Students Enrolled at Title IV Institutions by Control of Institution Student Level Level of Institution Enrollment Status and Other Selected Characteristics : United States Fall National Center for Education Statistics. https : //nces.ed.gov/ipeds/search/ViewTable ? tableId = Jackson C. R. Johnson and C. Persico. The Effects of School Spending on Educational and Economic Outcomes : Evidence from School Finance Reforms NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w20847 References | Jacobson L. R. LaLonde and D. Sullivan. Estimating the Returns to Community College Schooling for Displaced Workers. Journal of Econometrics nos : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconom.2004.04.010 Jepsen C. K. Troske and P. Coomes. The Labor-Market Returns to Community College Degrees Diplomas and Certificates. Journal of Labor Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/671809 Joyce T. S. Crockett D. Jaeger O. Altindag and S. O Connell. Does Classroom Time Matter ? Economics of Education Review : https : //www sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0272775715000254 Kane T. P. Orszag E. Apostolov R. Inman and A. Reschovsky. Higher Education Appropriations and Public Universities : Role of Medicaid and the Business Cycle. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs http : // www.jstor.org/stable/25067418 Kane T. and C. Rouse. Labor-Market Returns to Two- and Four-Year College. American Economic Review no : https : //www.jstor.org/ stable/2118190 Katz L. J. Roth R. Hendra and K. Schaberg. Why Do Sectoral Employment Programs Work ? Lessons from WorkAdvance. Journal of Labor Economics no. S1 : https : //doi.org/10.1086/717932 Kelchen R. and Z. Liu. Did Gainful Employment Regulations Result in College and Program Closures ? Education Finance and Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1162/edfp_a_00340 Klasik D. K. Blagg and Z. Pekor. Out of the Education Desert : How Limited Local College Options Are Associated with Inequity in Postsecondary Opportunities. Social Sciences no. : https : //www.mdpi com/2076-0760/7/9/165 Kinser K. Paying for For-Profit Higher Education : Implications of the United States Case. In Student Financing of Higher Education : A Comparative Perspective edited by D. Heller and C. Callender London : Routledge https : //www.routledge.com/Student-Financing-of-Higher-Education-AComparative-Perspective/Heller-Callender/p/book/9781138645417 Kofoed M. L. Gebhart D. Gilmore and R. Moschitto. Zooming to Class ? Experimental Evidence on College Students Online Learning during COVID19. Institute of Labor Economics. https : //docs.iza.org/dp14356.pdf Kozakowski W. Are Four-Year Public Colleges Engines for Economic Mobility ? Evidence from Statewide Admissions Thresholds. Annenberg Institute EdWorkingPaper https : //doi.org/10.26300/vapt-4e25 Krieg J. and S. Henson. The Educational Impact of Online Learning : How Do University Students Perform in Subsequent Courses ? Education Finance and Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1162/EDFP_a_00196 Kuehn D. S. Mills De La Rosa R. Lerman and K. Hollenbeck. Do Employers Earn Positive Returns to Investments in Apprenticeship ? Evidence from | References Registered Programs under the American Apprenticeship Initiative. Report prepared for U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration. Rockville MD : Abt Associates. https : //www.abtassociates.com/ files/insights/reports/2022/aai-roi-final-report-508c_9-16-22.pdf Labaree D. A Perfect Mess : The Unlikely Ascendancy of American Higher Education. Chicago : University of Chicago Press. https : //press.uchicago.edu/ ucp/books/book/chicago/P/bo19995111.html Lavecchia A. H. Liu and P. Oreopoulos. Behavioral Economics of Education : Progress and Possibilities. Handbook of the Economics of Education : https : //doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63459-7.00001-4 Leslie L. and G. Johnson. The Market Model and Higher Education. Journal of Higher Education no. : https : //doi.org/10.1080/00221546.1974.1177 Levin H. and E. Garcia. Benefit-Cost Analysis of Accelerated Study in Associated Programs ( ASAP ) of the City University of New York ( CUNY ) Center for Benefit-Cost Studies in Education. https : //www1.nyc.gov/assets/ opportunity/pdf/Levin_ASAP_Benefit_Cost_Report_FINAL_05212013.pdf Levine P. J. Ma and L. Russell. Do College Applicants Respond to Changes in Sticker Prices Even When They Don t Matter ? Education Finance and Policy https : //doi.org/10.1162/edfp_a_00372 Levy D. Juxtaposing Global and U.S. Private Higher Education : What Is to Be Learned ? In International Perspectives in Higher Education : Balancing Access Equity and Cost edited by J. Delisle and A. Usher https : // www.routledge.com/Student-Financing-of-Higher-Education-A-ComparativePerspective/Heller-Callender/p/book/9781138645417 ? utm_source = cjaffiliates &utm_medium = affiliates&cjevent = 5a91649a9cc411ed82b6abb90a82b832 Linkow T. E. Bumgarner H. Didriksen K. Lack A. Nichols E. Dastrup S. Dastrup and B. Gamse. The Story of Scaling Up : Interim Report on the Impact of Success Boston s Coaching for Completion. Abt Associates. https : //files.eric ed.gov/fulltext/ED602748.pdf Linkow T. B. Gamse F. Unlu E. Bumgarner H. Didriksen J. Furey M. Meneses M Sami and A. Nichols. The Power of Coaching : Highlights from the Interim Report on the Impact of Success Boston s Transition Coaching on College Success. Abt Associates. https : //files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED582090.pdf Liu V. C. Belfield and M. Trimble. The Medium-Term Labor Market Returns to Community College Awards : Evidence from North Carolina. Economics of Education Review : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2014.10.009 Lochner L. Non-Production Benefits of Education : Crime Health and Good Citizenship. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w16722 References | Lochner L. and E. Moretti. The Effect of Education on Crime : Evidence from Prison Inmates Arrests and Self-Reports. American Economic Review no : https : //doi.org/10.1257/000282804322970751 Long M. College Quality and Early Adult Outcomes. Economics of Education Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2007.04.004 Love I. Why Community College Bachelor s Degrees ? Similarities and Differences Across Urban and Rural Settings. New America. https : //www newamerica.org/education-policy/briefs/ why-community-college-bachelors-degrees/ Lovenheim M. and J. Smith. Returns to Different Postsecondary Investments : Institution Type Academic Programs and Credentials. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w29933 Lusher L. D. Campbell and S. Carrell. TAs Like Me : Racial Interactions between Graduate Teaching Assistants and Undergraduates. Journal of Public Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2018.02.005 Ma J. and M. Pender. Trends in College Pricing and Student Aid College Board. https : //research.collegeboard.org/media/pdf/trends-college-pricingstudent-aid-2021.pdf 2022a. Trends in College Pricing : Data in Excel. College Board. https : // research.collegeboard.org/media/xlsx/trends-college-pricing-excel-data-2022.xlsx .2022b. Trends in College Pricing and Student Aid College Board. https : // research.collegeboard.org/media/pdf/trends-in-college-pricing-student-aid-2022 pdf Ma J. M. Pender and M. Welch. Education Pays College Board. https : // research.collegeboard.org/media/pdf/education-pays-2019-full-report.pdf Marcucci P. The Politics of Student Funding Policies from a Comparative Perspective. In Student Financing of Higher Education : A Comparative Perspective edited by D. Heller and C. Callender London : Routledge https : //www.routledge.com/Student-Financing-of-Higher-Education-AComparative-Perspective/Heller-Callender/p/book/9781138645417 Marken S. L. Gray and L. Lewis. Dual Enrollment Programs and Courses for High School Students at Postsecondary Institutions : National Center for Education Statistics. http : //nces.ed.gov/pubs2013/2013002.pdf McMillan-Cottom T. Lower Ed : The Troubling Rise of For-Profits. New York : New Press. https : //thenewpress.com/books/lower-ed Meyer K. and K. Rosinger. Applying Behavioral Insights to Improve Postsecondary Education Outcomes : A Review of Obama Administration Efforts and Next Steps Under the Trump Administration. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : https : //doi.org/10.1002/ pam.22123 | References Miller B. Who Are Student Loan Defaulters ? Center for American Progress https : //www.americanprogress.org/article/student-loan-defaulters/ Miller C. C. Headlam M. Manno and D. Cullinan. Increasing Community College Graduation Rates with a Proven Model : Three-Year Results from the Accelerated Study in Associate Programs ( ASAP ) Ohio Demonstration. MDRC. https : //www.mdrc.org/publication/increasing-community-collegegraduation-rates-proven-model Minaya V. and J. Scott-Clayton. Labor Market Trajectories for Community College Graduates : How Returns to Certificates and Associate s Degrees Evolve over Time. Education Finance and Policy no. : https : //doi org/10.1162/edfp_a_00325 Mishory J. The Future of Statewide College Promise Programs. Century Foundation. https : //tcf.org/content/report/ future-statewide-college-promise-programs/ Mountjoy J. Community Colleges and Upward Mobility. American Economic Review no. : https : //www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/ aer.20181756 Mountjoy J. and B. Hickman. The Returns to College ( s ) : Relative Value-Added and Match Effects in Higher Education. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w29276 Mueller H. and C. Yannelis. The Rise in Student Loan Defaults. Journal of Financial Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j jfineco.2018.07.013 Murphy R. J. Scott-Clayton and G. Wyness. The End of Free College in England : Implications for Enrolments Equity and Quality. Economics of Education Review : https : //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/ pii/S0272775717306404 National Student Clearinghouse Research Center. 2022a. Completing College : National and State Reports. https : //nscresearchcenter.org/completing-college/ _______. 2022b. Overview : Spring Enrollment Estimates. https : // nscresearchcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/CTEE_Report_Spring_2022.pdf NCES ( National Center for Education Statistics ) Number and Percentage of Students Enrolled in Degree-Granting Postsecondary Institutions by Distance Education Participation Location of Student Level of Enrollment and Control and Level of Institution : Fall and Fall https : //nces.ed.gov/ programs/digest/d19/tables/dt19_311.15.asp .2020a. Percent of Undergraduate Students Receiving Pell Grants. https : //nces ed.gov/ipeds/TrendGenerator/app/answer/8/35 .2020b. Percent of Undergraduate Students Receiving Pell Grants by Level of Institution : https : //nces.ed.gov/ipeds/TrendGenerator/app/ build-table/8/35 ? cid = References | .2020c. Percent of Undergraduate Students Receiving Pell Grants ( Limited by Control of Institution ) https : //nces.ed.gov/ipeds/TrendGenerator/app/ answer/8/35 ? f = % 3D3 Percentage of the Population to Years Old Who Attained a Postsecondary Degree by Highest Degree Attained Age Group and Country : U.S. Department of Education. https : //nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d21/ tables/dt21_603.30.asp ? current = yes 2022a. Age at Start of Postsecondary Education by NPSAS Institution Sector ( with Multiple ) U.S. Department of Education Quick Launch qquayy. https : // nces.ed.gov/datalab/powerstats/121-national-postsecondary-student-aid-study2016-undergraduates/percentage-distribution 2022b. Residence While Enrolled by Age at Start of Postsecondary Education. U.S. Department of Education Quick Launch hgtstb. https : //nces.ed.gov/ datalab/powerstats/121-national-postsecondary-student-aid-study-2016undergraduates/percentage-distribution 2022c. NPSAS Institution Level by Age at Start of Postsecondary Education and Residence While Enrolled. U.S. Department of Education Quick Launch rgcflp. https : //nces.ed.gov/datalab/powerstats/121-national-postsecondarystudent-aid-study-2016-undergraduates/percentage-distribution 2022d. NPSAS Institution Level by Age as of 12/31/2015. U.S. Department of Education Quick Launch ljkiep. https : //nces.ed.gov/datalab/powerstats/121national-postsecondary-student-aid-study-2016-undergraduates/ percentage-distribution 2022e. Residence While Enrolled by Age as of 12/31/2015. Filtered by NPSAS Institution Level ( 4-year ) U.S. Department of Education Quick Launch krdscg. https : //nces.ed.gov/datalab/powerstats/121-national-postsecondarystudent-aid-study-2016-undergraduates/percentage-distribution 2022f. Age as of 12/31/2015 by NPSAS Institution Sector ( with Multiple ) U.S. Department of Education Quick Launch vppist. https : //nces.ed.gov/ datalab/powerstats/121-national-postsecondary-student-aid-study-2016undergraduates/percentage-distribution 2022g. Institution Sector ( with Multiple ) by Enrollment Pattern. Year U.S. Department of Education Quick Launch : heqmyc. https : //nces.ed.gov/ datalab/powerstats/121-national-postsecondary-student-aid-study-2016undergraduates/percentage-distribution/trend 2022h. Distance from Student s Home ( in Miles ) to NPSAS Institution by Institution Sector ( with Multiple ) ; Years and U.S Department of Education Quick Launch : lqtmop. https : //nces.ed.gov/datalab/ powerstats/121-national-postsecondary-student-aid-study-2016-undergraduates/ percentage-distribution/trend 2022i. Distance from Student s Home ( in Miles ) to NPSAS Institution by Race/ Ethnicity ( with Multiple ) without Foreign Students ; Years and | References U.S. Department of Education Quick Launch : ubmvzr. https : //nces ed.gov/datalab/powerstats/121-national-postsecondary-student-aid-study-2016undergraduates/percentage-distribution/trend 2022j. Distance from Student s Home ( in Miles ) to NPSAS Institution by Income Percentile Rank for All Students. Years and U.S. Department of Education Quick Launch : svljuv. https : //nces.ed.gov/ datalab/powerstats/121-national-postsecondary-student-aid-study-2016undergraduates/percentage-distribution/trend Neelakantan U. and J. Romero. Falling Short : Why Isn t the U.S. Producing More College Graduates ? Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. https : //www richmondfed.org/-/media/RichmondFedOrg/publications/research/annual_ report/2017/article.pdf OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) Education at a Glance : OECD Indicators. Paris : OECD Publishing. https : //doi org/10.1787/b35a14e5-en Education at a Glance : OECD Indicators. Paris : OECD Publishing https : //doi.org/10.1787/3197152b-en Oreopoulos P. and U. Petronijevic. Student Coaching : How Far Can Technology Go ? Journal of Human Resources no. : https : //doi.org/10.3368/ jhr.53.2.1216-8439R Oreopoulos P. and K. Salvanes. Priceless : The Nonpecuniary Benefits of Schooling. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/jep.25.1.159 Ortagus J. R. Kelchen K. Rosinger and N. Voorhees. Performance-Based Funding in American Higher Education : A Systematic Synthesis of the Intended and Unintended Consequences. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis no. https : //doi.org/10.3102/0162373720953128 Ost B. W. Pan and D. Webber. The Returns to College Persistence for Marginal Students : Regression Discontinuity Evidence from University Dismissal Policies. Journal of Labor Economics no. : http : //doi org/10.1086/696204 Protopsaltis S. and S. Parrott. Pell Grants : A Key Tool for Expanding College Access and Economic Opportunity Need Strengthening Not Cuts. Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. https : //www.cbpp.org/research/federal-budget/ pell-grants-a-key-tool-for-expanding-college-access-and-economic Redden E. The Community College Internationally. Inside Higher Ed. https : // www.insidehighered.com/news/2010/06/16/community-college-internationally Ross R. S. White J. Wright and L. Knapp. Using Behavioral Economics for Postsecondary Success. ideas42. http : //www.ideas42.org/wp-content/ uploads/2015/05/Using-Behavioral-Economics-for-Postsecondary-Success_ ideas42_2013.pdf References | Rothstein J. R. Santillano T. von Wachter W. Khan and M. Yang. Identifying the Impacts of Job Training Programs in California. California Policy Lab https : //www.capolicylab.org/ identifying-the-impacts-of-job-training-programs-in-california/ Rouse C. Democratization or Diversion ? The Effect of Community Colleges on Educational Attainment. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics no. : https : //www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07350015.1995.10524596 Salto D. Brazil : Expanding Access Through Private Institutions. In International Perspectives in Higher Education : Balancing Access Equity and Cost edited by J. Delisle and A. Usher https : //www.aei.org/research-products/ book/international-perspectives-in-higher-education-balancing-accessequity-and-cost/ Schanzenbach D. and S. Turner. Limited Supply and Lagging Enrollment : Production Technologies and Enrollment Changes at Community Colleges during the Pandemic. Journal of Public Economics https : //doi org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2022.104703 Scott-Clayton J. Information Constraints and Financial Aid Policy. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w17811 2018a. What Accounts for Gaps in Student Loan Default and What Happens After. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/wp-content/ uploads/2018/06/Report_Final.pdf 2018b. The Looming Student Loan Default Crisis Is Worse Than We Thought. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/ scott-clayton-report.pdf Scrivener S. M. Weiss A. Ratledge T. Rudd C. Sommo and H. Fresques. Doubling Graduation Rates : Three-Year Effects of CUNY s Accelerated Study in Associate Programs ( ASAP ) for Developmental Education Students. MDRC. https : //www.mdrc.org/sites/default/files/ doubling_graduation_rates_fr.pdf Skinner R. and C. Cooper. FY2019 State Grants Under Title I-A of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act ( ESEA ) Congressional Research Service. https : //www.everycrsreport.com/files/20200311_R46269_ eb6aebd236181eef9c73e8ec2f3b932a3e244798.pdf Smith J. Ova and Out : Using Twins to Estimate the Educational Returns to Attending a Selective College. Economics of Education Review : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2013.06.008 Smith J. J. Goodman and M. Hurwitz. The Economic Impact of Access to Public Four-Year Colleges. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w27177 | References Sommo C. D. Cullinan M. Manno S. Blake and E. Alonzo. Doubling Graduation Rates in a New State : Two-Year Findings from the ASAP Ohio Demonstration. MDRC. https : //files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED592008.pdf Song M. K. Zeiser D. Atchison and I. Brodziak de los Reyes. Early College Continued Success : Longer-Term Impact of Early College High Schools. Journal of Research on Educational Effectiveness no.1 : https : //doi org/10.1080/19345747.2020.1862374 Stolzenberg E. M. Aragon E. Romo V. Couch D. McLennan M. Eagan and N. Kang The American Freshman : National Norms Fall Los Angeles : Higher Education Research Institute of the University of California Los Angeles. https : // www.heri.ucla.edu/monographs/TheAmericanFreshman2019.pdf Student Loans Company. Student Loans in England : Financial Year Statistical Publication SP01/2022. Glasgow : Student Loans Company. https : // assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ attachment_data/file/1092922/slcsp012022.pdf Turner L. The Importance of Choice Architecture for Student Loan Repayment Decisions and Outcomes. Postsecondary Equity and Economics Research Project. https : //www.peerresearchproject.org/peer/research/body/Turner-PaperChoice-Architecture.pdf U.S. Department of Education. Fact Sheet on Final Gainful Employment Regulations. https : //www2.ed.gov/policy/highered/reg/hearulemaking/2012/ gainful-employment-fact-sheet-10302014.pdf Cover Letter. https : //www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ope/ heerfinstitutionalcoverletter.pdf 2022a. Federal Student Loan Portfolio. https : //studentaid.gov/data-center/ student/portfolio 2022b. During Raise the B.A.R. Summit Education Department Announces College Completion Fund Competition to Support Postsecondary Student Success. https : //www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/ during- % E2 % % 98raise-bar % E2 % % 99-summit-education-departmentannounces-college-completion-fund-competition-support-postsecondarystudent-success 2022c. ARP : American Rescue Plan ( HEERF III ) https : //www2.ed.gov/about/ offices/list/ope/arp.html 2022d. Gainful Employment Information. https : //studentaid.gov/data-center/ school/ge 2022e. Issue Paper : Gainful Employment. https : //d1y8sb8igg2f8e.cloudfront net/documents/Issue_Paper_3_Gainful_Employment_FINAL_3-8-22.pdf 2023a. The U.S. Department of Education Offers Low-Interest Loans to Eligible Students to Help Cover the Cost of College or Career School. https : // studentaid.gov/understand-aid/types/loans/subsidized-unsubsidized References | 2023b. Department Awards Grants to Improve Opportunities and Outcomes for Nation s Postsecondary Students. https : //www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/ department-awards-grants-improve-opportunities-and-outcomes-nationspostsecondary-students 2023c. Higher Education Emergency Relief Fund : Annual Performance Report. https : //www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ope/heerf-2021-annualperformance-report.pdf U.S. Department of Labor. 2022a. Trade Adjustment Assistance Community College and Career Training ( TAACCCT ) Grant Program Evaluation. https : //www.dol.gov/ agencies/oasp/evaluation/currentstudies/14 2022b. ApprenticeshipUSA : A Proven Solution for Employers. https : //www apprenticeship.gov/sites/default/files/dol-industry-factsheet-employer-v10.pdf U.S. Department of the Treasury. American Rescue Plan State and Local Fiscal Recovery Funds : Project Highlights. https : //home.treasury.gov/system/ files/136/American-Rescue-Plan-Anniversary-SLFRF-Examples.pdf Usher A. The Architecture of Student Loan Systems. In International Perspectives in Higher Education : Balancing Access Equity and Cost edited by J. Delisle and A. Usher https : //www.aei.org/research-products/ book/international-perspectives-in-higher-education-balancing-accessequity-and-cost/ Walton D. K. Gardiner and B. Barnow. Expanding Apprenticeship to New Sectors and Populations : The Experiences and Outcomes of Apprentices in the American Apprenticeship Initiative. Prepared for the U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration. Rockville MD : Abt Associates https : //www.abtassociates.com/files/insights/reports/2022/aai-outcomes-studyfinal-report-508.pdf Webb M. Early College Expansion : Propelling Students to Postsecondary Success at a School Near You. Washington : Jobs for the Future. https : //eric ed.gov/ ? id = ED559689 Webber D. and R. Ehrenberg. Do Expenditures Other Than Instructional Expenditures Affect Graduation and Persistence Rates in American Higher Education ? Economics of Education Review no. : https : //doi org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2010.04.006 Weiss M. A. Ratledge C. Sommo and H. Gupta. Supporting Community College Students from Start to Degree Completion : Long-Term Evidence from a Randomized Trial of CUNY s ASAP. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/app.20170430 White House. Fact Sheet : The American Families Plan. https : //www.whitehouse gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/04/28/fact-sheet-the-americanfamilies-plan/ Fact Sheet : Biden-Harris Administration Launches the Apprenticeship Ambassador Initiative to Create Equitable Debt-Free Pathways to High-Paying | References Jobs. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases /2022/09/01/ fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-launches-the-apprenticeship-ambassadorinitiative-to-create-equitable-debt-free-pathways-to-high-paying-jobs/ Wiswall M. and B. Zafar. How Do College Students Respond to Public Information About Earnings ? Journal of Human Capital no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/681542 World Higher Education Database. No date. The World of Higher Education at Your Fingertips. https : //www.whed.net/home.php Xu D. and S. Jaggars. The Impact of Online Learning on Students Course Outcomes : Evidence from a Large Community and Technical College System. Economics of Education Review : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j econedurev.2013.08.001 Xu D. S. Jaggars and J. Fletcher. How and Why Does Two-Year College Entry Influence Baccalaureate Aspirants Academic and Labor Market Outcomes. Working paper Center for Analysis of Postsecondary Education and Employment. https : //ccrc.tc.columbia.edu/media/k2/attachments/CAPSEE-howand-why-two-year-college-entry-influence-outcomes.pdf Zimmerman S. The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal Students. Journal of Labor Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1086/676661 Chapter Aaronson S. T. Cajner B. Fallick F. Galbis-Reig C. Smith and W. Wascher. Labor Force Participation : Recent Developments and Future Prospects. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity : https : //doi.org/10.1353/ eca.2014.0015 Abraham K. and M. Kearney. Examining the Decline in the U.S. Employmentto-Population Ratio : A Review of the Evidence. Journal of Economic Literature no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/jel.20191480 Acemoglu D. and D. Autor. Skills Tasks and Technologies : Implications for Employment and Earnings. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w16082 Acemoglu D. D. Autor D. Dorn G. Hanson and B. Price. Import Competition and the Great U.S. Employment Sag of the 2000s. Journal of Labor Economics no. S1 : https : //doi.org/10.1086/682384 Acemoglu D. and P. Restrepo. Secular Stagnation ? The Effect of Aging on Economic Growth in the Age of Automation. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20171101 Aiken L. D. Sloane M. McHugh C. Pogue and K. Lasater. A Repeated CrossSectional Study of Nurses Immediately Before and During the COVID-19 References | Pandemic : Implications for Action. Nursing Outlook no. : https : // doi.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2022.11.007 Akee R. D. Feir M. Gorzig and S. Myers Jr. Native American Deaths of Despair and Economic Conditions. IZA Discussion Paper https : //www econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/265767/1/dp15546.pdf Alesina A. E. Glaeser and B. Sacerdote. Work and Leisure in the U.S. and Europe : Why So Different ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w11278 Anand P. L. Dague and K. Wagner. The Role of Paid Family Leave in Labor Supply Responses to a Spouse s Disability or Health Shock. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : // doi.org/10.3386/w28808 Autor D. Work of the Past Work of the Future. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w25588 Autor D. and D. Dorn. The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.5.1553 Autor D. D. Dorn and G. Hanson. The China Syndrome : Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.103.6.2121 On the Persistence of the China Shock. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w29401 Autor D. D. Dorn. G. Hanson and J. Song. Trade Adjustment : Worker-Level Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1093/qje/qju026 Autor D. and M. Duggan. The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in Unemployment. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : // doi.org/10.1162/00335530360535171 Bacher-Hicks A. O. Chi and A. Orellana. COVID-19 and the Composition of the Massachusetts Teacher Workforce. Boston University Wheelock College of Education and Human Development. https : //wheelockpolicycenter.org/ wp-content/uploads/2021/10/TeacherWorkforce_PolicyBrief_Final.pdf Baker M. J. Gruber and K. Milligan. Universal Child Care Maternal Labor Supply and Family Well-Being. Journal of Political Economy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/591908 Barkin T. Is a Labor Challenge Coming ? Speech to Virginia Economic Summit and Forum on International Trade December https : //www.richmondfed.org/ press_room/speeches/thomas_i_barkin/2022/barkin_speech_20221202 | References Basso G. and G. Peri. Internal Mobility : The Greater Responsiveness of ForeignBorn to Economic Conditions. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/jep.34.3.77 Bastian J. The Rise of Working Mothers and the Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/pol.20180039 Bauernschuster S. and M. Schlotter. Public Child Care and Mothers Labor Supply Evidence from Two Quasi-Experiments. Journal of Public Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2014.12.013 Baum C. and C. Ruhm. The Effects of Paid Family Leave in California on Labor Market Outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management no. : https : //doi.org/10.1002/pam.21894 Bernstein S. R. Diamond A. Jiranaphawiboon T. McQuade and B. Pousada. The Contribution of High-Skilled Immigrants to Innovation in the United States NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w30797 Binder A. and J. Bound. The Declining Labor Market Prospects of LessEducated Men. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : // doi.org/10.1257/jep.33.2.163 Black S. and C. Juhn. The Rise of Female Professionals : Are Women Responding to Skill Demand ? American Economic Review no. ; http : //www.jstor.org/stable/117267 Black S. D. Schanzenbach and A. Breitwieser. The Recent Decline in Women s Labor Force Participation. Hamilton Project. https : //www.brookings.edu/ wp-content/uploads/2017/10/es_10192017_decline_womens_labor_force_ participation_blackschanzenbach.pdf Blanchard O. and L. Katz. Regional Evolutions. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. https : //www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/regional-evolutions/ Blau F. and L. Kahn. Changes in the Labor Supply Behavior of Married Women : Journal of Labor Economics no. : https : //www journals.uchicago.edu/doi/full/10.1086/513416 Female Labor Supply : Why Is the United States Falling Behind ? American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/ aer.103.3.251 Blau F. and C. Mackie eds. The Economic and Fiscal Consequences of Immigration. National Academies of Sciences Engineering and Medicine Washington : National Academies Press. https : //doi.org/10.17226/23550 Bloom N. A. Kurmann K. Handley and P. Luck. The Impact of Chinese Trade on U.S. Employment : The Good The Bad and The Apocryphal. Society for Economic Dynamics. https : //www.gsb.stanford.edu/faculty-research/ publications/impact-chinese-trade-us-employment-good-bad-apocryphal References | BLS ( U.S Bureau of Labor Statistics ) Current Population Survey : Concepts and Definitions. https : //www.bls.gov/cps/definitions.htm Bound J. The Health and Earnings of Rejected Disability Insurance Applicants. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.3386/w2816 Boyd D. H. Lankford S. Loeb and J. Wyckoff. Explaining the Short Careers of High-Achieving Teachers in Schools with Low-Performing Students. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/0002828 Buerhous P. D. Auerbach and D. Staiger. How Should We Prepare for the Wave of Retiring Baby Boomer Nurses ? Health Affairs. https : //doi.org/10.1377/ forefront.20170503.059894 Cajner T. J. Coglianese and J. Montes. The Long-Lived Cyclicality of the Labor Force Participation Rate. Working paper Federal Reserve Board of Governors https : //www.johncoglianese.com/publication/lfpr-cyclicality/lfpr-cyclicality.pdf Cajner T. L. Crane R. Decker J. Grigsby A. Hamins-Puertolas E. Hurst C. Kurz and A. Yildirmaz. The U.S. Labor Market during the Beginning of the Pandemic Recession. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w27159 Card D. The Effect of Unions on the Structure of Wages : A Longitudinal Analysis. Econometrica no. : https : //doi.org/10.2307/2171852 Case A. and A. Deaton. Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among White Non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. : https : //doi.org/10.1073/ pnas.1518393112 Deaths of Despair and the Future of Capitalism. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. https : //press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691190785/ deaths-of-despair-and-the-future-of-capitalism Life Expectancy in Adulthood Is Falling for Those Without a B.A Degree but as Educational Gaps Have Widened Racial Gaps Have Narrowed. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. : e2024777118 https : //www.pnas.org/content/118/11/e2024777118 Cassar L. and S. Meier. Nonmonetary Incentives and the Implications of Work as a Source of Meaning. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/jep.32.3.215 CEA ( Council of Economic Advisers ) The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation. https : //obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/ default/files/page/files/20160620_cea_primeage_male_lfp.pdf Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. Social Security Disability Insurance. https : //www.cbpp.org/research/social-security/ social-security-disability-insurance-0 | References Charles K. E. Hurst and M. Schwartz. The Transformation of Manufacturing and the Decline in U.S. Employment. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w24468 Clark A. What Makes a Good Job ? Job Quality and Job Satisfaction. IZA World of Labor. https : //wol.iza.org/articles/what-makes-good-job-job-quality-andjob-satisfaction Clemens M. and E. Lewis. The Effect of Low-Skill Immigration Restrictions on U.S. Firms and Workers : Evidence from a Randomized Lottery. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : // doi.org/10.3386/w30589 Coglianese J. The Rise of In-and-Outs : Declining Labor Force Participation of Prime Age Men. Working paper Harvard University. https : //www johncoglianese.com/publication/in-and-outs/in-and-outs.pdf Coile C. and P. Levine. Recessions Retirement and Social Security. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.101.3.23 Coile C. and H. Zhang. Recessions and Retirement : New Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic. PRC Working Paper Philadelphia : Pension Research Council Wharton School University of Pennsylvania. http : //dx.doi org/10.2139/ssrn.4199666 Cowan J. D. Goldhaber K. Hayes and R. Theobald. Missing Elements in the Discussion of Teacher Shortages. Educational Researcher no. : https : //doi.org/10.3102/0013189X16679145 Cutler D. J. Poterba L. Sheiner and L. Summers. An Aging Society : Opportunity or Challenge ? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity : https : //doi.org/10.2307/2534525 Dao M. D. Furceri and P. Loungani. Regional Labor Market Adjustment in the United States : Trend and Cycle. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00642 Dee T. and D. Goldhaber. Understanding and Addressing Teacher Shortages in the United States. Hamilton Project. https : //www.hamiltonproject.org/assets/ files/understanding_and_addressing_teacher_shortages_in_us_pp.pdf Doleac J. Increasing Employment for Individuals with Criminal Records. Hamilton Project. https : //www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/ es_20161021_prisoner_reentry_doleac.pdf Eggertsson G. M. Lancastre and L. Summers. Aging Output Per Capita and Secular Stagnation. American Economic Review : Insights no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aeri.20180383 Eissa N. and J. Liebman. Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax Credit. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.2307/2946689 References | Farber H. Nonunion Wage Rates and the Threat of Unionization. Industrial Labor and Relations Review no. : https : //journals.sagepub.com/ doi/abs/10.1177/001979390505800302 ? journalCode = ilra Farber H. D. Herbst I. Kuziemko and S. Naidu. Unions and Inequality over the Twentieth Century : New Evidence from Survey Data. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjab012 Favilukis J. and G. Li. The Great Resignation Was Caused by the COVID-19 Housing Boom. Social Science Research Network. https : //ssrn.com/ abstract = Feldman M. Place-Based Economic Development. Issues in Science and Technology no. : https : //issues.org/ place-based-economic-development-feldman/ Foote C. and R. Ryan. Labor Market Polarization Over the Business Cycle NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w21030 Forsythe E. L. Kahn F. Lange and D. Wiczer Where Have All the Workers Gone ? Recalls Retirements and Reallocation in the COVID Recovery. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w30387 Fry R. J. Passel and D. Cohn. A Majority of Young Adults in the U.S. Live with Their Parents for the First Time since the Great Depression. Pew Research Center. https : //www.pewresearch.org/ fact-tank/2020/09/04/a-majority-of-young-adults-in-the-u-s-live-with-theirparents-for-the-first-time-since-the-great-depression/ Gagnon E. B. Johannsen and D. L pez-Salido. Understanding the New Normal : The Role of Demographics. IMF Economic Review : https : //doi org/10.1057/s41308-021-00138-4 Ganong P. and D. Shoag. Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S Declined ? Journal of Urban Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j jue.2017.07.002 GAO ( U.S. Government Accountability Office ) Physician Workforce : Caps on Medicare-Funded Graduate Medical Education at Teaching Hospitals. https : // www.gao.gov/products/gao-21-391 Garcia K. and B. Cowan. The Impact of U.S. School Closures on Labor Market Outcomes during the COVID-19 Pandemic. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w29641 Galvin G. Nearly in Health Care Workers Have Quit Their Jobs during the Pandemic. Morning Consult. https : //morningconsult.com/2021/10/04/ health-care-workers-series-part-2-workforce/ Garin A. D. Koustas C. McPherson S. Norris M. Pecenco E. Rose Y. Shem-Tov and J. Weaver. The Impact of Incarceration on Employment Earnings and | References Tax Filing. Working paper Joint Statistical Research Program of the Statistics of Income Division U.S. Internal Revenue Service. https : //www.irs.gov/pub/ irs-soi/07-2022-impact-incarceration-employment-earnings-tax-filing.pdf Gelbach J. Public Schooling for Young Children and Maternal Labor Supply. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/0002828 Gelber A. T. Moore and A. Strand. The Effect of Disability Insurance Payments on Beneficiaries Earnings. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/pol.20160014 Goda G. and E. Soltas. The Impacts of COVID-19 Illnesses on Workers. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w30435 Goldhaber D. C. Grout K. Holden and N. Brown. Crossing the Border ? Exploring the Cross-State Mobility of the Teacher Workforce. Educational Researcher no. : https : //doi.org/10.3102/0013189X15613981 Goldin C. and L. Katz. The Power of the Pill : Oral Contraceptives and Women s Career and Marriage Decisions. Journal of Political Economy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/340778 Gorodnichenko Y. J. Song and D. Stolyarov. Macroeconomic Determinants of Retirement Timing. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w19638 Gottlieb J. and A. Zenilman. When Workers Travel : Nursing Supply During COVID-19 Surges. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w28240 Greene J. and M. Mauer. Downscaling Prisons. Sentencing Project. https : // www.justicestrategies.org/sites/default/files/publications/inc_ DownscalingPrisons2010.pdf Grossman G. and E. Oberfield. The Elusive Explanation for the Declining Labor Share. Annual Review of Economics : https : //dx.doi.org/10.1146/ annurev-economics-080921-103046 Haeck C. P. Lefebvre and P. Merrigan. Canadian Evidence on Ten Years of Universal Preschool Policies : The Good and the Bad. Labour Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.labeco.2015.05.002 Ham J. C. Swenson A. mrohoro lu and H. Song. Government Programs Can Improve Local Labor Markets : Evidence from State Enterprise Zones Federal Empowerment Zones and Federal Enterprise Community. Journal of Public Economics nos. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2010.11.027 Hansen B. J. Sabia and J. Schaller Schools Job Flexibility and Married Women s Labor Supply. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w29660 References | Hoynes H. J. Rothstein and K. Ruffini. Making Work Pay Better Through an Expanded Earned Income Tax Credit. Hamilton Project. https : //www hamiltonproject.org/assets/files/making_work_pay_expanded_eitc_Hoynes_ Rothstein_Ruffini.pdf Hsieh C. and E. Moretti. Housing Constraints and Spatial Misallocation. American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/mac.20170388 Hunt J. and M. Gauthier-Loiselle. How Much Does Immigration Boost Innovation ? American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics : https : // doi.org/10.1257/mac.2.2.31 James J. and J. Wyckoff. School Segregation Teacher Sorting and the Distribution of Teachers. Working paper Annenberg Institute at Brown University. https : //doi.org/10.26300/tv5x-6t21 Johnson J. and M. Kleiner. Is Occupational Licensing a Barrier to Interstate Migration ? American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/pol.20170704 Juhn C. and S. Potter. Changes in Labor Force Participation in the United States. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/jep.20.3.27 Kaplan G. and S. Schulhofer-Wohl. Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Interstate Migration. International Economic Review no. : https : // doi.org/10.1111/iere.12209 Katz B. W. Congdon and J. Shakesprere. Measuring Job Quality : Current Measures Gaps and New Approaches. Urban Institute Research Report https : //www.urban.org/sites/default/files/2022-04/Measuring % 20Job % Quality.pdf Keynes J. Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren. Essays in Persuasion Orig. pub. https : //doi.org/10.1007/978-1-349-59072-8_25 Kline P. and E. Moretti. Local Economic Development Agglomeration Economies and the Big Push : Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1093/qje/qjt034 Krueger A. Where Have All the Workers Gone ? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. https : //www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/ kruegertextfa17bpea.pdf Levy F. and P. Temin. Inequality and Institutions in 20th-Century America. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w13106 Lofstrom M. and S. Raphael. Impact of Realignment on County Jail Populations. Public Policy Institute of California. https : //gspp.berkeley.edu/ assets/uploads/research/pdf/p73.pdf | References Looney A. and N. Turner. Work and Opportunity Before and After Incarceration Economic Studies at Brookings. Washington : Brookings Institution. https : // www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/es_20180314_ looneyincarceration_final.pdf Maestas N. K. Mullen and D. Powell. The Effect of Population Aging on Economic Growth the Labor Force and Productivity. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w22452 Maestas N. K. Mullen D. Powell R. von Wachter and J. Wenger. Working Conditions in the United States : Results of the American Working Conditions Survey. RAND Corporation Research Report. https : //doi org/10.7249/RR2014 Maestas N. K. Mullen and A. Strand. Does Disability Insurance Receipt Discourage Work ? Using Examiner Assignment to Estimate Causal Effects of SSDI Receipt. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/aer.103.5.1797 Matsudaira J. Economic Conditions and the Living Arrangements of Young Adults : to Journal of Population Economics : https : // doi.org/10.1007/s00148-015-0555-y McEntarfer E. Older Workers Retirement and Macroeconomic Shocks. PRC Working Paper Philadelphia : Pension Research Council Wharton School University of Pennsylvania. http : //dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4169082 Meyer B. and D. Rosenbaum. Welfare the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Labor Supply of Single Mothers. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1162/00335530152466313 Migration Policy Institute. What Has Been the Impact of the Pandemic on Immigrant Communities and U.S. Immigration Trends and Policies Two Years On ? New Report Assesses. https : //www.migrationpolicy.org/news/ pandemic-impact-immigrants-us-immigration-two-years-on Montes J. C. Smith and J. Dajon. The Great Retirement Boom : The Pandemic-Era Surge in Retirements and Implications for Future Labor Force Participation. Finance and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper Washington : Federal Reserve Board. https : //doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2022.081 Morrissey T. Child Care and Parent Labor Force Participation : A Review of the Research Literature. Review of Economics of the Household : https : // doi.org/10.1007/s11150-016-9331-3 Mueller-Smith M. The Criminal and Labor Market Impacts of Incarceration. Working paper University of Michigan. https : //www.irp.wisc.edu/newsevents/ workshops/2015/participants/papers/10-Mueller-Smith-IRP-draft.pdf Murnane R. and J. Steele. What Is the Problem ? The Challenge of Providing Effective Teachers for All Children. Future of Children no. : https : //doi.org/10.1353/foc.2007.0010 References | Ne eman A. and N. Maestas How Has COVID-19 Impacted Disability Employment ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w30640 Neumark D. and J. Kolko. Do Enterprise Zones Create Jobs ? Evidence from California s Enterprise Zone Program. Journal of Urban Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2010.01.002 Neumark D. and H. Simpson. Place-Based Policies. Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics : http : //dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-595317.00018-1 Nguyen T. C. Lam and P. Bruno. Is There a National Teacher Shortage ? A Systematic Examination of Reports of Teacher Shortages in the United States. Working paper Annenberg Institute at Brown University. https : //doi org/10.26300/76eq-hj32 Nikolova M. and F. Cnossen. What Makes Work Meaningful and Why Economists Should Care About It. Labour Economics : https : //doi org/10.1016/j.labeco.2020.101847 Nunn R. J. Parsons and J. Shambaugh. Labor Force Nonparticipation : Trends Causes and Policy Solutions. Hamilton Project. https : //www.brookings.edu/ wp-content/uploads/2019/10/ES_THP_labor-force-nonparticipation_final.pdf OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) Public Spending on Childcare and Early Education. OECD Family Database. https : // www.oecd.org/els/soc/PF3_1_Public_spending_on_childcare_and_early_ education.pdf Pager D. The Mark of Criminal Record. American Journal of Sociology no : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/10.1086/374403 Petterson S. W. Liaw R. Phillips D. Rabin D. Meyers and A. Bazemore. Projecting U.S. Primary Care Physician Workforce Needs : Annals of Family Medicine no. : https : //doi.org/10.1370/afm.1431 Piehl A. Putting Time Limits on the Punitiveness of the Criminal Justice System. Hamilton Project. https : //www.hamiltonproject.org/assets/files/reducing_ punitiveness_piehl_policymemo.pdf Pierce J. and P. Schott. The Surprisingly Swift Decline of U.S. Manufacturing Employment. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/aer.20131578 Ricketts T. Workforce Issues in Rural Areas : A Focus on Policy Equity. American Journal of Public Health no. : https : //doi.org10.2105/ AJPH.2004.047597 Rodriguez M. and B. Avery. Unlicensed & Untapped : Removing Barriers to State Occupational Licenses for People with Records. National Employment Law Project. https : //s27147.pcdn.co/wp-content/uploads/Unlicensed-UntappedRemoving-Barriers-State-Occupational-Licenses.pdf | References Satiani A. J. Niedermier B. Satiani and D. Svendsen. Projected Workforce of Psychiatrists in the United States : A Population Analysis. Psychiatric Services no. : https : //doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.201700344 Schmitt J. and A. Mitukiewicz. Politics Matter : Changes in Unionisation Rates in Rich Countries Industrial Relations Journal no. : https : //doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2338.2012.00675.x Schor J. The Overworked American : The Unexpected Decline of Leisure. New York : Basic Books. https : //www.basicbooks.com/titles/juliet-b-schor/ the-overworked-american/9780465054343/ Sheiner L. The Determinants of the Macroeconomic Implications of Aging. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/ aer.104.5.218 Stansbury A. and L. Summers. The Declining Worker Power Hypothesis : An Explanation for the Recent Evolution of the American Economy. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w27193 U.S. Department of Education. School Pulse Panel. Institute of Education Sciences. https : //ies.ed.gov/schoolsurvey/spp/ Vahey D. L. Aiken D. Sloane S. Clarke and D. Vargas. Nurse Burnout and Patient Satisfaction. Med Care ( Suppl. ) : https : //www.ncbi.nlm nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2904602/ Volk J. D. Palanker M. O Brien and C. Goe. States Actions to Expand Telemedicine Access During COVID-19 and Future Policy Considerations. Commonwealth Fund. https : //www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/issuebriefs/2021/jun/states-actions-expand-telemedicine-access-covid-19 White House. Statement by President Joe Biden on the House Taking up the PRO Act. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021 /03/09/statement-by-president-joe-biden-on-the-house-taking-up-the-pro-act/ Wikle J. and R. Wilson. Access to Head Start and Maternal Labor Supply : Experimental and Quasi-Experimental Evidence. Working paper Brigham Young University. https : //economics.byu.edu/00000173-9aea-d2bd-a9f7fbeb30dd0000/hs-laborsupply-wikle-wilson-july2020-pdf World Prison Brief. World Prison Population List. Institute for Crime & Justice Policy Research. https : //www.prisonstudies.org/sites/default/files/resources/ downloads/world_prison_population_list_13th_edition.pdf Wu P. Wage Inequality and the Rise in Labor Force Exit : The Case of U.S Prime-Age Men. Research Department Working Paper Boston : Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. https : //doi.org/10.29412/res.wp.2022.16 Ziliak J. Supporting Low-Income Workers through Refundable Child-Care Credits. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/research/ supporting-low-income-workers-through-refundable-child-care-credits/ References | Chapter Acemoglu D. A. Makhdoumi A. Malekian and A. Ozdaglar. Too Much Data : Prices and Inefficiencies in Data Markets. American Economic Journal : Microeconomics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/mic.20200200 Acquisti A. C. Taylor and L. Wagman. The Economics of Privacy. Journal of Economic Literature no. : http : //doi.org/10.1257/jel.54.2.442 Aday S. H. Farrell D. Freelon M. Lynch J. Sides and M. Dewar. Watching from Afar : Media Consumption Patterns Around the Arab Spring. Sage Journals no. : https : //doi.org/10.1177/0002764213479373 Allcott H. L. Braghieri S. Eichmeyer and M. Gentzkow. The Welfare Effects of Social Media. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/aer.20190658 Allcott H. and M. Gentzkow. Social Media and Fake News in the Election. Journal of Economic Perspectives no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/jep.31.2.211 Amazon. The Evolution of Amazon s Inventory Planning System. https : //www amazon.science/latest-news/the-evolution-of-amazons-inventory-planning-system Armstrong M. Competition in Two-Sided Markets. RAND Journal of Economics no. : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/25046266.pdf Athey S. and F. Scott Morton. Platform Annexation. Antitrust Law Journal no. : https : //siepr.stanford.edu/publications/working-paper/ platform-annexation Ayres I. M. Banaji and C. Jolls. Race Effects on eBay. RAND Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1111/1756-2171.12115 Ayers J. B. Chu Z. Zhu E. Leas D. Smith M. Dredze and D. Broniatowski. Spread of Misinformation About Face Masks and COVID-19 by Automated Software on Facebook. JAMA Internal Medicine no. : https : // doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2021.2498 Bail C. L. Argyle T. Brown J. Bumpus H. Chen M. Hunzaker J. Lee M. Mann F Merhout and A. Volfovsky. Exposure to Opposing Views on Social Media Can Increase Political Polarization. PNAS no. : https : // doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1804840115 Baker J. and J. Chevalier. The Competitive Consequences of Most-FavoredNation Provisions. Antitrust Magazine no. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/ papers.cfm ? abstract_id = Baye M. J. Morgan and P. Scholten. The Value of Information in an Online Consumer Electronics Market. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing no : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/30000838 | References Barrett B. Commercial Companies in Party Networks : Digital Advertising Firms in U.S. Elections from Political Communication no. : https : //doi.org/10.1080/10584609.2021.1978021 Beknazar-Yuzbashev G. and M. Stalinski. Do Social Media Ads Matter for Political Behavior ? A Field Experiment. Journal of Public Economics https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2022.104735 Bergemann D. and A. Bonatti. Markets for Information : An Introduction. Annual Review of Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1146/ annurev-economics-080315-015439 Berkshire Hathaway Inc. Letter to Shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway Inc. https : //www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/2007ltr.pdf Blake T. S. Moshary K. Sweeney and S. Tadelis. Price Salience and Product Choice. Marketing Science no. : https : //pubsonline.informs.org/ doi/10.1287/mksc.2020.1261 Boik A. and K. Corts. The Effects of Platform Most-Favored-Nation Clauses on Competition and Entry. Journal of Law and Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/686971 Bonbright J. Principles of Public Utility Rates. New York : Columbia University Press Bond R. C. Fariss J. Jones A. Kramer C. Marlow J. Settle and J. Fowler. A 61-Million-Person Experiment in Social Influence and Political Mobilization. Nature : https : //doi.org/10.1038/nature11421 Boxell L. M. Gentzkow and J. Shapiro. Greater Internet Use Is Not Associated with Faster Growth in Political Polarization among U.S. Demographic Groups. PNAS no. : https : //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1706588114 Bresnahan T. The Economics of the Microsoft Case. Working Paper Stanford Law School. http : //dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.304701 Brown J. and A. Goolsbee. Does the Internet Make Markets More Competitive ? Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry. Journal of Political Economy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/339714 Brown S. Machine Learning Explained. Massachusetts Institute of Technology Sloan School of Management. https : //mitsloan.mit.edu/ideas-made-to-matter/ machine-learning-explained Brown Z. and A. MacKay. Forthcoming. Competition in Pricing Algorithms. American Economic Journal : Microeconomics. https : //www.aeaweb.org/ articles ? id = 10.1257/mic.20210158 Brynjolfsson E. A. Collis E. Diewert F. Eggers and K. Fox. GDP-B : Accounting for the Value of New and Free Goods in the Digital Economy. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : // doi.org/10.3386/w25695 References | Brynjolfsson E. Y. Hu and M. Smith. Consumer Surplus in the Digital Economy : Estimating the Value of Increased Product Variety at Online Booksellers. Management Science no. : https : //www.jstor.org/ stable/4134002 Brynjolfsson E. and M. Smith. Frictionless Commerce ? A Comparison of Internet and Conventional Retailers. Management Science no. : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/2661602 Byrne D. and N. de Roos. Learning to Coordinate : A Study in Retail Gasoline. American Economic Review no. : https : //pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/ pdfplus/10.1257/aer.20170116 Caillaud B. and B. Jullien. Chicken & Egg : Competition among Intermediation Service Providers. RAND Journal of Economics no. : https : // www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/1593720.pdf Caliskan A. Detecting and Mitigating Bias in Natural Language Processing. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/research/ detecting-and-mitigating-bias-in-natural-language-processing/ Carney N. All Lives Matter but So Does Race : Black Lives Matter and the Evolving Role of Social Media. Humanity & Society no. : https : // journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0160597616643868 Cavallo C. Are Online and Offline Prices Similar ? Evidence from Large MultiChannel Retailers. American Economic Review no. : https : // www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/aer.20160542 CFPB ( Consumer Financial Protection Bureau ) Credit Card Late Fees. https : // files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_credit-card-late-fees_ report_2022-03.pdf Chan J. A. Ghose and R. Seamans. The Internet and Racial Hate Crimes : Offline Spillovers from Online Access. MIS Quarterly no. : http : // dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2335637 Chandra A. and A. Collard-Wexler. Mergers in Two-Sided Markets : An Application to the Canadian Newspaper Industry. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy no. : https : //doi org/10.1111/j.1530-9134.2009.00237.x Chapman P. and S. Bodoni. Twitter Probed in EU for Pre-Musk Data Leak of Million Users. Bloomberg. https : //www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/202212-23/twitter-probed-by-top-eu-privacy-watchdog-for-pre-musk-eraleak ? leadSource = uverify % 20wall Chin C. Assessing Employer Intent When AI Hiring Tools Are Biased. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/research/assessingemployer-intent-when-ai-hiring-tools-are-biased/ Chiou L. and C. Tucker. Search Engines and Data Retention : Implications for Privacy and Antitrust. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau for Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w23815 | References Choi J. D. Jeon and B. Kim. Privacy and Personal Data Collection with Information Externalities. Journal of Public Economics : https : // doi.org/10.1016/j.jpubeco.2019.02.001 Competition Bureau Canada. Big Data and Innovation : Implications for Competition Policy in Canada. https : //www.competitionbureau.gc.ca/eic/site/ cb-bc.nsf/eng/04304.html Connecticut State of. An Act Concerning Personal Data Privacy and Online Monitoring Senate Bill No. February Session Connecticut General Assembly https : //www.cga.ct.gov/2022/amd/S/pdf/2022SB-00006R00SA-AMD.pdf Council of the European Union. Digital Markets Act ( DMA ) : Agreement Between the Council and the European Parliament. https : //www.consilium.europa.eu/en/ press/press-releases/2022/03/25/ council-and-european-parliament-reach-agreement-on-the-digital-markets-act/ Crain M. The Limits of Transparency : Data Brokers and Commodification. New Media and Society no. : https : //journals.sagepub.com/doi/ abs/10.1177/1461444816657096 Dastin J. Amazon Scraps Secret AI Recruiting Tool That Showed Bias Against Women. Reuters. https : //www.reuters.com/article/us-amazon-com-jobsautomation-insight/amazon-scraps-secret-ai-recruiting-tool-that-showed-bias-againstwomen-idUSKCN1MK08G DeLuca K. S. Lawson and Y. Sun. Occupy Wall Street on the Public Screens of Social Media : The Many Framings of the Birth of a Protest Movement. Communication Culture and Critique no. : https : //doi org/10.1111/j.1753-9137.2012.01141.x Digital Regulation Cooperation Forum. Auditing Algorithms : The Existing Landscape Role of Regulators and Future Outlook. https : //www.gov.uk/ government/publications/findings-from-the-drcf-algorithmic-processingworkstream-spring-2022/auditing-algorithms-the-existing-landscape-role-of-regulatorsand-future-outlook DiGrazia J. K. McKelvey J. Bollen and F. Rojas. More Tweets More Votes : Social Media as a Quantitative Indicator of Political Behavior. PLoS ONE no. https : //doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0079449 DOJ ( U.S. Department of Justice ) Justice Department Sues to Block Visa s Proposed Acquisition of Plaid. https : //www.justice.gov/opa/pr/ justice-department-sues-block-visas-proposed-acquisition-plaid Doleac J. and L. Stein. The Visible Hand : Race and Online Market Outcomes. Economic Journal no. : https : //doi.org/10.1111/ecoj.12082 Dub J. and S. Misra. Personalized Pricing and Consumer Welfare. Journal of Political Economy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/720793 References | Eeckhout J. and L. Veldkamp. Data and Market Power. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w30022/w30022.pdf Ellison G. and S. Ellison. Search Obfuscation and Price Elasticities on the Internet. Econometrica no. : https : //doi.org/10.3982/ECTA5708 Ellison G. and D. Fudenberg. Knife Edge of Plateau : When Do Market Models Tip ? NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //www.nber.org/papers/w9528 Engler A. Auditing Employment Algorithms for Discrimination. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/research/auditing-employmentalgorithms-for-discrimination/ European Parliament. European Parliament Legislative Resolution of July on the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on a Single Market for Digital Services ( Digital Services Act ) and Amending Directive 2000/31/EC. https : //www.europarl.europa.eu/doceo/document/ TA-9-2022-0269_EN.html # title2 European Parliament and Council of the European Union. Regulation ( EU ) 2022/2065 of the European Parliament and of the Council of October on a Single Market for Digital Services and Amending Directive 2000/31/EC ( Digital Services Act ) https : //eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/ ? u ri = CELEX : 32022R2065&from = EN European Parliament and European Commission. On Contestable and Fair Markets in the Digital Sector and Amending Directives ( EU ) 2019/1937 and ( EU ) 2020/1828 ( Digital Markets Act ) https : //eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/ EN/TXT/PDF/ ? uri = CELEX : 32022R1925&from = EN Evans D. The Antitrust Economics of Multi-Sided Platform Markets. Yale Journal on Regulation no. https : //www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ The-Antitrust-Economics-of-Multi-Sided-Platform-Evans/ aef4ba3a170b9863f305c8562ad0ce1726ae2f98 Farronato C. J. Fong and A. Fradkin. Forthcoming. Dog Eat Dog : Balancing Network Effects and Differentiation in a Digital Platform Merger. Management Science https : //www.hbs.edu/faculty/Pages/item.aspx ? num = FTC ( U.S. Federal Trade Commission ) Data Brokers : A Call for Transparency and Accountability. https : //www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/databrokers-call-transparency-accountability-report-federal-trade-commission-may2014/140527databrokerreport.pdf/ Economic Analysis of Hotel Resort Fees. https : //www.ftc.gov/system/ files/documents/reports/economic-analysis-hotel-resort-fees/p115503_hotel_ resort_fees_economic_issues_paper.pdf FTC Imposes $ Billion Penalty and Sweeping New Privacy Restrictions on Facebook. https : //www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2019/07/ ftc-imposes-5-billion-penalty-sweeping-new-privacy-restrictions-facebook | References Case No. : 22-cv-377 : Complaint for Permanent Injunction and Other Relief. https : //www.ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/1. % 20Complaint.pdf Fiorina M. and S. Abrams. Political Polarization in the American Public. Annual Review of Political Science : https : //doi.org/10.1146/annurev polisci.11.053106.153836 Furl N. P. Phillips and A. O Toole. Face Recognition Algorithms and the OtherRace Effect : Computational Mechanisms for a Developmental Contact Hypothesis. Cognitive Science no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/ S0364-0213 ( ) Gandal N. Hedonic Price Indexes for Spreadsheets and an Empirical Test for Network Externalities. RAND Journal of Economics no. : https : // www.jstor.org/stable/2555859 # metadata_info_tab_contents Competing Compatibility Standards and Network Externalities in the PC Software Market. Review of Economics and Statistics no. : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/2109809 # metadata_info_tab_contents Garett R. and S. Young. Online Misinformation and Vaccine Hesitancy. Translational Behavioral Medicine no. : https : //doi org/10.1093/tbm/ibab128 Gentzkow M. Valuing New Goods in a Model with Complementarity : Online Newspapers. American Economic Review no. : https : //www.jstor org/stable/30035018 Goldfarb A. and C. Tucker. Digital Economics. Journal of Economic Literature no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/jel.20171452 Gorodnichenko Y. T. Pham and O. Talavera. Social Media Sentiment and Public Opinions : Evidence from # Brexit and # USElection. European Economic Review https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2021.103772 Gu Y. L. Madio and C. Reggiani. Data Brokers Co-Opetition. Oxford Economic Papers no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/oep/gpab042 Gu Y. L. Madio and C. Reggiani. Data Brokers Co-Opetition. Oxford Economic Papers no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/oep/gpab042 Guszcza J. I. Rahwan W. Bible M. Cebrian and V. Katyal. Why We Need to Audit Algorithms. Harvard Business Review. https : //hbr.org/2018/11/ why-we-need-to-audit-algorithms Harrington J. Developing Competition Law for Collusion by Autonomous Artificial Agents. Journal of Competition Law and Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/joclec/nhy016 Highfill T. and C. Surfield. New and Revised Statistics of the U.S. Digital Economy U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. https : //www.bea gov/system/files/2022-11/new-and-revised-statistics-of-the-us-digitaleconomy-2005-2021.pdf References | Himelein-Wachowiak M. S. Giorgi A. Devoto M. Rahman L. Ungar A. Schwartz D Epstein L. Leggio and B. Curtis. Bots and Misinformation Spread on Social Media : Implications for COVID-19. JMIR Publications no. https : //doi.org/10.2196/26933 Ichihashi S. Online Privacy and Information Disclosure by Consumers. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/ aer.20181052 Jones J. R. Bond E. Bakshy D. Eckles and J. Fowler. Social Influence and Political Mobilization : Further Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in the U.S. Presidential Election. PLoS ONE no. https : //pubmed.ncbi nlm.nih.gov/28445476/ Joskow P. Chapter Regulation of Natural Monopoly. Handbook of Law and Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1016/S1574-0730 ( ) Joskow P. and N. Rose. The Effects of Economic Regulation. Handbook of Industrial Organization : https : //doi.org/10.1016/ S1573-448X ( ) Jullien B. A. Pavan and M. Rysman. Chapter : Two-Sided Markets Pricing and Network Effects. Handbook of Industrial Organization no. : https : //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1573448X21000078 ? via % 3Dihub Kades M. and F. Scott Morton. Interoperability as a Competition Remedy for Digital Networks. Working paper Washington Center for Equitable Growth https : //equitablegrowth.org/working-papers/ interoperability-as-a-competition-remedy-for-digital-networks/ Kahn A. The Economics of Regulation. Cambridge MA : MIT Press. https : // mitpress.mit.edu/9780262610520/the-economics-of-regulation/ Kirpalani R. and T. Philippon. Data Sharing and Market Power with Two-Sided Platforms. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau for Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w28023 Kroll J. Why AI Is Just Automation. Brookings Institution. https : //www brookings.edu/research/why-ai-is-just-automation/ Lajevardi N. K. Oskooii and H. Walker. Hate Amplified ? Social Media News Consumption and Support for Anti-Muslim Policies. Journal of Public Policy https : //doi.org/10.1017/S0143814X22000083 Lambrecht A. and C. Tucker. Algorithmic Bias ? An Empirical Study of Apparent Gender-Based Discrimination in the Display of STEM Career Ads. Management Science no. : https : //doi.org/10.1287/ mnsc.2018.3093 Lee N. and S. Lai. Why New York City Is Cracking Down on AI in Hiring. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2021/12/20/ why-new-york-city-is-cracking-down-on-ai-in-hiring/ | References Levy R. Social Media News Consumption and Polarization : Evidence from a Field Experiment. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/aer.20191777 Liu Y. R. Jia J. Ye and X. Qu. How Machine Learning Informs Ride-Hailing Services : A Survey. Communications in Transportation Research https : //doi org/10.1016/j.commtr.2022.100075 Luco F. Who Benefits from Information Disclosure ? The Case of Retail Gasoline. American Economic Journal : Microeconomics no. : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/26641423.pdf McCurry J. South Korean AI Chatbot Pulled from Facebook After Hate Speech Towards Minorities. Guardian January https : //www.theguardian.com/ world/2021/jan/14/time-to-properly-socialise-hate-speech-ai-chatbot-pulledfrom-facebook Mickle T. Apple Dominates App Store Search Results Thwarting Competitors. Wall Street Journal July https : //www.wsj.com/articles/ apple-dominates-app-store-search-results-thwarting-competitors-11563897221 Mishra S. The Dark Industry of Data Brokers : Need for Regulation ? International Journal of Law and Information Technology no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/ijlit/eaab012 M hlmann M. and O. Henfridsson. What People Hate About Being Managed by Algorithms According to a Study of Uber Drivers. Harvard Business Review https : //hbr.org/2019/08/what-people-hate-about-being-managed-by-algorithmsaccording-to-a-study-of-uber-drivers Mundt M. K. Ross and C. Burnett. Scaling Social Movements Through Social Media : The Case of Black Lives Matter. Social Media Society no. https : //journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/2056305118807911 NCSL ( National Conference of State Legislatures ) State Laws Related to Digital Privacy. https : //www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-informationtechnology/state-laws-related-to-internet-privacy.aspx Neely S. C. Eldredge R. Ersing and C. Remington. Vaccine Hesitancy and Exposure to Misinformation : A Survey Analysis. Journal of General Internal Medicine no. : https : //doi.org/10.1007/s11606-021-07171-z Obermeyer Z. B. Powers C. Vogeli and S. Mullainathan. Dissecting Racial Bias in an Algorithm Used to Manage the Health of Populations. Science no : https : //doi.org/10.1126/science.aax2342 O Connor J. and N. Wilson. Reduced Demand Uncertainty and the Sustainability of Collusion : How AI Could Affect Competition. Information Economics and Policy https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.infoecopol.2020.100882 OECD ( Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ) OECD AI Principles Overview. https : //oecd.ai/en/ai-principles References | O Sullivan D. Half a Billion Facebook Users Information Posted on Hacking Website Cyber Experts Say. CNN Business. https : //www.cnn.com/2021/04/04/tech/ facebook-user-info-leaked/index.html Pierri F. B. Perry M. DeVerna K. Yang A. Flammini F. Menczer and J. Bryden. Online Misinformation Is Linked to Early COVID-19 Vaccination Hesitancy and Refusal. Scientific Reports no.1. https : //doi.org/10.1038/ s41598-022-10070-w Prior M. Media and Polarization. Annual Review of Political Science : https : //doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-100711-135242 Pr fer J. and C. Schottm ller. Competing with Big Data. Journal of Industrial Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1111/joie.12259 Quan T. and K. Williams. Product Variety Across-Market Demand Heterogeneity and the Value of Online Retail. RAND Journal of Economics no. : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/45147416 Rochet J. and J. Tirole. Platform Competition in Two-Sided Markets. Journal of the European Economic Association no. : https : //doi org/10.1162/154247603322493212 Rysman M. Competition between Networks : A Study of the Market for Yellow Pages. Review of Economic Studies no. : https : //doi org/10.1111/0034-6527.00512 Saloner G. and A. Shepard. Adoption of Technologies with Network Effects : An Empirical Examination of the Adoption of Automated Teller Machines. RAND Journal of Economics no. : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/2555999 Schmalensee R. A Note on Economies of Scale and Natural Monopoly in the Distribution of Public Utility Services. Bell Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.2307/3003626 Scott Morton F. P. Bouvier A. Ezrachi B. Jullien R. Katz G. Kimmelman A Melamed and J. Morgenstern. Committee for the Study of Digital Platforms Market Structure and Antitrust Subcommittee. Chicago Booth Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and the State. https : //research chicagobooth.edu/-/media/research/stigler/pdfs/market-structure-report.pdf Scott Morton F. G. Crawford J. Cr mer D. Dinielli A. Fletcher P. Heidhues M Schnitzer and K. Seim. Equitable Interoperability : The Super Tool of Digital Platform Governance. Yale Tobin Center for Economic Policy Digital Regulation Policy. https : //tobin.yale.edu/sites/default/files/Equitable % Interoperability.pdf Scott Morton F. F. Zettelmeyer and J. Silva-Risso. Internet Car Retailing. Journal of Industrial Economics no. : https : //www.jstor.org/ stable/3569793 Sherman J. Data Brokers and Sensitive Data on U.S. Individuals : Threats to American Civil Rights National Security and Democracy. Duke University Sanford School of Public Policy. https : //techpolicy.sanford.duke.edu/ | References wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2021/08/Data-Brokers-and-Sensitive-Data-on-USIndividuals-Sherman-2021.pdf Sinai T. and J. Waldfogel. Geography and the Internet : Is the Internet a Substitute or a Complement for Cities ? Journal of Urban Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2004.04.001 Sisson P. Robots Aren t Done Reshaping Warehouses. New York Times July https : //www.nytimes.com/2022/07/12/business/warehouse-technology-robotics html Smiley R. and W. Greene. Determinants of the Effectiveness of Electric Utility Regulation. Resources and Energy no. : https : //doi org/10.1016/0165-0572 ( ) 90018-X Smith B. How TikTok Reads Your Mind. New York Times December https : // www.nytimes.com/2021/12/05/business/media/tiktok-algorithm.html Song M. Estimating Platform Market Power in Two-Sided Markets with an Application to Magazine Advertising. American Economic Journal : Microeconomics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/mic.20160052 Spence A. Monopoly Quality and Regulation. Bell Journal of Economics no : https : //doi.org/10.2307/3003237 State of New York et al. v. Facebook Inc. New York State Attorney General s Office. https : //ag.ny.gov/sites/default/files/state_of_new_york_et_al._v._ facebook_inc._-_filed_public_complaint_12.11.2020.pdf Stigler G. The Economics of Information. Journal of Political Economy no : https : //www.jstor.org/stable/1829263 Suh C. I. Vasi and P. Chang. How Social Media Matter : Repression and the Diffusion of the Occupy Wall Street Movement. Social Science Research : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2017.01.004 Teh T. C. Liu J. Wright and J. Zhou. Forthcoming. Multi-Homing and Oligopolistic Platform Competition. American Economic Journal : Microeconomics. https : // www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/mic.20210324 U.S. Census Bureau. Quarterly Retail E-Commerce Sales 2nd Quarter https : //www.census.gov/retail/mrts/www/data/pdf/ec_current.pdf U.S. Senate. What Information Do Data Brokers Have on Consumers and How Do They Use It ? https : //www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-113shrg95838/ pdf/CHRG-113shrg95838.pdf U.S. Surgeon General s Advisory. Protecting Youth Mental Health. U.S Department of Health and Human Services. https : //www.hhs.gov/sites/default/ files/surgeon-general-youth-mental-health-advisory.pdf Victor D. Microsoft Created a Twitter Bot to Learn from Users ; It Quickly Became a Racist Jerk. New York Times March https : //www.nytimes com/2016/03/25/technology/microsoft-created-a-twitter-bot-to-learn-fromusers-it-quickly-became-a-racist-jerk.html References | Wall Street Journal. Inside TikTok s Algorithm : A WSJ Video Investigation. July https : //www.wsj.com/articles/tiktok-algorithm-video-investigation-11626877477 Wang C. and J. Wright. Forthcoming. Platform Investment and Price Parity Clauses. Journal of Industrial Economics. https : //app.scholarsite.io/julian-wright/articles/ platform-investment-and-price-parity-clauses-3 Weyl E. A Price Theory of Multi-Sided Platforms. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.20180478 White House. Executive Order on Promoting Competition in the American Economy. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidentialactions/2021/07/09/executive-order-on-promoting-competition-in-theamerican-economy/ Blueprint for an AI Bill of Rights : Making Automated Systems Work for the American People. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2022/10/Blueprint-for-an-AI-Bill-of-Rights.pdf White House National Economic Council. The Competition Initiative and Hidden Fees. https : //obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/ documents/hiddenfeesreport_12282016.pdf Williams C. and G. Gulati. Digital Advertising Expenditures in the Presidential Election. Sage Journals no. : https : //doi org/10.1177/0894439317726751 Wright J. One-Sided Logic in Two-Sided Markets. Review of Network Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.2202/1446-9022.1042 Xu W. and K. Sasahara. Characterizing the Roles of Bots on Twitter during the COVID-19 Infodemic. Journal of Computational Social Science : https : //doi.org/10.1007/s42001-021-00139-3 Zang J. How Facebook s Advertising Algorithms Can Discriminate by Race and Ethnicity. Tech Science. https : //techscience.org/a/2021101901/ Zhang S. N. Mehta P. Singh and K. Srinivasan. Frontiers : Can an Artificial Intelligence Algorithm Mitigate Racial Economic Inequality ? An Analysis in the Context of Airbnb. Management Science : no. : https : //doi org/10.1287/mksc.2021.1295 Chapter Acemoglu D. The Bitcoin Fountainhead. https : //www.project-syndicate.org/ commentary/bitcoin-an-appealing-distraction-by-daron-acemoglu-2021-10 Adams A. and M. Ibert. Runs on Algorithmic Stablecoins : Evidence from Iron Titan and Steel. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/runson-algorithmic-stablecoins-evidence-from-iron-titan-and-steel-20220602.html | References Amazon. Amazon Aurora PostgreSQL-Compatible Edition Benchmarking Guide. https : //d1.awsstatic.com/product-marketing/Aurora/RDS_Aurora_PostgreSQL_ Performance_Assessment_Benchmarking_V1-0.pdf Anadu K. M. Cipriani R. Craver and G. La Spada. COVID Response : The Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report https : //www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/ research/staff_reports/sr980.pdf Atlantic Council. Central Bank Digital Currency Tracker. https : //www atlanticcouncil.org/cbdctracker/ Bank of Canada European Central Bank Bank of Japan Sveriges Riksbank Swiss National Bank Bank of England Board of Governors the Federal Reserve System and Bank for International Settlements. Central Bank Digital Currencies : Financial Stability Implications. https : //www.bis.org/publ/othp42_ fin_stab.pdf Bank of England. Why Does Money Depend on Trust ? https : //www bankofengland.co.uk/knowledgebank/why-does-money-depend-on-trust Baughman G. F. Carapella J. Gerszten and D. Mills. The Stable in Stablecoins. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/the-stable-instablecoins-20221216.html Bech M. J. Hancock T. Rice and A. Wadsworth. On the Future of Securities Settlement. BIS Quarterly Review March. https : //www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_ qt2003i.pdf Benetton M. G. Compiani and A. Morse. When Cryptomining Comes to Town : High-Electricity-Use Spillovers to the Local Economy. http : //dx.doi org/10.2139/ssrn.3779720 Berentsen A. and F. Sch r. A Short Introduction to the World of Cryptocurrencies. Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis : https : //files.stlouisfed.org/files/htdocs/publications/review/2018/01/10/a-shortintroduction-to-the-world-of-cryptocurrencies.pdf Borri N. Y. Liu and A. Tsyvinski. The Economics of Non-Fungible Tokens. Working paper. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm ? abstract_id = Bowman M. Technology Innovation and Financial Services. Federal Reserve Board https : //www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bowman20220817a.htm Briola A. D. Vidal-Tom s Y. Wang and T. Aste. Anatomy of a Stablecoin s Failure : The Terra-Luna Case. Finance Research Letter https : //www sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1544612322005359 Brown K. Announcing Approval of Federal Information Processing Standard ( FIPS ) Secure Hash Standard ; a Revision of FIPS National Institute of Standards and Technology. Federal Register. https : //www federalregister.gov/documents/2002/08/26/02-21599/ announcing-approval-of-federal-information-processing-standard-fips-180-2secure-hash-standard-a References | Brunnermeier M. and L. Pedersen. Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w12939 BTC. Difficulty. btc.com/stats/diff Calma J. Texas Fragile Grid Isn t Ready for Crypto Mining s Explosive Growth. The Verge. https : //www.theverge.com/2022/7/14/23206795/ bitcoin-crypto-mining-electricity-texas-grid-energy-bills-emissions Carapella F. E. Dumas J. Gerszten N. Swem and L. Wall. Decentralized Finance ( DeFi ) : Transformative Potential & Associated Risks. Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series https : //www federalreserve.gov/econres/feds/files/2022057pap.pdf Cassidy J. The Minsky Moment : Subprime Mortgage Crisis and Possible Recession. New Yorker February https : //www.newyorker.com/ magazine/2008/02/04/the-minsky-moment Chaum D. Computer Systems Established Maintained and Trusted by Mutually Suspicious Groups. Ph.D. dissertation University of California Berkeley https : //evervault.com/papers/chaum.pdf Cheng E. $ Million Iced Tea Company Says It s Pivoting to the Blockchain and Its Stock Jumps % CNBC. https : //www.cnbc.com/2017/12/21/longisland-iced-tea-micro-cap-adds-blockchain-to-name-and-stock-soars.html Clearing House. No date. Real-Time Payments for All Financial Institutions. https : // www.theclearinghouse.org/payment-systems/rtp Coindesk. Bitcoin. https : //www.coindesk.com/price/bitcoin/ CoinMarketCap. Helium. https : //coinmarketcap.com/currencies/helium/ Top Stablecoin Tokens by Market Capitalization. https : //coinmarketcap com/view/stablecoin/ CPFB ( Consumer Protection Financial Bureau ) Complaint Bulletin. https : //files consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb_complaint-bulletin_cryptoassets_2022-11.pdf CRS ( Congressional Research Service ) The U.S. Dollar as the World s Dominant Reserve Currency. https : //crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IF/IF11707 Damalas G. R. Abouseif K. O Brien and A. Stafford. Crypto Derivatives Are Becoming a Major Digital Asset Class. EY. https : //www.ey.com/en_us/ financial-services/crypto-derivatives-are-becoming-a-major-digital-asset-class de Vries A. and C. Stoll. Bitcoin s Growing E-Waste Problem. Resources Conservation and Recycling https : //www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/abs/pii/S0921344921005103 Diamond. D. and P. Dybvig. Bank Runs Deposit Insurance and Liquidity. Journal of Political Economy no. : https : //www.jstor.org/ stable/1837095 | References Digiconomist. Bitcoin Electronic Waste Monitor. https : //digiconomist.net/ bitcoin-electronic-waste-monitor/ Dixon C. Why Web3 Matters. Future. https : //future.com/why-web3-matters/ Dowling M. Fertile LAND : Pricing Non-Fungible Tokens. Finance Research Letters https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.frl.2021.102096 Emerson S. D. Jeans and P. Liu. Crypto Darling Helium Promised a People s Network ; Instead Its Executives Got Rich. Forbes September https : // www.forbes.com/sites/sarahemerson/2022/09/23/ helium-crypto-tokens-peoples-network/ ? sh = 234bb5087316 Emsisoft Malware Lab. The Cost of Ransomware in : A Country-by-Country Analysis. https : //www.emsisoft.com/en/blog/38426/ the-cost-of-ransomware-in-2021-a-country-by-country-analysis/ Etherscan. Ethereum Daily Transactions Chart. https : //etherscan.io/chart/tx Faverio M. and N. Massarat. % of Americans Who Have Invested in Cryptocurrency Say It s Done Worse Than Expected. Pew Research Center pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2022/08/23/46-of-americans-who-have-invested-incryptocurrency-say-its-done-worse-than-expected/ FCA ( U.K. Financial Conduct Authority ) First Supervisory Notice. Reference https : //www.fca.org.uk/publication/supervisory-notices/firstsupervisory-notice-binance-markets-limited.pdf FDIC ( Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ) FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households. https : //www.fdic.gov/analysis/ household-survey/index.html Federal Register. Notices. Vol. no. : https : //www.govinfo gov/content/pkg/FR-2019-08-09/pdf/2019-17027.pdf Federal Reserve Board. The Federal Reserve in the Payments Mechanism. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/press/general/1998/199 80105/19980105.pdf Federal Reserve Board : Automated Clearinghouse Services. https : // www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/fedach_about.htm 2022a. Developments in Noncash Payments for and : Findings from the Federal Reserve Payments Study. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/ paymentsystems/december-2021-findings-from-the-federal-reserve-paymentsstudy.htm 2022b. FedNow Service. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/ fednow_about.htm 2022c. FedNow Service : Frequently Asked Questions. https : //www federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/files/fednow_faq.pdf 2022d. Money and Payments : The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/money-andpayments-20220120.pdf References | Policy Statement on Section ( ) of the Federal Reserve Act. https : // www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/bcreg20230127a1.pdf No date. Fostering Payment and Settlement System Safety and Efficiency. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/files/pf_6.pdf Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Developing an Efficient Payments System. https : //www.minneapolisfed.org/article/1988/developing-anefficient-payments-system Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. No date. What Is the Fed ? Payment Services. https : //www.frbsf.org/education/teacher-resources/what-is-the-fed/ payment-services/ Fletcher E. Crypto-Assets Buzz Drives Record Investment Scam Losses. Federal Trade Commission. https : //www.ftc.gov/news-events/data-visualizations/dataspotlight/2021/05/cryptocurrency-buzz-drives-record-investment-scam-losses Flood J. Bank Runs. New York May https : //nymag.com/news/intelligencer/ topic/banks-2012-6/ Ge Huang V. A. Osipovich and P. Kowsmann. FTX Tapped into Customer Accounts to Fund Risky Bets Setting Up Its Downfall. Wall Street Journal https : //www.wsj.com/articles/ ftx-tapped-into-customer-accounts-to-fund-risky-bets-setting-up-itsdownfall-11668093732 Gibson M. and E. Belsky. SR / CA : Engagement in Crypto-AssetRelated Activities by Federal Reserve Supervised Banking Organizations. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //www.federalreserve gov/supervisionreg/srletters/SR2206.htm Goldstein J. and D. Kestenbaum. The Island of Stone Money. NPR. https : // www.npr.org/sections/money/2011/02/15/131934618/the-island-ofstone-money Goldstein M. A. Stevenson M. Farrell and D. Yaffe-Bellany. How FTX s Sister Firm Brought the Crypto Exchange Down. New York Times November https : //www.nytimes.com/2022/11/18/business/ftx-alameda-ties.html Gorton G. Misunderstanding Financial Crises : Why We Don t See Them Coming Oxford : Oxford University Press. https : //global.oup.com/academic/product/ misunderstanding-financial-crises-9780199922901 Gorton G. and J. Zhang. Taming Wildcat Stablecoins. Working paper. https : // papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm ? abstract_id = Protecting the Sovereign s Money Monopoly. Working paper University of Michigan. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm ? abstract_id = Government Accountability Office. Virtual Currencies : Additional Information Could Improve Federal Agency Efforts to Counter Human and Drug Trafficking. https : //www.gao.gov/assets/gao-22-105462.pdf | References Griffith E. Is Your Startup Stalled ? Pivot to Blockchain. Wired. https : //www wired.com/story/is-your-startup-stalled-pivot-to-blockchain/ Hoffman A. No date. Taking the Cryptic Out of Crypto Assets. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. https : //www.dallasfed.org/-/media/Documents/educate/events/2022/2 2econsummit/22econsummit_Hoffman.pdf Howden. The Great Realignment. https : //www.howdengroup.com/sites/g/files/ mwfley566/files/2023-01/the-great-realignment-report-2023.pdf Huang J. C. O Neill and H. Tabuchi. Bitcoin Uses More Electricity Than Many Countries ; How Is That Possible ? New York Times September https : //www nytimes.com/interactive/2021/09/03/climate/bitcoin-carbon-footprint-electricity html Hudson s Bay Company History Foundation. Currency. https : //www.hbcheritage ca/history/fur-trade/currency Humphrey T. The Classical Concept of the Lender of Last Resort. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review : https : //www richmondfed.org/ ~ /media/richmondfedorg/publications/research/economic_ review/1975/pdf/er610101.pdf Hyperledger Foundation. No date. Case Study : DLT Labs and Walmart Canada Transform Freight Invoice Management with Hyperledger Fabric. https : // www.hyperledger.org/learn/publications/dltlabs-case-study Iansiti M. and K. Lakhani. The Truth About Blockchain. Harvard Business Review. https : //hbr.org/2017/01/the-truth-about-blockchain Jordan L. Wampum : Introduction. University of Notre Dame. https : //coins nd.edu/colcoin/colcoinintros/Wampum.intro.html Kamin D. Investors Snap Up Metaverse Real Estate in a Virtual Land Boom. New York Times November https : //www.nytimes.com/2021/11/30/business/ metaverse-real-estate.html Klein A. The Fastest Way to Address Income Inequality ? Implement a Real Time Payment System. Brookings Institution. https : //www.brookings.edu/research/ the-fastest-way-to-address-income-inequality-implement-a-real-time-paymentsystem/ Laaper S. No date. Using Blockchain to Drive Supply Chain Transparency : Future Trends in Supply Chain. Deloitte. https : //www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/ operations/articles/blockchain-supply-chain-innovation.html Liao G. and J. Caramichael. Stablecoins : Growth Potential and Impact on Banking. Federal Reserve Board International Finance Discussion Paper https : // www.federalreserve.gov/econres/ifdp/files/ifdp1334.pdf Lankenau S. Smoke Em If You Got Em : Cigarette Black Markets in U.S Prisons and Jails. National Library of Medicine National Center for Biotechnology Information no. : https : //www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ pmc/articles/PMC2117377/ References | Levine M. Gary Gensler Wants to Regulate Crypto. Bloomberg. https : //www bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-09-08/gary-gensler-wants-to-regulatecrypto # xj4y7vzkg ? leadSource = uverify % 20wall Locke T. Jack Dorsey Sells His First Tweet Ever as NFT for Over $ Million. CNBC. https : //www.cnbc.com/2021/03/22/jack-dorsey-sells-his-first-tweetever-as-an-nft-for-over-2point9-million.html Maniff J. Inclusion by Design : Crafting a Central Bank Digital Currency to Reach All Americans. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. https : //www kansascityfed.org/research/payments-system-research-briefings/ inclusion-by-design-crafting-central-bank-digital-currency/ Marlinspike M. My First Impressions of Web3. Blog. https : //moxie org/2022/01/07/web3-first-impressions.html Mickens J. Blockchains Are a Bad Idea. HBS Digital Initiative. https : //www youtube.com/watch ? v = 15RTC22Z2xI Minsky H. The Financial Instability Hypothesis. Working paper Levy Economics Institute. https : //www.levyinstitute.org/pubs/wp74.pdf Stabilizing an Unstable Economy rev. ed. New York : McGraw-Hill. Orig pub. https : //www.amazon.com/Stabilizing-Unstable-Economy-HymanMinsky/dp/0071592997 Mnuchin S. and C. Phillips. A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities : Nonbank Financials Fintech and Innovation. U.S. Department of the Treasury. https : //home.treasury.gov/sites/default/files/2018-08/AFinancial-System-that-Creates-Economic-Opportunities---Nonbank-FinancialsFintech-and-Innovation_0.pdf Modderman G. Who Accepts Bitcoin as Payment ? Coin Telegraph June https : //cointelegraph.com/explained/who-accepts-bitcoin-as-payment Moen J. and E. Tallman. The Panic of Federal Reserve History. https : // www.federalreservehistory.org/essays/panic-of-1907 Nacha. Payments Myth Busting. https : //www.nacha.org/content/paymentsmyth-busting Nakamoto S. Bitcoin : A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. https : //bitcoin.org/ bitcoin.pdf National Association of Federally-Insured Credit Unions. Re : Money and Payments : The U.S. Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation. https : //www nafcu.org/system/files/files/5.20.22 % 20Letter % 20to % 20Federal % Reserve % 20re % 20Central % 20Bank % 20Digital % 20Currency.pdf NIST ( National Institute of Standards and Technology ) No date. Non-Repudiation. https : //csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/non_repudiation Nogrady B. There s Gold Platinum and Other Valuable Materials in Every Phone the Hard Part Is Getting It Out. https : //www.bbc.com/future/ article/20161017-your-old-phone-is-full-of-precious-metals | References Noko J. Dollarization : The Case of Zimbabwe. Cato Institute. https : //www.cato org/sites/cato.org/files/serials/files/cato-journal/2011/5/cj31n2-9.pdf OCC ( U.S. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency ) Federally Chartered Banks and Thrifts May Provide Custody Services for Crypto Assets. https : //www.occ gov/news-issuances/news-releases/2020/nr-occ-2020-98.html OpenSea. @ jack : : https : //opensea.io/assets/matic/0x280098 81f0ffe85c90725b8b02be55773647c64a/20 Oracle. Permissioned Blockchain. https : //developer.oracle.com/learn/technicalarticles/permissioned-blockchain Orosz G. Twitter post. https : //twitter.com/GergelyOrosz/ status/1516422295186722824 Outten S. Bitcoin Transaction Validation What Exactly Goes on Under the Hood ? Deltec Bank. https : //www.deltecbank.com/2021/10/05/ bitcoin-transaction-validation-what-exactly-goes-on-under-the-hood/ Pechman M. Here s How Bitcoin s Intraday Volatility Complicates Leverage Trading. CoinTelegraph. https : //cointelegraph.com/news/ here-s-how-bitcoin-s-intraday-volatility-complicates-leverage-trading Putzier K. Metaverse Real Estate Piles Up Record Sales in Sandbox and Other Virtual Realms. Wall Street Journal November https : //www.wsj.com/ articles/metaverse-real-estate-piles-up-record-sales-in-sandbox-andother-virtual-realms-11638268380 Rathjen J. ACH Improvements FedNow Represent Future of Electronic Payments. Bloomberg Tax March https : //news.bloombergtax.com/payroll/ ach-improvements-fednow-represent-future-of-electronic-payments Roose K. Maybe There s a Use for Crypto After All. New York Times February https : //www.nytimes.com/2022/02/06/technology/helium-cryptocurrencyuses.html Rybarczyk R. Understanding the Bitcoin Blockchain Header. Medium. https : // medium.com/fcats-blockchain-incubator/ understanding-the-bitcoin-blockchain-header-a2b0db06b515 Samford H. and L. Domingo. The Political Geography and Environmental Impacts of Cryptocurrency Mining. University of Washington. https : //jsis.washington.edu/ news/the-political-geography-and-environmental-impacts-of-cryptocurrencymining/ Schmidt L. A. Timmermann and R. Wermers. Runs on Money Market Mutual Funds. American Economic Review no. : https : //pubs.aeaweb org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/aer.20140678 Schneier B. There s No Good Reason to Trust Blockchain Technology. Wired https : //www.wired.com/story/theres-no-good-reason-to-trust-blockchaintechnology/ References | SEC ( U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ) 2021a. SEC Charges Global Crypto Lending Platform and Top Executives in $ Billion Fraud. https : //www.sec gov/news/press-release/2021-172 2021b. SEC Charges Three Individuals with Insider Trading. https : //www.sec gov/news/press-release/2021-121 Crypto Assets and Cyber Enforcement Actions. https : //www.sec.gov/ spotlight/cybersecurity-enforcement-actions Siegel R. Zimbabwe s Hyperinflation Poses Unique Challenges. NPR. https : // www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php ? storyId = Seward Z. A16z Leads $ 111M Token Sale for Helium s HNT. CoinDesk. https : // www.coindesk.com/business/2021/08/10/ a16z-leads-111m-token-sale-for-heliums-hnt/ Smilyanets D. I Scrounged Through the Trash Heaps ; Now I m a Millionaire : An Interview with REvil s Unknown. Record. https : //therecord media/i-scrounged-through-the-trash-heaps-now-im-a-millionaire-an-interviewwith-revils-unknown/ Tabuchi H. Cryptomining Capacity in U.S. Rivals Energy Use of Houston Findings Show. New York Times July https : //www.nytimes com/2022/07/15/climate/cryptocurrency-bitcoin-mining-electricity.html Tian R. A Deep Dive into Leverages in DeFi Borrowing Margin Trading Leveraged Tokens and Options : FinNexus. Alexandria. https : //coinmarketcap com/alexandria/ article/a-deep-dive-into-leverages-in-defi-borrowing-margin-trading-leveragedtokens-and-options-finnexus Tikkanen A. No date. A Brief ( and Fascinating ) History of Money. Britannica. https : // www.britannica.com/story/a-brief-and-fascinating-history-of-money Tim n J. Amount.h. Code commit. https : //github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/08a73 16c144f9f2516db8fa62400893f4358c5ae/src/amount.h Tortorelli P. and K. Rooney. Sam Bankman-Fried s Alameda Quietly Used FTX Customer Funds for Trading Say Sources. CNBC. https : //www.cnbc com/2022/11/13/sam-bankman-frieds-alameda-quietly-used-ftx-customer-fundswithout-raising-alarm-bells-say-sources.html University of Cambridge. Cambridge Bitcoin Electricity Consumption Index. https : //ccaf.io/cbeci/index/comparisons U.S. Commercial Code. No date. : General Definitions. https : //www.law cornell.edu/ucc/1/1-201 U.S. Department of Labor. Compliance Assistance Release No. https : // www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/employers-and-advisers/plan-administration-andcompliance/compliance-assistance-releases/2022-01 | References U.S. Department of Justice. The Role of Law Enforcement in Detecting Investigating and Prosecuting Criminal Activity Related to Digital Assets. https : //www.justice.gov/ag/page/file/1535236/download U.S. Department of the Treasury. 2022a. Crypto-Assets : Implications for Consumers Investors and Businesses. https : //home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/ CryptoAsset_EO5.pdf 2022b. The Future of Money and Payments : Report Pursuant to Section ( b ) of Executive Order https : //home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/Future-ofMoney-and-Payments.pdf 2022c. Report on Digital Asset Financial Stability Risks and Regulation. https : //home.treasury.gov/system/files/261/FSOC-Digital-Assets-Report-2022 pdf 2022d. Action Plan to Address Illicit Financing Risks of Digital Assets. https : // home.treasury.gov/system/files/136/Digital-Asset-Action-Plan.pdf 2022e. Fact Sheet : Framework for International Engagement on Digital Assets. https : //home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases/jy0854 Velde F. On the Origin of Specie. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. https : // www.atlantafed.org/-/media/documents/news/conferences/2012/monetaryeconomics/papers/velde.pdf Venmo. No date. Bank Transfer Timeline. https : //help.venmo.com/hc/en-us/ articles/221083888-Bank-Transfer-Timeline Vitasek K. J. Bayliss L. Owen and N. Srivastava. How Walmart Canada Uses Blockchain to Solve Supply-Chain Challenges. Harvard Business Review https : //hbr.org/2022/01/ how-walmart-canada-uses-blockchain-to-solve-supply-chain-challenges Warren E. Warren Van Hollen Pressley Garc a Introduce Legislation to Require the Fed to Act on Faster Payments. Press release. https : //www.warren.senate gov/newsroom/press-releases/ warren-van-hollen-pressley-garca-introduce-legislation-to-require-the-fed-toact-on-faster-payments Wheatley J. Six Things You Need to Know About Raghuram Rajan. Financial Times August https : //www.ft.com/content/6b12ca6a-e993-3021-b7747228934ba322 White House. 2022a. Technical Evaluation for a U.S. Central Bank Digital Currency System. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/09-2022Technical-Evaluation-US-CBDC-System.pdf 2022b. Executive Order on Ensuring Responsible Development of Digital Assets. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidentialactions/2022/03/09/executive-order-on-ensuring-responsible-developmentof-digital-assets/ References | 2022c. Fact Sheet : White House Releases First-Ever Comprehensive Framework for Responsible Development of Digital Assets. https : //www whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2022/09/16/fact-sheetwhite-house-releases-first-ever-comprehensive-framework-for-responsibledevelopment-of-digital-assets/ 2022d. Energy Implications of Crypto-Assets in the United States. https : // www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/09-2022-Crypto-Assets-andClimate-Report.pdf 2022e. Policy Objectives for a U.S. Central Bank Digital Currency System. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/09-2022-PolicyObjectives-US-CBDC-System.pdf Williams. A Neighborhood s Cryptocurrency Mine : Like a Jet That Never Leaves. Washington Post. https : //www.washingtonpost.com/business/ interactive/2022/cryptocurrency-mine-noise-homes-nc/ Wong R. Why Stablecoins Fail : An Economist s Post-Mortem on Terra. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief https : //www.richmondfed org/publications/research/economic_brief/2022/eb_22-24 World Bank. No date. Tamper-Proof Logs. https : //id4d.worldbank.org/guide/ tamper-proof-logs Yaffe-Bellany D. They Made Millions on Luna Solana and Polygon : Crypto s Boom Beyond Bitcoin. New York Times February https : //www.nytimes com/2022/02/07/technology/cryptocurrency-luna-solana-polygon.html Yaga D. P. Mell N. Roby and K. Scarfone. Blockchain Technology Overview. National Institute for Standards and Technology Report https : //nvlpubs nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2018/nist.ir.8202.pdf Yang Y. JPMorgan Finds New Use for Blockchain in Trading and Lending. https : //www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-26/ jpmorgan-finds-new-use-for-blockchain-in-collateral-settlement Chapter Acharya V. T. Johnson S. Sundaresan and T. Tomunen. Is Physical Climate Risk Priced ? Evidence from Regional Variation in Exposure to Heat Stress. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w30445 Agarwala M. and D. Coyle. Natural Capital in Climate Models. Nature Sustainability : https : //doi.org/10.1038/s41893-020-00618-x Agarwala M. and D. Zenghelis. Natural Capital Accounting for Sustainable Macroeconomic Strategies. U.N. Department of Economic and Social Affairs System of Environmental and Economic Accounting. https : //seea.un.org/ content/natural-capital-accounting-sustainable-macroeconomic-strategies | References Ahmedzade T. J. Horton P. Mwai and W. Song. China Europe U.S. Drought : Is the Driest Year Recorded ? British Broadcasting Center September https : //www.bbc.com/news/62751110 Akerlof G. The Market for Lemons : Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1016/B978-0-12-214850-7.50022-X American Society of Civil Engineers. Climate-Resilient Infrastructure : Adaptive Design and Risk Management edited by B. Ayyub. Reston VA : American Society of Civil Engineers Investment Gap Report Card for America s Infrastructure. https : //infrastructurereportcard.org/resources/investmentgap-2020-2029/ Annan F. and W. Schlenker. Federal Crop Insurance and the Disincentive to Adapt to Extreme Heat. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.p20151031 Arellano-Gonzalez J. A. AghaKouchak M. Levy Y. Qin J. Burney S. Davis and F Moore. The Adaptive Benefits of Agricultural Water Markets in California. Environmental Research Letters no. https : //doi org/10.1088/1748-9326/abde5b Ash K. and N. Obradovich. Climatic Stress Internal Migration and Syrian Civil War Onset. Journal of Conflict Resolution no. : https : //doi org/10.1177/0022002719864140 Auffhammer M. Climate Adaptive Response Estimation : Short- and Long-Run Impacts of Climate Change on Residential Electricity and Natural Gas Consumption. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2022.102669 Bakkensen L. and L. Barrage. Going Underwater ? Flood Risk Belief Heterogeneity and Coastal Home Price Dynamics. Review of Financial Studies no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhab122 Baldauf M. L. Garlappi and C. Yannelis. Does Climate Change Affect Real Estate Prices ? Only If You Believe in It. Review of Financial Studies no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhz073 Barrage L. The Fiscal Costs of Climate Change. AEA Papers and Proceedings : https : //doi.org/10.1093/restud/rdz055 Barrage L. and J. Furst. Housing Investment Sea Level Rise and Climate Change Beliefs. Economics Letters : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j econlet.2019.01.023 Barreca A. and J. Schaller. The Impact of High Ambient Temperatures on Delivery Timing and Gestational Lengths. Nature Climate Change : https : //doi.org/10.1038/s41558-019-0632-4 References | Bastien-Olvera B. F. Granella and F. Moore. Persistent Effect of Temperature on GDP Identified from Lower Frequency Temperature Variability. Environmental Research Letters no. https : //doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ac82c2 Baylis P. and J. Boomhower. The Economic Incidence of Wildfire Suppression in the United States. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics. https : // www.aeaweb.org/articles ? id = 10.1257/app.20200662 Beasley W. and S. Dundas. Hold the Line : Modeling Private Coastal Adaptation Through Shoreline Armoring Decisions. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2020.102397 Benveniste H. M. Oppenheimer and M. Fleurbaey. Effect of Border Policy on Exposure and Vulnerability to Climate Change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. : https : //doi.org/10.1073/ pnas.2007597117 Benz S. and J. Burney. Widespread Race and Class Disparities in the Surface Urban Heat Extremes Across the United States. Earth s Future https : // agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2021EF002016 Bercos-Hickey E. T. O Brien M. Wehner L. Zhang C. Patriciola H. Huang and M Risser. Anthropogenic Contributions to the Pacific Northwest Heatwave. Geophysical Research Letters no. https : //doi org/10.1029/2022GL099396 Berrang-Ford L. et al. A Systematic Global Stocktake of Evidence on Human Adaptation to Climate Change. Nature Climate Change : https : // www.nature.com/articles/s41558-021-01170-y Bernstein A. M. Gustafson and R. Lewis. Disaster on the Horizon : The Price Effect of Sea Level Rise. Journal of Financial Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2019.03.013 Bhutta N. A. Chang L. Dettling and J. Hsu. Disparities in Wealth by Race and Ethnicity in the Survey of Consumer Finances. Finance and Economics Discussion Series Notes Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System https : //www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/disparities-in-wealthby-race-and-ethnicity-in-the-2019-survey-of-consumer-finances-20200928.html Billings S. E. Gallagher and L. Ricketts. Let the Rich Be Flooded : The Distribution of Financial Aid and Distress After Hurricane Harvey. Journal of Financial Economics. https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2021.11.006 Borunda A. Megadrought Persists in Western U.S. as Another Extremely Dry Year Develops. National Geographic. https : //www.nationalgeographic.com/ environment/article/megadrought-persists-in-western-us-as-another-extremelydry-year-develops Bradsher K. and J. Dong. China s Record Drought Is Drying Rivers and Feeding Its Coal Habit. New York Times August https : //www.nytimes com/2022/08/26/business/economy/china-drought-economy-climate.html | References Bradt J. C. Kousky and O. Wing. Voluntary Purchases and Adverse Selection in the Market for Flood Insurance. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2021.102515 Braun A. and C. Kousky. Catastrophe Bonds. Wharton Risk Center Primer July. https : //riskcenter.wharton.upenn.edu/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/ Cat-Bond-Primer-July-2021.pdf Brunetti C. J. Caramichael M. Crosignani B. Dennis G. Kotta D. Morgan C. Shin and I. Zer. Climate-Related Financial Stability Risks for the United States : Methods and Applications. Finance and Economics Discussion Series Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/ econres/feds/climate-related-financial-stability-risks-for-the-united-states.htm Brunetti C. B. Dennis D. Gates D. Hancock D. Ignell E. Kiser G. Kotta A. Kovner R. Rosen and N. Tabor. Climate Change and Financial Stability. FEDS Notes Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //www federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/climate-change-and-financialstability-20210319.html Bureau of Reclamation. About Us : Fact Sheet. https : //www.usbr.gov/main/about/ fact.html Burke M. A. Driscoll S. Heft-Neal and M. Wara. The Changing Risk and Burden of Wildfire in the United States. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. https : //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2011048118 Burke M. F. Gonz lez P. Baylis S. Heft-Neal C. Baysan S. Basu and S. Hsiang. Higher Temperatures Increase Suicide Rates in the United States and Mexico. Nature Climate Change : https : //doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0222-x Burke M. S. Heft-Neal J. Li A. Driscoll P. Baylis M. Stigler J. Weill J. Burney J Wen M. Childs and C. Gould. Exposures and Behavioral Responses to Wildfire Smoke. Nature Human Behavior : https : //doi.org/10.1038/ s41562-022-01396-6 Burke M. S. Hsiang and E. Miguel. Global Non-Linear Effect of Temperature on Economic Production. Nature no. : https : //doi org/10.1038/nature15725 Carleton T. A. Jina M. Delgado M. Greenstone T. Houser S. Hsiang A. Hultgren R Kopp K. McCusker I. Nath J. Rising A. Rode H. Seo A. Viaene J. Yuan and A. Zhang. Valuing the Global Mortality Consequences of Climate Change Accounting for Adaptation Costs and Benefits. Quarterly Journal of Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjac020 Carlson C. G. Albery C. Merow C. Trisos C. Zipfel E. Eskew K. Olival N. Ross and S. Bansal. Climate Change Increases Cross-Species Viral Transmission Risk. Nature : https : //doi.org/10.1038/s41586-022-04788-w CBO ( Congressional Budget Office ) Federal Support for Financing State and Local Transportation and Water Infrastructure. http : //www.cbo.gov/ publication/54549 References | Expected Costs of Damage from Hurricane Winds and Storm-Related Flooding. https : //www.cbo.gov/system/files/2019-04/55019-ExpectedCosts FromWindStorm.pdf 2022a. Discretionary Spending in Fiscal Year : An Infographic. https : // www.cbo.gov/publication/58269 2022b. Wildfires. https : //www.cbo.gov/publication/58212 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. NHE Fact Sheet. https : //www.cms gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/ NationalHealthExpendData/NHE-Fact-Sheet Chapman J. A. Lu and L. Timmerhoff. By the Numbers : A Look at Municipal Bankruptcies Over the Past Years. Pew Research Institute. https : //www pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/articles/2020/07/07/ by-the-numbers-a-look-at-municipal-bankruptcies-over-the-past-20-years Chediak M. Unprecedented California Blackout Ending as PG&E Restores Power. Bloomberg News October https : //www.bloomberg.com/news/ articles/2019-10-10/unprecedented-california-blackout-spreads-with-millionsin-dark ? leadSource = uverify % 20wall # xj4y7vzkg Childs M. J. Li J. Wen S. Heft-Neal A. Driscoll S. Wang C. Gould M. Qiu J Burney and M. Burke. Daily Local-Level Estimates of Ambient Wildfire Smoke PM2.5 for the Contiguous U.S. Environmental Science & Technology no. : https : //doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.2c02934 Climate Central and Zillow. Ocean at the Door : New Homes and the Rising Sea : Recent Housing Growth Rates are Faster in High Flood Risk Zones for Most Coastal States. http : //assets.climatecentral.org/pdfs/Nov2018_Report_ OceanAtTheDoor.pdf ? pdf = OceanAtTheDoor-Report CMRA. No date. Climate Mapping for Resilience and Adaptation. https : //resilience climate.gov/ # assessment-tool Cong S. D. Nock Y. Qiu and B. Xing. Unveiling Hidden Energy Poverty Using the Energy/Equity Gap. Nature Communications https : //doi.org/10.1038/ s41467-022-30146-5 Congressional Research Service. National Flood Insurance Program Risk Rating : Frequently Asked Questions. https : //crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/ IN/IN11777 Conte M. and D. Kelly. An Imperfect Storm : Fat-Tailed Tropical Cyclone Damages Insurance and Climate Policy. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2017.08.010 Cook L. Violence and Economic Activity : Evidence from African American Patents Journal of Economic Growth : https : //doi org/10.1007/s10887-014-9102-z CoreLogic. CoreLogic Analysis Shows Final Estimated Insured and Uninsured Damages for Hurricane Ian to Be Between $ Billion and $ Billion. https : // | References www.corelogic.com/press-releases/ corelogic-analysis-shows-final-estimated-insured-and-uninsured-damages-forhurricane-ian-to-be-between-41-billion-and-70-billion/ Coyle D. GDP : A Brief but Affectionate History. Princeton NJ : Princeton University Press. https : //press.princeton.edu/books/paperback/9780691169859/ gdp Dasgupta P. The Economics of Biodiversity : The Dasgupta Review. Her Majesty s Treasury. https : //www.gov.uk/government/publications/ final-report-the-economics-of-biodiversity-the-dasgupta-review Davenport F. M. Burke and N. Diffenbaugh. Contribution of Historical Precipitation Change to U.S. Flood Damages. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. https : //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2017524118 Dell M. B. Jones and B. Olken. Temperature Shocks and Economic Growth : Evidence from the Last Half Century. American Economic Journal : Macroeconomics no. : http : //dx.doi.org/10.1257/mac.4.3.66 Deng H. D. Aldrich M. Danziger J. Gao N. Phillips S. Cornelius and Q. Wang. High-Resolution Human Mobility Data Reveal Race and Wealth Disparities in Disaster Evacuation Patterns. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications https : //doi.org/10.1057/s41599-021-00824-8 Denholm P. P. Brown W. Cole T. Mai B. Sergi M. Brown P. Jadun J. Ho J Mayernik C. McMillan and R. Sreenath. Examining Supply-Side Options to Achieve % Clean Electricity by National Renewable Energy Laboratory. https : //www.nrel.gov/docs/fy22osti/81644.pdf Derenoncourt E. C. Kim M. Kuhn and M. Schularick. Wealth of Two Nations : The U.S. Racial Wealth Gap NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi org/10.3386/w30101 Deryugina T. The Fiscal Cost of Hurricanes : Disaster Aid Versus Social Insurance. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/pol.20140296 Desch nes O. The Impact of Climate Change on Mortality in the United States : Benefits and Costs of Adaptation. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w30282 Desch nes O. and M. Greenstone. Climate Change Mortality and Adaptation : Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the U.S. American Economic Journal : Applied Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1257/app.3.4.152 Desch nes O. M. Greenstone and J. Guryan. Climate Change and Birth Weight. American Economic Review : Papers and Proceedings no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.99.2.211 References | Diaz D. Estimating Global Damages from Sea Level Rise with the Coastal Impact and Adaptation Model ( CIAM ) Climatic Change : https : // doi.org/10.1007/s10584-016-1675-4 Dietz T. E. Ostrom and P. Stern. The Struggle to Govern the Commons. Science no. : https : //doi.org/10.1126/science.1091015 Diffenbaugh N. D. Swain and D. Touma. Anthropogenic Warming Has Increased Drought Risk in California. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. : https : //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1422385112 Dixon L. N. Clancy B. Bender A. Kofner D. Manheim and L. Zakaras. Flood Insurance in New York City Following Hurricane Sandy. Santa Monica CA : RAND Corporation. https : //www.rand.org/pubs/research_reports/RR328.html Dundas S. and R. von Haefen. The Effects of Weather on Recreational Fishing Demand and Adaptation : Implications for a Changing Climate. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists no. https : //doi org/10.1086/706343 Electric Power Research Institute. Costs and Benefits of Proactive Adaptation in the Electric Sector. https : //www.epri.com/research/products/0000000030 Elliott D. Insurance Woes in Coastal Louisiana Make Hurricane Recovery Difficult. National Public Radio July https : //www.npr org/2022/07/27/1113639292/ insurances-woes-in-coastal-louisiana-make-hurricane-recovery-difficult Environmental and Energy Study Institute. The National Security Impacts of Climate Change. https : //www.eesi.org/files/IssueBrief_Climate_Change_ Security_Implications.pdf Environmental Law Institute. Law of Environmental Protection. Blue Springs MO : Aspen Publishing. https : //www.eli.org/law-environmental-protection Evans D. C Webb E. Braunstein J. Glowacki A. Netter B. Katz and D. Lohmann Residential Flood Risk in the United States : Quantifying Flood Losses Mortgage Risk and Sea Level Rise. Society of Actuaries. https : //www.soa.org/ globalassets/assets/files/resources/research-report/2020/soa-flood-report.pdf Farrell J. P. Burow K. McConnell J. Bayham K. Whyte and G. Koss. Effects of Land Dispossession and Forced Migration on Indigenous Peoples in North America. Science no. https : //doi.org/10.1126/science.abe4943 Federal Emergency Management Agency. Flooding : Our Nation s Most Frequent and Costly Natural Disaster. https : //www.fbiic.gov/public/2010/mar/ FloodingHistoryandCausesFS.PDF Flood Risk Disclosure : Model State Requirements for Disclosing Flood Risk During Real Estate Transactions. https : //www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/ documents/fema_state-flood-risk-disclosure-best-practices_07142022.pdf | References No date. The Watermark : National Flood Insurance Program Financial Statements. https : //www.fema.gov/flood-insurance/work-with-nfip/ watermark-financial-statements Federal Insurance and Mitigation Administration. The Watermark : Fiscal Year Second Quarter Volume Federal Emergency Management Agency https : //www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_fy22-q2-watermark pdf Fiedler T. A. Pitman K. Mackenzie N. Wood C. Jakob and S. Perkins-Kirkpatrick Business Risk and the Emergence of Climate Analytics. Nature Climate Change : https : //doi.org/10.1038/s41558-020-00984-6 Financial Stability Board. Climate Scenario Analysis by Jurisdictions : Initial Findings and Lessons. https : //www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/medias/ documents/climate_scenario_analysis_by_jurisdictions_initial_findings_and_ lessons.pdf Fisher E. S. Sippel and R. Knutti. Increasing Probability of Record-Shattering Climate Extremes. Nature Climate Change : https : //doi org/10.1038/s41558-021-01092-9 Fitch Ratings. Fitch Downgrades Pakistan to CCC+. https : //www.fitchratings com/research/sovereigns/fitch-downgrades-pakistan-to-ccc-21-10-2022 Fleenor W. E. Hanak J. Lund and J. Mount. Delta Hydrodynamics and Water Salinity with Future Conditions : Technical Appendix C. Public Policy Institute of California. https : //www.ppic.org/wp-content/uploads/content/pubs/ other/708EHR_appendixC.pdf Florida Citizens. Policies in Force. https : //www.citizensfla.com/policies-in-force Fothergill A. and L. Peek. Poverty and Disasters in the United States : A Review of Recent Sociological Findings. Natural Hazards : https : //doi org/10.1023/B : NHAZ.0000026792.76181.d9 Frame D. M. Wehner I. Noy and S. Rosier. The Economic Costs of Hurricane Harvey Attributable to Climate Change. Climatic Change : https : // doi.org/10.1007/s10584-020-02692-8 George Washington University. Ascertainment of the Estimated Excess Mortality for Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico. Milken Institute School of Public Health https : //publichealth.gwu.edu/content/gw-report-delivers-recommendations-aimedpreparing-puerto-rico-hurricane-season Gibson M. and J. Mullins. Climate Risk and Beliefs in New York Floodplains. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists no. https : //doi.org/10.1086/710240 Goldsmith-Pinkham P. M. Gustafson and R. Lewis. Sea Level Rise Exposure and Municipal Bond Yields. Working paper Jacobs Levy Equity Management Center for Quantitative Financial Research. http : //dx.doi.org/10.2139/ ssrn.3478364 References | Gopalakrishnan S. D. McNamara M. Smith and B. Murray. Decentralized Management Hinders Coastal Climate Adaptation : The Spatial-Dynamics of Beach Nourishment. Environmental and Resource Economics : https : //doi.org/10.1007/s10640-016-0004-8 Goss M. D. Swain J. Abatzoglou A. Sarhadi C. Kolden A. Williams and N Diffenbaugh. Climate Change Is Increasing the Likelihood of Extreme Autumn Wildfire Conditions Across California. Environmental Research Letters no. https : //doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab83a7 Graff Zivin J. and M. Neidell. Temperature and the Allocation of Time : Implications for Climate Change. Journal of Labor Economics no. https : //doi.org/10.1086/671766 Green R. R. Basu B. Malig R. Broadwin J. Kim and B. Ostro. The Effect of Temperature on Hospital Admissions in Nine California Counties. International Journal of Public Health : https : //doi.org/10.1007/ s00038-009-0076-0 Gulev S. P. Thorne J. Ahn F. Dentener C. Domingues S. Gerland D. Gong D Kaufman H. Nnamchi J. Quaas J. Rivera S. Sathyendranath S. Smith B Trewin K. von Schuckmann and R. Vose. Changing State of the Climate System. In Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis edited by V. Masson-Delmotte P. Zhai A. Pirani S. Connors C. P an S. Berger N Caud Y. Chen L. Goldfarb M. Gomis M. Huang K. Leitzell E. Lonnoy J Matthews T. Maycock T. Waterfield O. Yelek i R. Yu and B. Zhou Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. https : //doi org/10.1017/9781009157896.004 Guti rrez J. R. Jones G. Narisma L. Alves M. Amjad I. Gorodetskaya M. Grose N Klutse S. Krakovska J. Li D. Mart nez-Castro L. Mearns S. Mernild T Ngo-Duc B. van den Hurk and J. Yoon. Atlas. In Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis edited by V. Masson-Delmotte P. Zhai A Pirani S. Connors C. P an S. Berger N. Caud Y. Chen L. Goldfarb M Gomis M. Huang K. Leitzell E. Lonnoy J. Matthews T. Maycock T Waterfield O. Yelek i R. Yu and B. Zhou Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. https : //doi.org/10.1017/9781009157896.021 Hagerty N. and B. Leonard. Interior s Plan Won t Solve the Colorado River Crisis. Here s What Will. High Country News October https : //www.hcn org/articles/opinion-colorado-river-interiors-plan-wont-solve-the-coloradoriver-crisis-heres-what-will Hallegatte S. J. Hourcade and P. Dumas. Why Economic Dynamics Matter in Assessing Climate Change Damages : Illustration on Extreme Events. Ecological Economics no. : https : //doi.org/10.1016/j ecolecon.2006.06.006 | References Hartwig R. and C. Wilkinson. Residual Market Property Plans : From Markets of Last Resort to Markets of First Choice. Insurance Information Institute. https : // www.iii.org/sites/default/files/docs/pdf/residual_markets_wp_051616.pdf Hashida Y. J. Withey D. Lewis T. Newman and J. Kline. Anticipating Changes in Wildlife Habitat Induced by Private Forest Owners Adaptation to Climate Change and Carbon Policy. Public Library of Science. https : //doi.org/10.1371/ journal.pone.0230525 Hausfather Z. and F. Moore. Net-Zero Commitments Could Limit Warming to Below C. Nature : https : //doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-00874-1 Hino M. S. Belanger C. Field A. Davies and K. Mach. High-Tide Flooding Disrupts Local Economic Activity. Science Advances no. https : //doi org/10.1126/sciadv.aau2736 Hino M. and M. Burke. The Effect of Information About Climate Risk on Property Values. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no https : //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2003374118 Hippe A. A. Becker M. Fischer and B. Schwegler. Estimation of Cost Required to Elevate U.S. Ports in Response to Climate Change : A Thought Exercise for Climate Critical Resources. Working paper Stanford University. https : //stacks stanford.edu/file/druid : rm328fb1292/WP138.pdf Hoffman J. V. Shandas and N. Pendleton. The Effects of Historical Housing Policies on Resident Exposure to Intra-Urban Heat : A Study of U.S. Urban Areas. Climate no. https : //doi.org/10.3390/cli8010012 Howe C. K. Anderson A. R. Siders B. Ristroph K. Spidalieri J. Li W. Burns E Kronk Warner H. Tanana H. Vizcarra N. Kuyumjian and Z. Schiffer. Chapter : Climate Change. In Law of Environmental Protection Washington : Environmental Law Institute Howell J. and J. Elliott. Damages Done : The Longitudinal Impacts of Natural Hazards on Wealth Inequality in the United States. Social Problems no. https : //doi.org/10.1093/socpro/spy016 Hsiang S. R. Kopp A. Jina J. Rising M. Delgado S. Mohan D. Rasmussen R. MuirWood P. Wilson M. Oppenheimer K. Larsen and T. Houser. Estimating Economic Damage from Climate Change in the United States. Science no. : https : //doi.org/10.1126/science.aal4369 Insurance Information Institute. No date a. Current Table. https : //www.iii.org/ table-archive/20793 No date b. Facts Statistics : Catastrophe Bonds and Other Insurance-Linked Securities. https : //www.iii.org/fact-statistic/facts-statistics-catastrophe-bonds Insurance Journal. Florida Citizens Tops Million Policies Making It Largest in State by a Third. August https : //www.insurancejournal.com/news/ southeast/2022/08/12/680306.htm References | IPCC ( Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ) Summary for Policymakers. In Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis edited by V. MassonDelmotte P. Zhai A. Pirani S. Connors C. P an S. Berger N. Caud Y. Chen L. Goldfarb M. Gomis M. Huang K. Leitzell E. Lonnoy J. Matthews T Maycock T. Waterfield O. Yelek i R. Yu and B. Zhou Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. https : //doi org/10.1017/9781009157896.001 Issler P. R. Stanton C. Vergara-Alert and N. Wallace. Mortgage Markets with Climate-Change Risk : Evidence from Wildfires in California. Working paper http : //dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3511843 James I. As Drought Persists Minimal Water Deliveries Announced for the Central Valley Project. Los Angeles Times February https : //www.latimes com/california/story/2022-02-24/ minimal-water-allocations-for-the-central-valley-project Jenkins J. J. Farbes R. Jones N. Patankar and G. Schivley. Electricity Transmission Is Key to Unlock the Full Potential of the Inflation Reduction Act. Rapid Energy Policy Evaluation and Analysis Toolkit. https : // repeatproject.org/docs/REPEAT_IRA_Transmission_2022-09-22.pdf Jerch R. M. Kahn and G. Lin. Local Public Finance Dynamics and Hurricane Shocks. Journal of Urban Economics doi.org/10.1016/j.jue.2022.103516 Kahn M. Adapting to Climate Change : Markets and the Management of an Uncertain Future. New Haven CT : Yale University Press. https : //yalebooks yale.edu/book/9780300246711/adapting-climate-change/ Kao S. M. Ashfaq D. Rastogi S. Gangrade R. Martinez A. Fernandez G. Konapala N. Voisin T. Zhou W. Xu H. Gao B. Zhao and G. Zhao. The Third Assessment of the Effects of Climate Change on Federal Hydropower. Oak Ridge TN : National Laboratory. https : //info.ornl.gov/sites/publications/Files/ Pub168510.pdf Keenan J. and J. Bradt. Underwaterwriting : From Theory to Empiricism in Regional Mortgage Markets in the U.S. Climatic Change : https : //doi.org/10.1007/s10584-020-02734-1 Kelley C. S. Mohtadi M. Cane R. Seager and Y. Kushnir. Climate Change in the Fertile Crescent and Implications of the Recent Syrian Drought. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. : https : // doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1421533112 Keys B. and P. Mulder. Neglected No More : Housing Markets Mortgage Lending and Sea Level Rise. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : //doi.org/10.3386/w27930 Kiewiet R. and K. Szakaty. Constitutional Limitations on Borrowing : An Analysis of State Bonded Indebtedness. Journal of Law Economics and Organization no. : | References Kolstad C. and F. Moore. Estimating the Economic Impacts of Climate Change Using Weather Observations. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy https : //scholar.google.com/citations ? view_op = view_citation&hl = en&user = ysvd 9c0AAAAJ&citation_for_view = ysvd9c0AAAAJ : L8Ckcad2t8MC Kopp R. Land-Grant Lessons for Anthropocene Universities. Climatic Change no. https : //doi.org/10.1007/s10584-021-03029-9 Kousky C. The Role of Natural Disaster Insurance in Recovery and Risk Reduction. Annual Review of Resource Economics : Understanding Disaster Insurance. Washington : Island Press. https : // islandpress.org/books/understanding-disaster-insurance Kousky C. H. Kunreuther B. Lingle and L. Shabman. The Emerging Private Residential Flood Insurance Market in the United States. Wharton Risk Management and Decision Processes Center University of Pennsylvania https : //riskcenter.wharton.upenn.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/EmergingFlood-Insurance-Market-Report.pdf Kousky C. M. Palim and Y. Pan. Flood Damage and Mortgage Credit Risk : A Case Study of Hurricane Harvey. Journal of Housing Research no. : https : //doi.org/10.1080/10527001.2020.1840131 Landers J. California Utility to Underground Miles of Power Lines. American Society of Civil Engineers. https : //www.asce.org/publications-andnews/civil-engineering-source/civil-engineering-magazine/article/2021/09/ california-utility-to-underground-10000-mi-of-power-lines Leefeldt E. Why Is Homeowners Insurance in Florida Such a Disaster ? Forbes November https : //www.forbes.com/advisor/homeowners-insurance/ why-is-homeowners-insurance-in-florida-such-a-disaster/ Lipton D. M. Rubenstein S. Weiskopf S. Carter J. Peterson L. Crozier M. Fogarty S Gaichas K. Hyde T. Morelli J. Morisette H. Moustahfid R. Mu oz R Poudel M. Staudinger C. Stock L. Thompson R. Waples and J. Weltzin Ecosystems Ecosystem Services and Biodiversity. In Impacts Risks and Adaptation in the United States : Fourth National Climate Assessment Volume II edited by D. Reidmiller C. Avery D. Easterling K. Kunkel K Lewis T. Maycock and B. Stewart Washington : U.S. Global Change Research Program. https : //doi.org/10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH7 Lu C. The Lingering Impact of Pakistan s Floods. Foreign Policy September https : //foreignpolicy.com/2022/09/15/ pakistan-floods-humanitarian-disease-food-crisis-climate/ Lustgarten A. The Great Climate Migration. New York Times Magazine July https : //www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/23/magazine/climate-migration html Mach K. C. Kraan W. Adger H. Buhaug M. Burke J. Fearon C. Field C. Hendrix J Maystadt J. O Loughlin P. Roessler J. Scheffran K. Schultz and N. von References | Uexkull. Climate as a Risk Factor for Armed Conflict. Nature : https : //doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1300-6 Mack K. C. Kraan M. Hino E. Johnston and C. Field. 2019b. Managed Retreat Through Voluntary Buyouts of Flood-Prone Properties. Science Advances no. https : //doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aax8995 Marder J. Beating Back the Tides. National Aviation and Space Administration https : //sealevel.nasa.gov/news/203/beating-back-the-tides Martinich J. J. Neumann L. Ludwig and L. Jantarasami. Risks of Sea Level Rise to Disadvantaged Communities in the United States. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change : https : //doi.org/10.1007/ s11027-011-9356-0 McGee K. A Place Worth Protecting : Rethinking Cost-Benefit Analysis under FEMA s Flood-Mitigation Programs. University of Chicago Law Review no. : https : //heinonline.org/HOL/Page ? handle = hein.journals/ uclr88&div = 64&g_sent = 1&casa_token = nFrduvaQRJUAAAAA : M3P21KHCgk oPC6eTZJHTRHIf8L6uHFSy-vSGXG8GbJAntCQ9mAa34WUOPQ9OvtQ5F0 u8sGjb&collection = journals Meinshausen M. J. Lewis C. McGlade J. G tschow Z. Nicholls R. Burdon L. Cozzi and B. Hackmann. Realization of Paris Agreement Pledges May Limit Warming Just Below C. Nature : https : //doi.org/10.1038/ s41586-022-04553-z Mendelsohn R. Efficient Adaptation to Climate Change. Climatic Change : https : //doi.org/10.1023/A : Mendelsohn R. W. Nordhaus and D. Shaw. The Impact of Global Warming on Agriculture : A Ricardian Analysis. American Economic Review no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/aer.89.4.1046 Milly P. J. Betancourt M. Falkenmark R. Hirsch Z. Kundzewicz D. Lettenmaier and R. Stouffer. Stationarity Is Dead : Whither Water Management ? Science : https : //www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1151915 Missirian A. and W. Schlenker. Asylum Applications Respond to Temperature Fluctuations. Science no. : https : //doi.org/10.1126/science aao0432 ModEx. No date. The Catastrophe Risk Modeling Market : From Laggards to Leaders : Barriers Consequences and Strategic Considerations. https : //www.nasdaq com/docs/1617-Q19 % 20ModEx % 20Brochure % 20rebrand % 20to % Nasdaq_MT_v2.pdf Moore F. and D. Diaz. Temperature Impacts on Economic Growth Warrant Stringent Mitigation Policy. Nature Climate Change : https : //doi org/10.1038/nclimate2481 Moore F. A. Stokes M. Conte and X. Dong. Noah s Ark in a Warming World : Climate Change Biodiversity Loss and Public Adaptation Costs in the United | References States. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists no. : https : //doi.org/10.1086/716662 Mukherjee A. and N. Sanders. The Causal Effect of Heat on Violence : Social Implications of Unmitigated Heat Among the Incarcerated. NBER Working Paper Cambridge MA : National Bureau of Economic Research. https : // www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w28987/w28987.pdf National Advisory Council. Report to the FEMA Administrator. Federal Emergency Management Agency. https : //www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/ documents/fema_nac-report_11-2020.pdf National Intelligence Council. Climate Change and International Responses Increasing Challenges to U.S. National Security through https : //www dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/NIE_Climate_Change_and_ National_Security.pdf National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. What Percentage of the American Population Lives Near the Coast ? https : //oceanservice.noaa.gov/ facts/population.html No date. Weather-Related Fatality and Injury Statistics. https : //www.weather gov/hazstat/ Natural Resources Defense Council. No date. Climate Resilience : How States Stack Up on Flood Disclosure. https : //www.nrdc.org/flood-disclosure-map Neumann J. P. Chinowsky J. Helman M. Black C. Fant K. Strzepek and J. Martinich Climate Effects on U.S. Infrastructure : The Economics of Adaptation for Rail Roads and Coastal Development. Climatic Change no. https : // doi.org/10.1007/s10584-021-03179-w New York District North Atlantic Division of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection New York State Department of Environmental Conservation New York State Department of State and New York City Mayor s Office of Climate and Environmental Justice. New York New Jersey Harbor and Tributaries Coastal Storm Risk Management Feasibility Study : Draft Integrated Feasibility Report and Tier Environmental Impact Statement. https : //www.nan.usace.army.mil/Portals/37/NYNJHATS % Draft % 20Integrated % 20Feasibility % 20Report % 20Tier % % 20EIS.pdf Newell R. B. Prest and S. Sexton. The GDP-Temperature Relationship : Implications for Climate Change Damages. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2021.102445 NGFS-INSPIRE. Central Banking and Supervision in the Biosphere : An Agenda for Action on Biodiversity Loss Financial Risk and System Stability. NGFS Occasional Paper. https : //www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/medias/documents/ central_banking_and_supervision_in_the_biosphere.pdf Nordhaus W. To Slow or Not to Slow : The Economics of The Greenhouse Effect. Economic Journal no. : https : //doi.org/10.2 307/2233864 References | Climate Clubs : Overcoming Free-Riding in International Policy. American Economic Review no. : https : //www.aeaweb.org/ articles ? id = 10.1257/aer.15000001 Ortiz-Bobea A. T. Ault C. Carrillo R. Chambers and D. Lobell. Anthropogenic Climate Change Has Slowed Global Agricultural Productivity Growth. Nature Climate Change : https : //doi.org/10.1038/s41558-021-01000-1 Otto C. K. Kuhla T. Geiger J. Schewe and K. Frieler. Better Insurance Could Effectively Mitigation the Increase in Economic Growth Losses from U.S Hurricanes Under Global Warming. Science Advances https : //www.science org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.add6616 Ouazad A. and M. Kahn. Mortgage Finance and Climate Change : Securitization Dynamics in the Aftermath of Natural Disasters. Review of Financial Studies no. : https : //doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhab124 Painter M. An Inconvenient Cost : The Effects of Climate Change on Municipal Bonds. Journal of Financial Economics no. : https : //doi org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2019.06.006 Panjwani A. Underwater : The Effect of Federal Policies on Households Exposure to Climate Change Risk. Working paper. https : //static1.squarespace.com/ static/595f21a5f7e0abb30f55b693/t/6324bffe703add302692 d00f/1663352831153/Panjwani_Ahyan_Underwater.pdf Pankratz N. and C. Schiller. Climate Change and Adaptation in Global SupplyChain Networks. Finance and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper Washington : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. https : //doi org/10.17016/FEDS.2022.056 Paquette D. and M. Kornfield. Ian Is Florida s Deadliest Hurricane Since ; Most Victims Drowned. Washington Post October https : //www washingtonpost.com/nation/2022/10/05/hurricane-ian-florida-victims/ Park J. J. Goodman M. Hurwitz and J. Smith. Heat and Learning. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/ pol.20180612 Park Williams A. B. Cook and J. Smerdon. Rapid Intensification of the Emerging Southwestern North American Megadrought in Nature Climate Change : https : //doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01290-z Pitman A. T. Fiedler N. Ranger C. Jakob N. Ridder S. Perkins-Kirkpatrick N. Wood and G. Abramowitz. Acute Climate Risks in the Financial System : Examining the Utility of Climate Model Projections. Environmental Research : Climate no. https : //doi.org/10.1088/2752-5295/ac856f Plume K. U.S. Barge Backlog Swells on Parched Mississippi River. Reuters https : //www.reuters.com/world/us/ us-barge-backlog-swells-parched-mississippi-river-2022-10-04/ Querolo N. and B. Sullivan. California Fire Damage Estimated at $ Billion. Bloomberg News October https : //www.bloomberg.com/news/ | References articles/2019-10-28/california-fire-damages-already-at-25-4-billion-andcounting # xj4y7vzkg Rennert K. F. Errickson B. Prest L. Rennels R. Newell W. Pizer C. Kingdon J Wingenroth R. Cooke B. Parthum D. Smith K. Cromar D. Diaz F. Moore U. M ller R. Plevin A. Raftery H. Sev kov H. Sheets J. Stock T. Tan M Watson T. Wong and D. Anthoff. Comprehensive Evidence Implies a Higher Social Cost of CO2. Nature : https : //doi.org/10.1038/ s41586-022-05224-9 Robles F. and J. Bidgood. Three Months After Maria Roughly Half of Puerto Ricans Still Without Power. New York Times December https : //www nytimes.com/2017/12/29/us/puerto-rico-power-outage.html Rosa L. D. Chiarelli M. Sangiorgio A. Beltran-Pe a M. Rulli P. D Odorico and I Fung. Potential for Sustainable Irrigation Expansion in a C Warmer Climate. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. : https : //doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2017796117 Rossi C. Assessing the Impact of Hurricane Frequency and Intensity on Mortgage Delinquency. Journal of Risk Management in Financial Institutions no. : https : //www.newswise.com/pdf_docs/159438407991822_ Assessing % 20the % 20Impact % 20of % 20Hurricane % 20Frequency % 20and % Intensity % 20on % 20Mortgage % 20Default % 20Ris1 % ( ) .pdf Rothstein R. The Color of Law : A Forgotten History of How Our Government Segregated America. New York : Liveright. https : //www.epi.org/publication/ the-color-of-law-a-forgotten-history-of-how-our-government-segregatedamerica/ Royal A. and M. Walls. Flood Risk Perceptions and Insurance Choice : Do Decisions in the Floodplain Reflect Overoptimism ? Risk Analysis no. https : //doi.org/10.1111/risa.13240 Sadasivam N. Holding the Bill. Grist March https : //grist.org/climate/ insurance-companies-and-lenders-are-responding-to-climate-change-byshifting-risk-to-taxpayers/ Sastry P. Who Bears Flood Risk ? Evidence from Mortgage Markets in Florida. https : //papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm ? abstract_id = Schlenker W. and M. Roberts. Nonlinear Temperature Effects Indicate Severe Damages to U.S. Crop Yields Under Climate Change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences no. : https : //doi.org/10.1073/ pnas.0906865106 Schuppe J. Louisiana Faces an Insurance Crisis Leaving People Afraid They Can t Afford Their Homes. U.S. News & World Report September https : // www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/louisiana-homeowners-insurance-crisishurricanes-rcna46746 Seneviratne S. X. Zhang M. Adnan W. Badi C. Dereczynski A. Di Luca S. Ghosh I Iskander J. Kossin S. Lewis F. Otto I. Pinto M. Satoh S. M References | Vicente-Serrano M. Wehner and B. Zhou. Weather and Climate Extreme Events in a Changing Climate. In Climate Change : The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change edited by V. Masson-Delmotte P. Zhai A. Pirani S. Connors C. Pean S. Berger N Caud Y. Chen L. Goldfarb M. Gomis M. Huang K. Leitzell E. Lonnoy J Matthews T. Maycock T. Waterfield O. Yelekci R. Yi and B. Zhou Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. https : //doi org/10.1017/9781009157896.013 Severen C. C. Costello and O. Desch nes. A Forward-Looking Ricardian Approach : Do Land Markets Capitalize Climate Change Forecasts ? Journal of Environmental Economics and Management : https : //doi org/10.1016/j.jeem.2018.03.009 State of California Governor s Office of Planning and Research. California s Changing Climate : A Summary of Key Findings from California s Fourth Climate Change Assessment. California Natural Resources Agency and California Energy Commission. https : //www.energy.ca.gov/sites/default/ files/2019-11/20180827_Summary_Brochure_ADA.pdf Stern N. The Economics of Climate Change : The Stern Review. Cambridge : Cambridge University Press. https : //www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/ publication/the-economics-of-climate-change-the-stern-review/ Stevens H. and J. Samenow. Maps Show Where Extreme Heat Shattered Records This Summer. Washington Post September https : //www washingtonpost.com/climate-environment/interactive/2022/ temperature-records-summer/ Svartzman R. E. Espagne J. Gauthey P. Hadji-Lazaro M. Salin T. Allen J. Berger J Calas A. Godin and A. Vallier. A Silent Spring for the Financial System ? Exploring Biodiversity-Related Financial Risks in France. Working Paper Banque of France. https : //publications.banque-france.fr/en/ silent-spring-financial-system-exploring-biodiversity-related-financial-risksfrance Thomas K. U.S. Hospitals Wrestle with Shortages of Drug Supplies Made in Puerto Rico. New York Times October https : //www.nytimes com/2017/10/23/health/puerto-rico-hurricane-maria-drug-shortage.html Tilman D. M. Clare D. Williams K. Kimmel S. Polasky and C. Packer. Future Threats to Biodiversity and Pathways to their Prevention. Nature : https : //doi.org/10.1038/nature22900 Tran B. and D. Wilson. The Local Economic Impact of Natural Disasters Working Paper San Francisco : Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco https : //doi.org/10.24148/wp2020-34 | References UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. Adaptation Communication of the United States. https : //unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/USA % 20Full % Adaptation % 20Communication % % 209am_.pdf Urban Institute. Housing Finance at a Glance : A Monthly Chartbook. https : // www.urban.org/sites/default/files/2022-11/Housing % 20Finance- % 20At % A % 20Glance % 20Monthly % 20Chartbook % 2C % 20November % 202022.pdf U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. No date. Flood Risk Management. https : //www.usace army.mil/Missions/Civil-Works/Flood-Risk-Management/ U.S. Department of Agriculture Office of Communications. Secretary Vilsack Announces New 10-Year Strategy to Confront the Wildfire Crisis. U.S. Forest Service. https : //www.fs.usda.gov/news/releases/ secretary-vilsack-announces-new-10-year-strategy-confront-wildfire-crisis U.S. Department of Commerce. Biden Administration Announces Historic Coastal and Climate Resilience Funding. June https : //www.noaa.gov/news-release/ biden-administration-announces-historic-coastal-and-climate-resilience-funding U.S. Department of Defense. 2021a. DOD Installation Exposure to Climate Change at Home and Abroad. Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense Environment and Resilience. https : //media.defense.gov/2021/ Apr/20/2002624613/-1/-1/1/DOD-INSTALLATION-EXPOSURE-TOCLIMATE-CHANGE-AT-HOME-AND-ABROAD.PDF 2021b. Department of Defense Climate Risk Analysis. Office of the Undersecretary for Policy Strategy Plans and Capabilities. https : //media defense.gov/2021/Oct/21/2002877353/-1/- 1/0/DOD-CLIMATE-RISKANALYSIS-FINAL.PDF U.S. Department of Energy. The Inflation Reduction Act Drives Significant Emissions Reductions and Positions America to Reach Our Climate Goals. Office of Policy. https : //www.energy.gov/sites/default/files/2022-08/8.18 % InflationReductionAct_Factsheet_Final.pdf U.S. Department of Homeland Security. An Affordability Framework for the National Flood Insurance Program. Federal Emergency Management Agency https : //www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-05/Affordability_april_2018.pdf Summary of Proposed Reforms. Federal Emergency Management Agency. https : //www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_floodinsurance-reform-proposal_5242022.pdf U.S. Department of the Interior. Biden-Harris Administration Makes $ Million Commitments to Support Relocation of Tribal Communities Affected by Climate Change. https : //www.doi.gov/pressreleases/ biden-harris-administration-makes-135-million-commitment-support-relocationtribal U.S. Department of State and Executive Office of the President. The Long-Term Strategy of the United States : Pathways to Net-Zero Greenhouse Gas Emissions References | by https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/US-LongTerm-Strategy.pdf U.S. Department of Transportation. Bipartisan Infrastructure Law : Promoting Resilient Operations for Transformative Efficient and Cost-Saving Transportation ( PROTECT ) Formula Program. Fact sheet Federal Highway Administration July https : //www.fhwa.dot.gov/bipartisaninfrastructure-law/protect_fact_sheet.cfm U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Climate Change and Social Vulnerability in the United States : A Focus on Six Impacts. https : //www.epa.gov/cira/ social-vulnerability-report Greenhouse Gas Reduction Fund. https : //www.epa.gov/inflationreduction-act/greenhouse-gas-reduction-fund No date. About the Office of Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights. https : //www.epa.gov/aboutepa/ about-office-environmental-justice-and-external-civil-rights U.S. Federal Reserve. Pilot Climate Scenario Analysis Exercise : Participant Instructions. https : //www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/ csa-instructions-20230117.pdf U.S. Global Change Research Program. Fourth National Climate Assessment. https : //nca2018.globalchange.gov U.S. Government Accountability Office. National Security Snapshot : Climate Change Risks to National Security. https : //www.gao.gov/products/ gao-22-105830 U.S. Securities and Exchanges Commission. SEC Proposes Rules to Enhance and Standardize Climate-Related Disclosures for Investors. https : //www.sec.gov/ news/press-release/2022-46 U.S. Small Business Administration. No date. Disaster Assistance. https : //www.sba gov/funding-programs/disaster-assistance United Nations Climate Change. No date. Paris Agreement : Status of Ratification. https : //unfccc.int/process/the-paris-agreement/status-of-ratification Urban M. Accelerating Extinction Risk from Climate Change. Science no : https : //doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa4984 van der Wiel K. S. Kapnick G. vsn Oldenborgh K. Whan S. Philip G. Vecchi R Singh J. Arrighi and H. Cullen. Rapid Attribution of the August Flood-Inducing Extreme Precipitation in South Louisiana to Climate Change. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences : https : //hess.copernicus.org/ articles/21/897/2017/hess-21-897-2017.pdf Vose R. D. Easterling A. LeGrande and M. Wehner. Temperature Changes in the United States. In Climate Science Special Report : Fourth National Climate Assessment edited by D. Wuebbles D. Fahey K. Hibbard D. Dokken B | References Stewart and T. Maycock Washington : U.S. Global Change Research Program. https : //doi.org/10.7930/J0N29V45 Wagner K. Why Is Reforming Natural Disaster Insurance Markets So Hard ? Policy Brief Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research. https : //siepr stanford.edu/publications/policy-brief/ why-reforming-natural-disaster-insurance-markets-so-hard Adaptation and Adverse Selection in Markets for Natural Disaster Insurance. American Economic Journal : Economic Policy no. : https : //doi.org/10.1257/pol.20200378 Wheeler K. B. Udall J. Wang E. Kuhn H. Salehabadi and J. Schmidt. What Will It Take to Stabilize the Colorado River ? Science no. : https : //doi.org/10.1126/science.abo4452 White House. 2015a. Findings from Select Federal Reports : The National Security Implications of a Changing Climate. https : //obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/ sites/default/files/docs/National_Security_Implications_of_Changing_Climate_ Final_051915.pdf 2015b. National Security Strategy. https : //obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/ default/files/docs/2015_national_security_strategy_2.pdf Fact Sheet : Historic Bipartisan Infrastructure Deal. https : //www whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/07/28/ fact-sheet-historic-bipartisan-infrastructure-deal/ 2022a. Fact Sheet : The Inflation Reduction Act Supports Workers and Families. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statementsreleases/2022/08/19/ fact-sheet-the-inflation-reduction-act-supports-workers-and-families/ 2022b. Federal Budget Exposure to Climate Risk. Office of Management and Budget. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/ap_21_ climate_risk_fy2023.pdf 2022c. National Strategy to Develop Statistics for Environmental-Economic Decisions : A U.S. System of Natural Capital Accounting and Associated Environmental-Economic Statistics. Office of Science and Technology Policy Office of Management and Budget and Department of Commerce. https : // www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Natural-Capital-AccountingStrategy.pdf 2022d. OMB Analysis : The Social Benefits of the Inflation Reduction Act s Greenhous Gas Emission Reductions. Office of Management and Budget https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/OMB-AnalysisInflation-Reduction-Act.pdf 2022e. National Security Strategy. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/ uploads/2022/10/Biden-Harris-Administrations-National-SecurityStrategy-10.2022.pdf References | 2022f. Climate-Related Macroeconomic Risks and Opportunities. https : //www whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/CEA_OMB_Climate_Macro_ WP_2022-430pm.pdf 2022g. Fact Sheet : Ways the Biden-Harris Administration Is Making America Resilient to Climate Change. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefingroom/statements-releases/2022/08/01/fact-sheet-10-ways-the-biden-harrisadministration-is-making-america-resilient-to-climate-change/ 2022h. Biden-Harris Administration Announces New Actions to Lower Energy Costs for Families. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statementsreleases/2022/11/02/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-announcesnew-actions-to-lower-energy-costs-for-families/ 2022i. Building a Clean Energy Economy : A Guidebook to the Inflation Reduction Act s Investments in Clean Energy and Climate Action. https : // www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/Inflation-Reduction-ActGuidebook.pdf 2022j. Executive Order on Catalyzing Clean Energy Industries and Jobs through Federal Sustainability. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/ presidential-actions/2021/12/08/executive-order-on-catalyzing-clean-energyindustries-and-jobs-through-federal-sustainability/ No date. Justice40. https : //www.whitehouse.gov/environmentaljustice/ justice40/ Wing O. W. Lehman P. Bates C. Sampson N. Quinn A. Smith J. Neal J. Porter and C. Kousky. Inequitable Patterns of U.S. Flood Risk in the Anthropocene. Nature Climate Change : https : //doi.org/10.1038/ s41558-021-01265-6 Winter J. H. Huang E. Osterberg and J. Mankin. Anthropogenic Impacts on the Exceptional Precipitation of in the Mid-Atlantic United States. In Explaining Extreme Events of from a Climate Perspective edited by S Herring N. Christidis A. Hoell M. Hoerling and P. Stott S5 S16 Washington : American Meteorological Society. https : //doi.org/10.1175/ BAMS-ExplainingExtremeEvents2018.1 Woetzel J. D. Pinner H. Samandari H. Engel M. Krishnan C. Kampel and J. Graabak 2020a. Could Climate Become the Weak Link in Your Supply Chain ? McKinsey Global Institute. https : //www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/ sustainability/our-insights/ could-climate-become-the-weak-link-in-your-supply-chain Woetzel J. D. Pinner H. Samandari H. Engel M. Krishnan C. Kampel and M. Vasmel 2020b. Will Mortgages and Markets Stay Afloat in Florida ? McKinsey Global Institute. https : //www.mckinsey.com/ ~ /media/mckinsey/business % functions/sustainability/our % 20insights/will % 20mortgages % 20and % markets % 20stay % 20afloat % 20in % 20florida/mgi_climate % 20risk_case % studies_florida_may2020.pdf | References Wondmagegn B. J. Xiang K. Dear S. Williams A. Hansen D. Pisaniello M. Nitschke J. Nairn B. Scalleye A. Xiao L. Jian M. Tong H. Bambrick J. Karnonh and P. Bia. Increasing Impacts of Temperature on Hospital Admissions Length of Stay and Related Healthcare Costs in the Context of Climate Change in Adelaide South Australia. Science of the Total Environment no. https : //doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.145656 World Weather Attribution. Climate Change Fingerprints Confirmed in Hurricane Harvey s Rainfall August https : //www.worldweatherattribution.org/ hurricane-harvey-august-2017/ Xu E. C. Webb and D. Evans. Wildfire Catastrophe Models Could Spark the Changes California Needs. Milliman. https : //www.milliman.com/-/media/ milliman/importedfiles/uploadedfiles/wildfire_catastrophe_models_could_ spark_the_changes_california_needs.ashx Yu Y. J. Dunne E. Sheviakova P. Ginoux S. Malyshev J. John and J. Krasting. Increased Risk of the Alaskan July Fires Due to Anthropogenic Activity. In Explaining Extreme Events of from a Climate Perspective edited by S Herring N. Christidis A. Hoell M. Hoerling and P. Stott S1 S8. Washington : American Meteorological Society. https : //doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-20-0154.1 References | Appendix A Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers during Letter of Transmittal Council of Economic Advisers Washington December Mr. President : The Council of Economic Advisers submits this report on its activities during calendar year in accordance with the requirements of Congress as set forth by Section ( d ) of the Employment Act of as amended by the Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of Sincerely yours Cecilia Elena Rouse Chair Jared Bernstein Member Heather Boushey Member Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers during | Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date Edwin G. Nourse Leon H. Keyserling Chairman Vice Chairman Acting Chairman Chairman Member Vice Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chairman Member Member August August November May August May June September March September December April December May December November May January January January August November May September November February February February July February February February January September March July October September June July January March March June August February June July November John D. Clark Roy Blough Robert C. Turner Arthur F. Burns Neil H. Jacoby Walter W. Stewart Raymond J. Saulnier Joseph S. Davis Paul W. McCracken Karl Brandt Henry C. Wallich Walter W. Heller James Tobin Kermit Gordon Gardner Ackley John P. Lewis Otto Eckstein Arthur M. Okun James S. Duesenberry Merton J. Peck Warren L. Smith Paul W. McCracken Hendrik S. Houthakker Herbert Stein Ezra Solomon Marina v.N. Whitman Gary L. Seevers William J. Fellner Alan Greenspan Paul W. MacAvoy Burton G. Malkiel Charles L. Schultze William D. Nordhaus Lyle E. Gramley George C. Eads Stephen M. Goldfeld Murray L. Weidenbaum William A. Niskanen Jerry L. Jordan | Appendix A January February August January December February April January October January January January November July December February August February January June January January December July August March August April February January November January January February May January January August March July Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date Martin Feldstein William Poole Beryl W. Sprinkel Thomas Gale Moore Michael L. Mussa Michael J. Boskin John B. Taylor Richard L. Schmalensee David F. Bradford Paul Wonnacott Laura D Andrea Tyson Alan S. Blinder Joseph E. Stiglitz Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Member Member Chair Member Member Chairman Member Member Chair Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Member Chairman Chairman Member Member Chairman Member Chair Member Chairman Member Member Member Chairman Member Chairman Member Member Member Member October December April July August February June October November November February July July June June January February April October August August May May July November May November November February June November November February July January March September March April April November February August August July August August July January January May September January August June January January April June Martin N. Baily Alicia H. Munnell Janet L. Yellen Jeffrey A. Frankel Rebecca M. Blank Martin N. Baily Robert Z. Lawrence Kathryn L. Shaw R. Glenn Hubbard Mark B. McClellan Randall S. Kroszner N. Gregory Mankiw Kristin J. Forbes Harvey S. Rosen Ben S. Bernanke Katherine Baicker Matthew J. Slaughter Edward P. Lazear Donald B. Marron Christina D. Romer Austan D. Goolsbee Cecilia Elena Rouse Katharine G. Abraham Carl Shapiro Alan B. Krueger James H. Stock Jason Furman Betsey Stevenson Maurice Obstfeld Sandra E. Black Jay C. Shambaugh February August August August March July January January January February November July February June June January July March January January September August February April May August May January August August January January Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers during | Council Members and Their Dates of Service Name Position Oath of office date Separation date Kevin A. Hassett Richard V. Burkhauser Tomas J. Philipson Chairman Member Member Acting Chairman Vice Chairman Member Acting Chairman Vice Chairman Chair Member Member September September August July July May June June March January January June May Tyler B. Goodspeed Cecilia Elena Rouse Jared Bernstein Heather Boushey | Appendix A June January Report to the President on the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers during Established by the Employment Act of the Council of Economic Advisers is charged with advising the President on economic policy based on data research and evidence. The Council is composed of three members : a Chair who is appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate ; and two members who are appointed by the President. Along with a team of economists they analyze and interpret economic developments and formulate and recommend economic policies that advance the interests of the American people The Chair of the Council Cecilia Elena Rouse was confirmed by the Senate on March as the 30th Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers. She is the first African American to hold this position. In this role she serves as President Biden s Chief Economist and a Member of the Cabinet. She is the Katzman-Ernst Professor in the Economics of Education and Professor of Economics and Public Affairs at Princeton University From to Rouse was Dean of Princeton University s School of Public and International Affairs. Rouse served as a Member of President Barack Obama s Council of Economic Advisers from to She also worked at the National Economic Council in the Clinton Administration as a Special Assistant to the President from to Her academic research has focused on the economics of education including the economic benefits of community college attendance and impact of student loan debt on postgraduation outcomes as well as other issues in labor economics such as discrimination The Members of the Council Heather Boushey was appointed to the Council by the President on January Before assuming this position Boushey cofounded the Washington Center for Equitable Growth where she was President and CEO from to She previously served as Chief Economist for Secretary Hillary Clinton s transition team and as an economist at the Activities of the Council of Economic Advisers during | Center for American Progress the Joint Economic Committee of the U.S Congress the Center for Economic and Policy Research and the Economic Policy Institute Jared Bernstein was appointed to the Council by the President on January Before this appointment Bernstein spent years in senior roles at the Economic Policy Institute and worked at the Department of Labor. He was a Senior Fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities from to From to he was Chief Economist and Economic Adviser to then Vice President Biden Areas of Activity A central function of the Council is to advise the President on all economic issues and developments including preparing almost-daily memos for the President the Vice President and White House senior staff on key economic data releases and policy issues. The Council works closely with officials at various government entities including the National Economic Council the Domestic Policy Council the Office of Management and Budget and Administrative Agencies to engage in discussions on numerous policy matters. The Council the Department of the Treasury and the Office of Management and Budget are responsible for producing the economic forecasts that underlie the Administration s Budget proposals. Finally the Council is a leading participant in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development ( OECD ) historically chairing the Economic Policy Committee and participating in OECD working meetings The Council produces economic analyses in a series of blogs and issue briefs. This past year these included : The Employment Situation a monthly blog analyzing the employment situation that corresponds to the monthly Jobs Report ( January December ) Looking Back Moving Forward : Year One of President Biden s Economic Agenda a blog analyzing how government support during the pandemic helped boost personal income and spending thus contributing to economic growth ( January ) New Data Show that Economic Growth Was Broadly Shared in a