The Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS January THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress January UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : ERROR In Appendix B table II p net corporate profits after taxes for should be : # billion dollars for dividends and * billion dollars for savings * I .Billions or dollars ] Year Compensation of Employees Net Income of Proprietors Total National Income _ __ Total Salaries and Wages Supplements Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Interest and Net Rents Net Corporate Profits After Taxes Total Dividends Savings National income is the total net income earned in production by individuals or businesses. The concept of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in excluding depreciation and depletion allowances and business taxes. A reconciliation between these two series and income payments is shown in Appendix A table II for and Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. -Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL T H E WHITE HOUSE Washington D. G. January # The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SIRS : I am presenting herewith my Economic Report to the Congress as required under the Employment Act of In preparing this report I have had the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers members of the Cabinet and heads of independent agencies Respectfully TABLE OF CONTENTS Page Introduction I. Review of Employment Production Purchasing Power II. Prices Wages Profits in Piices Wages Profits III. The Nation 's Economic Budget Postwar Transformation IV. Goalsfor Employment Objectives Production Objectives Purchasing Power Objectives V. Favorable and Unfavorable Factors in Consumer Income and Expenditures Business Income and Outlays International Transactions Government Budgets VI. Summary of Economic Conditions and Trends VII. Recommendations Short-Range Program Prices and Wages Social Security Housing Taxation Labor-Management Relations Long-Range Program Efficient Utilization of the Labor Force Maximum Utilization of Productive Resources Encouragement of Free Competitive Enterprise Promoting Welfare Health and Security Cooperation in International Economic Relations Combating Economic Fluctuations Appendix A : Explanation of the Nation 's Economic Budget Appendix B : Statistical tables relating to employment production and purchasing power Appendix C : Excerpt from the State of the Union Message vn To the Congress of the United States : As the year opens America has never been so strong or so prosperous. Nor have our prospects ever been brighter Yet in the minds of a great many of us there is a fear of another depression the loss of our jobs our farms our businesses But America was not built on fear. America was built on courage on imagination and an unbeatable determination to do the job at hand The job at hand today is to see to it that America is not ravaged by recurring depressions and long periods of unemployment but that instead we build an economy so fruitful so dynamic so progressive that each citizen can count upon opportunity and security for himself and his family Nor is prosperity in the United States important to the American people alone. It is the foundation of world prosperity and world peace. And the world is looking to us I believe that the American people have the wisdom and the will to use our abundant resources so that all may prosper. I reject and I know the American people reject the notion that we must have another depression. I am not referring to minor detours and bumps in the road ahead these w ^ e know we shall have. I am referring to economic collapse and stagnation such as started in This need not happen again and must not happen again The Congress passed the Employment Act of by an overwhelming bipartisan vote. This Act wisely provided for a Council of Economic Advisers to the President men who as a result of training experience and attainments are exceptionally qualified to analyze and interpret economic developments to appraise programs and activities of the Government and to formulate and recommend national economic policy The Congress also provided for a permanent joint committee to receive and analyze this annual Economic Report of the President and to submit recommendations concerning it to both Houses In transmitting this first Economic Report I am conscious of its significance as the beginning of a series of reports that will serve the Executive and the Congress as the basis for an orderly and continuing review of the economic state of the union and for integrated and comprehensive steps to ensure the permanent economic health of the Nation The Economic Report is an opportunity for national self-examination and self-criticism. It is a challenge to the President and the Congress to determine the causes of whatever problems we face in our economic life and to find the solutions to those problems. It provides an opportunity for all our citizens to judge the merits of the analysis and proposed action. It is a new and splendid tool to help us in our tasks. And like all governmental tools its effectiveness will increase year by year as we learn by doing vn VIII INTRODUCTION Prosperity can not be the concern of one party or of one group. I t can not be attained without the goodwill and the cooperation of all To build a greater America we must approach the task with unity of purpose with patience with wisdom and with determination to overcome all obstacles. If we do this and we must I have no doubt about the ability of Americans to build on a firm basis of security and political and economic freedom a country in which the rewards we enjoy can be doubled within the life span of many of those now living I REVIEW OF EMPLOYMENT During civilian employment approached million. This was the highest civilian employment this Nation has ever known million more than in and several million higher than the wartime peak. If we include the military services total employment exceeded million. Unemployment on the other hand remained low throughout the year. At the present time it is estimated at about million actively seeking work. This is probably close to the minimum unavoidable in a free economy of great mobility such as ours Thus at the end of less than a year and a half after VJ-day more than million demobilized veterans and other millions of wartime workers have found employment in the swiftest and most gigantic change-over that any nation has ever made from war to peace. At its peak during aggregate employment was substantially in accord with the objectives stated by the Congress in the Employment Act PRODUCTION Total production turned out by the Nation 's farmers and workers likewise mounted to new peacetime levels. In it was about percent above the predefense level and only percent below the wartime high. ( Appendix B Table I. ) However production is not yet at its peak in relation to our present plant and manpower resources. Bottlenecks shortages of materials and components labormanagement disputes and other reconversion difficulties have had their retarding influence But with all these obstacles production in the second half of reached a higher rate than in any peacetime year. Goods scarce during the war began to fill dealers ' shelves. The American people were eating more food per capita than in any previous year even though in some cases they were unable to buy exactly the kind of food they wanted. In total people were supplied with more goods and services than ever before. This indicates that when all our resources are fully marshalled for peacetime pursuits the whole American people will be able to enjoy a standard of living far surpassing any that we have ever known PURCHASING POWER The Congress by setting maximum purchasing power as an objective of National policy in the Employment Act pointed to the importance of purchasing power in keeping our economy fully employed and fully productive. When people stop buying business stops pro1 ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT ducing and employment drops. It is therefore of the utmost importance that at all times we be concerned as to the volume of purchasing power of the Nation and its relation to the volume of production of goods and services Purchasing power of course depends upon current cash income the use of savings and the use of credit. It also depends upon prices As we all know when prices go up the purchasing power of the dollar goes down In the problem of linking maximum purchasing power with maximum employment was not completely solved. To be sure cash and credit were available to purchasers in extraordinary amounts This was due to high agricultural and industrial earnings large accumulated savings considerable extension of credit and the payment of veterans ' allowances and mtistering-out pay. In the face of continuing shortages of many kinds of goods and services this led to an inflationary pressure. When price controls were relaxed and finally dropped this pressure resulted in a substantial increase in the general price level The rise in prices that occurred in the latter half of greatly reduced the purchasing power of the current incomes received by the large majority of people. It is true that some groups in the population received increases in income that for them balanced or more than balanced the rise in prices. But the large mass of consumers did not enjoy such offsets. How to effect a mutual adjustment of incomes and prices which will provide purchasing power adequate to sustained maximum production in the years ahead thus becomes a central problem for private enterprise and Government II PEICES WAGES PEOFITS IN The relation of wages prices and profits is the key to the maintenance of purchasing power. If prices are too low in relation to wages they squeeze or eliminate profits stifling the initiative of business interfering with production and reducing or retarding employment. If prices are too high in relation to wages they restrict the market and reduce employment as well as causing suffering to individual consumers PRICES During the war years prices were on the whole successfully kept in check under the " hold the line " policy with farm and food prices rising somewhat more than most others. Between VJ-day and the middle of last year when the lapse in price control occurred prices rose moderately chiefly due to price increases granted to speed production or to take account of wage rises. The average increase in wholesale prices from VJ-day to mid-1946 was percent and in retail prices was percent although textiles and clothing rose considerably more than the average ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Source : Department of Labor ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT But between June and December wholesale prices jumped an additional percent while the consumer price index climbed percent The sharpest increases were for the most part in farm and food products textiles clothing and in residential construction The Congress made clear its intent that decontrol be speeded. In fact after the new price-control law was passed the direct control of prices soon became virtually impossible. It was no longer a question of whether it was in the interest of the workers businessmen farmers and the public to control prices ; it was a question whether price controls were any longer workable. It was the advice by late fall of labor business the farm groups and my Cabinet that general price control be dropped Two things immediately happened. Prices rose sharply. Goods that had been produced under price control but withheld in the hope of decontrol appeared on shelves The increase in consumer prices has substantially reduced the purchasing power of the great majority of consumers. ( Appendix B Tables V VI and VII. ) WAGES After VJ-day direct wage controls with the exception of those in the building trades were dropped in order to permit a return so far as possible to collective bargaining. Indirect wage controls were however maintained until general price decontrol Between July and July the average wage-rate increase in manufacturing was about percent. Nearly half of this increase was offset by reductions in overtime declines in piecework earnings and the shift of workers from higher-paid wartime to lowerpaid peacetime jobs. Thus for manufacturing as a whole the average hourly earnings of labor last July were percent above what they were the year before. Because of the reduction in the workweek during and weekly take-home pay declined in many industries and rose but moderately elsewhere in spite of the increase in wage rates Since July there has been some further increase in wage rates average hourly earnings and average take-home pay but less than the increase in prices. Thus real earnings have fallen. ( Appendix B Tables VIII and IX. ) PROFITS Business profits began to rise in many lines of nondurable goods and in most trades and services soon after VJ-day. This rise reflected the increased volume of civilian sales. Price increases during the past year and removal of the excess-profits tax added still further to profits after taxes. In most of the soft goods and service lines profits after taxes in the second quarter of were already above the levels of and Further increases were reported for the third quarter But profits have been extremely uneven as between industries. In many of the reconversion industries especially where volume was slow in getting underway profits at first were low and in many cases ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT there were actual losses many of which however were alleviated by the carry-back provision of the tax law Third-quarter reports showed increased profits in most of the durable-goods industries although price ceilings had not yet been generally removed. Profits increased further during the fourth quarter with the removal of price control We should not infer that all industries or all firms in a given industry were operating at a highly profitable level or that none were incurring losses. We must also remember that the purchasing power of the business dollar as well as the consumer dollar has been diminished by the price rise. Nevertheless taking account of all of these considerations it is plain that business in general is receiving exceptional profits. ( Appendix B Table I I and X. ) Ill THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET The volume of employment and production in any given period depends upon the volume of expenditures. These expenditures are of four types : Consumer Buying Business Buying Foreign Buying Government Buying ( Federal State and local ) In order that we may have a better idea of the size of the job ^ ahead and the relative proportion of our goods and services going to consumers business foreign markets and Government I here set forth the Nation 's Economic Budget. ( A detailed explanation may be found in Appendix A. ) The Nation 's Economic Budget shows the distribution of income and expenditures among consumers business and Government and imports and exports. It sheds light upon whether price and wage policies and other public policies are encouraging an alignment among these four component parts which is favorable to sustained high levels of economic activity or which threatens us with an economic decline. The Economic Budget also indicates whether a given level of economic activity is being achieved mainly by private expenditures or by public expenditures and in what proportion. By comparing budgets for different periods we can discern favorable and unfavorable trends The Nation 's Economic Budget is primarily a device for the measurement of our economic activity. Use of this device is not wedded to any particular economic theory. The Economic Budget is an objective summary statement of our economy in action at a given time as reflected by the income and expenditures of its major parts It reflects the aggregate actions of millions of consumers and businesses and of the Federal State and local governments By way of illustration Table I contrasts the Nation 's Economic Budget during the last pre-defense year with the Budget during the war year and with the Budget during the transition year ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET is made up of these components/ CONSUMERS GOVERNMENT RECEIPTS -EXPENDITURES BUSINESS & INTERNATIONAL This is how the excess and deficit of receipts over expenditures is balanced. ( inbillions ) CONSUMERS U GOVERNMENT BUSINESS & t * INTERNATIONAL * Tht mm S946 components do not add exactly fo the gross notional product because of certain minor adjustments ' i * Includes adjustment for Government transfers abroad ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT TABLE I. The Nation 's Economic Budget and l [ Billions of dollars ; current prices ] Predefense Calendar Year T Economic Group Reconversion Calendar Year * War Calendar Year T T CONSUMERS Income after taxes Expenditures Savings ( ) Undistributed profits and reserves Gross capital formation3 Excess of receipts ( ) ; or capital formation ( ) INTERNATIONAL Net imports Net exports Net expenditures on foreign account GOVERNMENT ( Federal State local ) Receipts from the public other than borrowing. Payments to the public _ __ _ Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) ADJUSTMENTS For Government transfers to public 4_ For Government transfers abroad Gross National Product. See Appendix A for supporting tables and descriptive material Preliminary Includes residential construction but excludes net exports * Includes transfers of funds which are included in private receipts and Government expenditures but do not involve addition to the Nation 's output such as unemployment compensation veterans ' readjustment allowances mustering-out pay etc Includes loans to foreign governments subscriptions to international organizations reimbursable lendlease etc POSTWAR TRANSFORMATION " The figures for the years and show that a transformation has taken place in our economy since the last predefense year. The great increase in the total Economic Budget reflects the change-over from an economy of substantial unemployment and moderate production to an economy of unparalleled employment and production. Great significance lies in the fact that the Economic Budget for the year was almost as high as during the war year and more than twice as high as during the predefense year Even allowing for price changes we have made such great strides forward in wealth and productivity that our thinking for the future can no longer be bound by the distant past The changes in the composition of the Nation 's Economic Budget during these years also deserves attention During the war year Government expenditures were more than half the total Economic Budget ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Business responded to the Government 's demand with record production Private income derived from production doubled the predefense level even after allowance for the increase in taxes Consumer expenditures increased but due to the shortages of civilian goods effective price control and patriotic motives for saving they did not increase nearly as much as they otherwise would have the difference going into savings In the transition year the expenditures of business and consumers once more took the lead as the Government 's wartime expenditures were drastically reduced. Business spent large sums for reconverting overhauling and modernizing plants and equipment and for replenishing depleted pipe lines of inventories. High business activity resulted in high levels of consumer income and expenditures Consumer spending was further increased by the use of wartime savings and expanding installment credit and in the case of veterans by mustering-out pay and readjustment allowances As a point of departure for examining our objectives for this year it is useful to present tentative estimates of the rates at which expenditures and receipts in the Nation 's Economic Budget were running at the end of This is shown in Table I I TABLE II. The Nation 's Economic Budget During Calendar Year the J ^ th Quarter of the [ Preliminary estimates ; billions of dollars ] 4th Quarter Seasonally Adjusted Annual Kates Economic Group Year as a Whole Excess Receipts Expenditures ( ) or Deficit Receipts Expenditures ( ) Consumers _ Business International. Government Adjustments : Transfer Payments Gross national product __ " _ Excess ( ) or Deficit ( ) In comparing preliminary estimates for the fourth quarter of with those for the year as a whole the significant changes may be summarized as follows : Government expenditures were reduced. This was highly desirable but it meant that much higher private expenditures were needed to sustain maximum employment and production Business expenditures increased but a part of the increase reflected higher prices rather than increased production Consumer expenditures rose but practically all of the increase was attributable to the price rise. Consumer incomes rose less than expenditures and actually declined in real terms This trend in the position of consumers becomes of central importance as we turn to a consideration of our prospects for ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT IV GOALS FOR The Employment Act requires that this Economic Report set forth the levels of employment production and purchasing power needed to carry out the policy of the Act. This policy is to create and maintain " conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment opportunities including self-employment for those able willing and seeking to work and to promote maximum employment production and purchasing power. " EMPLOYMENT OBJECTIVES We do not know exactly how many people will want jobs during Our labor force fluctuates by several million during the course of any year with the changing seasons with boys and girls of school age going back to the classroom and with part-time workers coming into and going out of the labor force. The purposes of the Act would be substantially achieved if during we sustain employment at about the levels or slightly higher In maintaining a high level of total civilian employment we must also achieve a better distribution between localities of labor scarcity and labor surplus ; between occupations that are short of workers and occupations that are overcrowded. The proper use of our workers is equally important both to the economy and to the individual PRODUCTION OBJECTIVES During the last quarter of total national production is estimated to have reached an annual rate of billion dollars. We know however that we are not yet turning out goods as fast as we are capable of doing with our present plant manpower and material resources Bottlenecks in the supply of certain parts and materials have slowed down production. So have labor-management disputes. With maximum employment in we should be able to increase our total output significantly although limits may be imposed by shortages of basic materials It is not yet clear that our basic industries are fully adjusted to a 200-billion-dollar peacetime economy. I t will become increasingly important that capacity goals in the basic industries such as steel power and transportation be set high enough so as not only to sustain present and foreseeable levels of economic activity but also to permit their expansion It is not practical to state in physical terms just exactly how much our production should be during because of the great variety of goods and services which our economy produces. To state production in terms of dollars is of doubtful usefulness at the present time because price levels may move up or down and any dollar figure set forth now might prove to be misleading. We do know however that a labor force of the anticipated size can be expected to produce more goods and services during than were produced during the past twelve months. Perhaps an over-all increase of percent might be a reasonable objective for maximum production ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT A considerable amount of last year 's production went into the rebuilding and reequipping of our manufacturing plant and the replenishing of producers ' and dealers ' inventories. We can expect an increased flow of consumer goods during even if there were to be no increase in total output. Hence a 5-percent increase in total production would mean a greater proportionate increase of consumer goods The question therefore will become one of the ability of consumers to buy the total supply of products offered to them PURCHASING POWER OBJECTIVES Consumer purchasing power depends upon the flow of money into consumers ' hands as current income. It depends also on the use of past savings and the rate of current saving. It depends on the use of credit and it depends upon what money will buy ; that is upon the level of prices No attempt will be made to set a dollar figure on the purchasing power needed to buy the goods and services which the Nation will produce in It is plain however that if employment is to remain high and if production is to increase in real purchasing power must rise sufficiently to take the increased production off the market I t has been stated that maximum production for would give us an over-all increase of some percent above the level reached during the last quarter of This increase would be due only in small part to a slight rise in the number of workers employed and principally to the increased efficiency of the productive process as the lingering impediments to maximum production are eliminated What are * the chances that consumers could buy an additional several billion dollars ' worth of product if present prices and pay rates were maintained ? Only a minor portion of the value of the additional goods and services produced in would be reflected in additional consumer income. The greater part of the additional income would be represented in the surpluses of governments and in reserves of business concerns. Thus it follows that consumers would have to buy considerably more goods and services with only slightly increased income This could be done only if consumers made still freer use of credit or if they reduced the rate of their new savings and drew heavily upon their past savings. Although consumer credit has not yet reached prewar levels it has already expanded gfeatly and still freer use might build up difficulties for the future. The rate of net savings as shown elsewhere in this Report has receded to a point below which it can hardly be expected to fall. Increasing consumer purchasing power in this way could at best be only a temporary solution and certainly not a desirable one Another method by which the markets could be cleared of the enlarged volume of goods and services produced in would be to enlarge the real purchasing power of the consumers by increasing their incomes. It would be unrealistic however to expect that this increase in real purchasing power of consumers could occur solely through a corresponding increase in money incomes. An attempt to raise income by the amount necessary would mean such large increases ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT II in money wages and salaries at certain points as to threaten curtailments of production or wage-price spirals. Further there is no practical way to distribute such wage and salary increases throughout the whole population in such a manner as to effect the desired supports to the market. The groups of wage and salary garners whose purchasing power has been most reduced are the very ones who are likely to participate least in an increase of money earnings. Such concentration of pay increases within particular groups would make even more difficult the task of obtaining a sufficient total increase to sustain maximum employment production and purchasing power Thus it follows that we could not expect to attain the economic objectives for this year solely by an increase in money incomes. A major approach to bringing real purchasing power of consumers into balance with productive capacity this year must be through reduced prices The emphasis on price reduction as a major route for an increase in consumers ' purchasing power does not overlook the desirability of increases in pay rates in some sectors It follows that only through adjustments both in the price and pay structure made with discriminating regard for specific circumstances rather than on an over-all national basis can we achieve a sustained demand for the maximum output which the American economy is able to produce this year V FAVORABLE AND UNFAVORABLE FACTORS IN Because the health of our economy depends on the acts of million people with millions of separate enterprises including farming, business and professional it is not possible to forecast the precise course of events a year in advance in a report of this kind. Indeed the Employment Act contemplates that the state of the Nation 's economic health must be constantly watched so that timely policies may be adopted during the course of the year as conditions change. We can however appraise in advance some of the favorable and unfavorable factors affecting the expenditures of consumers business foreign buyers and Government CONSUMER INCOME AND EXPENDITURES The main facts about consumer income expenditures and purchasing power are given in Appendix B Tables I I I I I and V. Here I shall comment briefly upon a few of the favorable and unfavorable factors Favorable factors in consumer demand Consumer demand has been at very high levels since VJ-day. This has been due largely to two factors : First the pent-up demand for many goods that have been scarce in recent years ; and second a level of incomes and purchasing power substantially higher than in prewar years Some of the pent-up demands are gradually being met but during this year we can anticipate continued high demand for a number ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT of items that have been scarce including housing automobiles appliances and many housefurnishings With larger supplies of durable goods coming on the market this year an increased proportion of consumer expenditures may be made for these items and a smaller proportion for nondurable goods and services. Such a shift may be listed as a favorable factor because it will tend toward the reduction of the prices of many nondurable goods and services which were raised to extraordinarily high levels in because of the concentration of consumer expenditures in these fields The most solid and permanent foundation for consumer demand is current disposable income. In this there has been great improvement since the prewar period even when account is taken of the increase in consumers ' prices. The following table illustrates this : TABLE III. Per Capita Disposable Income Year or Quarter ( average ) _ Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rates : First quarter Second quarterThird quarter Fourth quarter For method of computation and interpretation see Appendix B table V and accompanying note Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data The American public had a " disposable " income ( after taxes ) of billion dollars in This represents an average of $ per capita. In the prewar period the corresponding figure was $ It is true that a large part of this increase in income was absorbed by higher prices. The Consumer Price Index in averaged percent above the level. This index measures the increase in the retail prices of most of the goods and services bought by families with low to moderate incomes. It provides a rough measure of the general rise in prices paid by consumers as a whole. Thus it appears that average per capita incomes rose considerably more than prices This means that the average per capita real purchasing power in was substantially greater than in the prewar period In consequence of these improvements and in spite of some continued shortages the average American family is buying more food clothing and other things than ever before. The total volume of consumption of these and other things particularly durable goods needs to be maintained and expanded if is to be a year of maximum production Unfavorable factors in consumer demand Despite the continuance of many favorable factors the recent trends in consumer purchasing power are disturbing. Many groups of consumers suffered a larger drop in purchasing power in the latter half of than is indicated by the trends in average per capita disposable income shown in Table IV. The purchasing power of wages has dropped seriously especially during trie past six months. The $ weekly take-home pay of the average factory worker in October bought only about as much as the $ he received in April ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT In consequence of these developments and the appearance of more goods on the market there has been a marked change in saving by consumers indicated in the following table : TAB : LE IV. Trends in Consumers ' Savings Year or Quarter average _ Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rates First quarter _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ _ Less : Dispos- Consumer Equals : able Expendi- Savings Income tures ( Billions of dollars ) Percent of Disposable Income Spent Saved Preliminary estimate based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce In the war year consumers saved about percent of their total disposable income. A major part of this saving reflected shortages of civilian goods effective price ceilings and patriotic bond purchases. The rate of savings has fallen substantially since then and by the end of had dropped to a little less than percent of this disposable income. This was only slightly above the level of savings in the prewar years I t is doubtful whether the rate of consumer savings will or even can be reduced much further except by adversity In spite of the high rate of savings during the war it is unsafe to assume that most American families still have enough savings in hand to supplement current income for any considerable length of time. Recent surveys indicate that percent of American families held no war bonds or bank accounts in and percent held less than $ of savings in these forms. Available data point to the fact that past savings have been used to supplement current incomes during this past year Another element in current trends is the rapid increase in installment and credit buying during recent months. Consumer credit totaled almost a billion and a half dollars more in November than in March. But undue extension of deficit financing on the part of millions of American families can gravely hurt our business system and lead in the end to deficit financing by the Government. I n the long run consumers must rely on current incomes for purchasing power If consumer incomes should remain at current levels we would expect savings to drop little if any. Consequently we would not expect consumers as a whole to spend much more money than they were spending at the end of the year without considerable expansion in consumer credit unless total consumer incomes are increased. ( Appendix B Table IV. ) Some of my short-range recommendations bear upon this problem ECONOMIC REfORT OF THE PRESIDENT THE CHANGE IN SAVINGS Since V-J Day people are saving less money though still more than in the prewar days BILLIONS OF DOLLARS DISPOSABLE INCOME ( Income payments less taxes ) w N T SAVINGSE NT CONSOMO About % of disposable income is being saved today approximately the prewar rate as compared with some % in PER CENT NET SAVINGS AS PERCENT nt niCDP p i n i r mnnur Ur UloPlJOHDLL m i UML I \ \ K / / ^ ^ ^ ^ * Seasonally adjusted annual rate Source : Department of Commerce ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT BUSINESS INCOME AND OUTLAYS Business investment as the term is used in the Nation 's Economic Budget includes investment in industrial plant and equipment in inventories in commercial construction and in residential construction To maintain maximum production and employment in it is desirable that business investment be at an annual rate at least equal to the annual rate prevailing in the last quarter of Plant and equipment During the war years a large deferred demand for industrial and commercial construction and equipment had been accumulating In business investment in plant and equipment approximated billion dollars as compared to billion dollars in and about billion dollars in Even with allowances for a substantial ris,e in costs it is evident that the most recent rate of investment in plant and equipment is much higher than before the war and the defense program For the long run continuation of expenditures for privately financed productive facilities at anywhere near the recent levels will depend upon the size of our peacetime market investment incentives and the rate of technological progress rather than upon backlog Inventories Business inventories increased six to seven billion dollars in and at the end of the year were worth about billion dollars. Although this sum is not disproportionate to total sales there may be a decline in the rate of accumulation in As uncertainties in supply and price clear up inventories will become more stable. A reduction in the rate of inventory accumulation will mean a lower level of business investment in this area and raises the question of whether or how it is to be offset by increases in other forms of investment or consumer expenditures Commercial construction During the volume of commercial construction although limited by the shortage of materials and by the requirements of the Veterans ' Emergency Housing Program reached one billion dollars. The Civilian Production Administration was obliged to defer a large proportion of the nonresidential building applications so that demand for commercial buildings remains high In addition the distributors of goods and services as a whole although with individual exceptions have enjoyed record profits during the past year and apparently are in a position to finance an expansion of their capital facilities. However the high costs of construction tend to offset in some degree the favorable outlook created by the continued existence of substantial demand At the present time not only have new residential areas been built up without a corresponding building up of commercial facilities but ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT substantial additional residential construction would create still further demand for commercial facilities Residential construction Investment in residential construction which totaled about % billion dollars in would need to approximate billion dollars in at the current price level in order to maintain a satisfactory level of activity in this field. As a result of the Veterans ' Emergency Housing Program in the supply of materials has been increased sufficiently to permit the building of at least houses in However the price problem in housing is even more serious than in other lines because the gap between consumer income and housing prices is so great. While material prices may fall substantially this year the gap will still remain dangerously high especially for the lower income groups. But even if the backlog demand provides a ready market for all the housing which is produced in this superficially satisfactory situation would plant the seeds of a collapse in residential construction within a few short years because the number of families who can afford high-priced houses comprises only a small part of the population Favorable factors in business demand The prospects for business investment are brightened by several clear elements of strength. The first of these is the availability of abundant aggregate funds including ample bank credit The second favorable factor is that profits in most lines of industry and business have been highly rewarding during and have been rising quarter by quarter. The profits outlook for suggests adequate motive for investment in plant equipment and inventory to meet the wants of a people functioning at maximum employment Still another favorable factor is the backlog demand for construction " Unfavorable factors in business demand Threatening the continuation and expansion of business investment is the fear that a drop in general consumer demand may be in the offing Another main factor that could adversely affect business confidence and thus business demand would be the recurrence of serious management-labor disputes. Also the high cost of housing constitutes an adverse factor. Finally business demand may be somewhat restricted by shortages of certain basic materials INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTIONS The net balance of international transactions in was about the same as we can anticipate for Some changes in the components of that balance and in the methods of financing it however are both desirable and likely to occur ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Intense demand of foreign countries for goods available only or chiefly in this country has been one of the factors accounting for a high level of employment production and purchasing power in the United States during Our receipts from the sales of goods and services abroad have recently been running at a rate of about billion dollars a year compared with only billion dollars prior to the war Foreign demand for United States goods at present is associated witli the incompleteness of reconstruction in war-devastated areas and it will continue to be high during even though some countries may be reluctant to purchase at our current high prices Sufficient resources will be available to foreign countries to finance urgently needed purchases from us. Any recession in domestic demand would permit us to meet soone of the now unsatisfied foreign demand with a resulting increase in exports. Even if this should be confined to a rise in quantities rather than in the dollar values it would be a factor cushioning the effects of any dip in domestic production and employment Should fears concerning our willingness and ability to buy and lend abroad increase however foreign countries may husband their dollar resources so as to make them available over a longer period In this event our exports would be reduced GOVERNMENT BUDGETS In the Budget Message I review in detail expenditures and receipts for the current fiscal year and transmit recommendations for the next fiscal year. There is no need to repeat those details in this Economic Report. It should be noted that the Government receipt and expenditure figures used in the Economic Report are not identical with the conventional figures of budget estimates because they refer to the calendar year rather than to the fiscal year and because they are on a consolidated and cash basis in order to measure the economic impact of Government transactions on the economy With an outlook of high economic activity for the current year the revenue policies are designed to balance the budget and achieve a surplus toward the retirement of the national debt. The expenditure policies are designed exclusively to cover the essential cost of national defense and war liquidation to meet our international commitments and the obligations to war veterans under existing law to carry forward programs required by the Congress and to take some small but essential further steps toward fulfilling the duties of alert and progressive government Nevertheless it is obvious that Government transactions which including Federal State and local government total more than a fourth of our national product profoundly affect the whole economy An analysis of the economic impact of Government expenditures is facilitated by a break-down of the totals according to the type of recipients and character of the payments. Federal payments to the ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT public are classified along lines of economic significance in the following estimates : TABUE V. Federal Cash Payments ( inch net loans ) to the Public [ Billions of dollars ] Calendar year Payments to Change Active Federal personnel : Civilian Military _ _ Total Individuals ( other than active Federal personnel ) : Civilian Military Total Farmers ( incl. food subsidies ) l Business Holders of the Federal debt ( interest payments ) State and local governments International organizations foreign governments and U. S. exporters.. Producers of goods and services transportation and miscellaneous Total i Excluding payments for purchase of goods and services Detail will not necessarily add to totals due to rounding. Calendar year is estimated While Federal cash expenditures are expected to decline by about billion dollars from calendar year to calendar year State and local expenditures are expected to increase by approximately billion dollars largely because of a probable increase in expenditures for public works veterans ' bonuses and an increase in pay rates Thus there will be a net reduction in governmental expenditures on all levels by about billion dollars. As has been shown in Table I I above a considerable decline in Federal expenditures took place during the calendar year and only a small further decline is expected for this year as compared with the end of last year. The economy seems already to have adjusted itself to the decline in Federal spending that took place during the first three quarters of without a net loss in employment or production. This testifies to the effectiveness of reconversion policies During the war State and local payments were reduced below prewar levels whereas receipts from the public increased somewhat. The total of State and local gross debt was reduced by about billion dollars Since VJ-day State and local expenditures have steadily increased This trend is likely to continue in State and local revenues in will probably not be greatly different from those in unless there is a sharp drop in economic activity or prices. Payments to and receipts from the public of State and local governments will be in approximate balance during this year ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT VI SUMMARY OF ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TEENDS On the plus side of the economic ledger we possess a fabulous wealth of resources. Our industrial plant is larger and in many cases better than ever before. Funds for business expansion are ample and profit incentives are high in most lines. Our labor force has greatly increased its number of semiskilled and skilled workers. The spending power of consumers as a whole is much higher than it ever was before the war. Consumer desires are fortified by a backlog of unsatisfied wants particularly for housing commercial construction automobiles household appliances furnishings and other durable goods There are long-deferred and needed public works Federal State and local. There is a strong and sustained foreign demand. More than that we can be optimistic about the desire to buy because of the higher standards of living which almost all of our people have recently enjoyed and which they do not want to forego While these favorable factors in our economic situation are fundamental it is more practical and profitable to examine weaknesses that need corrections than to congratulate ourselves upon the blessings which we already enjoy Chief among the unfavorable factors is the marked decline in real purchasing power of great numbers of consumers resulting from the large price increases in the second half of last year. Maximum production and employment this year would yield a substantial increase in the available supply of consumer goods and services especially in the area of durable goods. This requires higher real purchasing power to take the goods off the market If price and wage adjustments are not made and made soon enough there is danger that consumer buying will falter orders to manufacturers will decline production will drop and unemployment will grow unless consumers resort to large additional borrowing and use of past savings to buy the increased supply of goods. These temporary expedients are limited in power and even if available would merely postpone the day of reckoning Weakening of the activity of investment might operate also as an obstacle to maximum employment production and purchasing power. If industrial and commercial construction slackens and pricesi for residential construction remain high as compared with incomes of laborers and white-collar workers our maximum employment objective might be threatened this year or soon thereafter Labor-management strife with severe work stoppages remains a possibility. This would directly interfere with production or employment by creating or intensifying shortages of materials parts or equipment. Through creation of uncertainties about demand or supply and costs % of materials it might lead to reductions in business outlays for plant equipment and inventories That is why in my State of the Union Message I placed so much stress upon successful labor-management relations ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT During this year the underlying favorable factors are strong enough to maintain high prosperity. But this year brings us face to face with maladjustments and unfavorable possibilities which if not corrected or * prevented could cause a recession in production and employment The Government will watch this situation and be prepared for action if needed I shall now proceed to discuss the contribution labor business agriculture and the Government can make to the solution of these basic problems along with recommendations related to other elements in a " national economic policy " as called for by the Employment Act VII RECOMMENDATIONS SHORT-RANGE PROGRAM My short-range recommendations have long-range significance as well. But they merit immediate attention from the Congress and from the people as a whole because of their influence upon economic conditions in Prices and wages Removal of emergency price and wage controls has restored the main responsibility for prices and wages to business labor farmers and consumers. The Government can point out dangers seen from the perspective of the whole economy but the correctives must largely be applied by others Business should reduce prices wherever possible in order to bring about the necessary increase in consumer purchasing power to bolster their markets. Price reductions are especially needed in the case of goods such as many articles of food clothing housefurnishings and building materials whose prices have risen out of line. If business makes these reductions in a timely and orderly way it will help sustain markets rather than destroy them Farmers must realize that last year 's exceptional farm prices will fall somewhat as world food supplies increase and as consumers find a more ample supply of durable goods to purchase. Existing price supports afford protection against a severe price decline Labor on its part must recognize that high volume at low costs and low prices requires high productivity and the absence of restrictions on production. For its own advantage as well as that of the country at large labor should refrain from demands for excessive wage increases that would require price increases or would prevent price reductions that are necessary to sell the capacity output of the product Management in turn should recognize that increased productivity permits wage increases in some cases as well as price reductions ; and that wages and salaries need to be raised where they have lagged substantially behind the increase in living costs in the past few years or where they are substandard But just as there can be no universal or uniform rule to govern price reductions so there can be no uniform rule relating to wages. Both price adjustments and wage adjustments are necessary in the ensuing months. Wage adjustments like price adjustments need to be made ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT with a discriminating regard for individual situations throughout the economy The Government can help in several ways to maintain a balance between prices and wages. Procurement agencies will avoid policies that stimulate price increases or prevent reductions. Disposal of surplus goods will be speeded. The antitrust laws will be applied vigorously to prevent and eliminate restrictive practices and pricing abuses The Congress should take steps at once to extend rent control beyond next June. A large increase in rents would substantially reduce consumer purchasing power On the wage side the Congress should extend the coverage of the Fair Labor Standards Act to classes of workers in interstate commerce now excluded and should raise the minimum wage in view of the substantial rise in the cost of living and in the national production since it was enacted 2'. Social security I shall treat generally of the social-security program in a subsequent section dealing with long-range programs and recommendations. In view of current economic trends however certain action is desirable at once. I urge the Congress to take immediate steps to revise benefit payments under the social-security system. The Congress has already authorized a temporary increase in public assistance benefits. This legislation expires by the end of this year and new legislative action is required. Benefits under the old-age and survivors ' insurance system should also be adjusted. These measures are necessary to alleviate real hardship which has been aggravated by increases in the cost of living. Beyond that adequate social-security benefit payments provide a desirable support to mass purchasing power Housing More than a million additional housing units need to be started in This goal will not only furnish badly needed shelter to our veterans and other citizens but will result in a sizable contribution of the housing industry toward employment and purchasing power At the lowest cost levels foreseeable this year one million additional housing units will approximate an investment of billion dollars during As shortages of materials and manpower disappear the main threat to a high volume of housing is the high level of current housing prices relative to the volume of consumer income To reduce the cost of housing on all fronts and by all desirable methods we must start as promptly as possible a long-range housing program. Such a program can stimulate large investments in land acquisition and preparation for development. It can start the flow of new types of private investment into housing ventures. It can bring the traditional home-building industry into rental housing as well No subject has received more protracted study by the Congress leading to more uniform conclusions. Nonpartisan housing legislation4 was introduced in the Seventy-ninth Congress and passed the Senate by a large majority ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT On several occasions I have urged enactment of this program which was developed within the Congress itself. I again urge enactment of this program at the earliest possible moment ^ Taxation Expert and lay opinion is in agreement on the rule of sound public finance that calls for a surplus in Government revenues over expenditures while employment is high and the total of income is large. In the present economic situation it is clear that it would be unsound fiscal policy to reduce taxes Everyone is agreed that the tax burden is great and should be reduced as soon as possible. When reductions come it will be important that they be fairly and .equitably distributed that they contribute to the maintenance of purchasing power by reducing the burden on the mass of consumers and that they help provide the work and business incentives essential for a high level of production. There are various ways of accomplishing these objectives of tax policy and of making an equitable reduction of taxes fairly distributed over all levels of income. These problems should receive careful study so that we are adequately prepared for wise action when the time comes Labor-management relations I have transmitted to the Congress in my State of the Union Message recommendations covering the broad field of labor-management relations and need not dwell further on them here. ( Appendix C. ) It is important however to emphasize once more in relation to our goal of a permanent high-production high-employment economy the key responsibility that both management and labor have in helping to achieve this goal. Sound collective bargaining is essential In order to build an enduring prosperity for ourselves and our children we must and we shall solve the problem of making necessary adjustments in wages and working conditions without round after round of crippling and futile halts in production LONG-RANGE PROGRAM The war has left us a tremendously increased productive potential and further increases are in store. In order to keep our expanding economic activity in line with our growing capacities the extraordinary postwar demand that we enjoy today must be transformed into sustained demand of an expanding peacetime economy Elimination of wartime controls does not mean that we want to go back to the size of economy we had before the war. The possibilities and requirements of a sustained 200-billion-dollar economy differ from those of an unstable 100-billion-dollar economy A variety of measures will be needed to fortify the basic structure of the American economy before the transformation from war and reconversion to a high-consumption peacetime economy is completed We are still at the threshold in formulating a program of consistent policies designed to give business agriculture and labor the opportunities which are envisaged in the Employment Act ECONOMIC REPORT OP THE PRESIDENT THE LABOR FORCE Since V-J Day the armed forces have released over ten million men and women MILLIONS OF PERSONS ARMED ORCES niiiiiiiiiiiiiji niiilllllllillllll gill I I in Illllll and the civilian labor force has reached peak levels ' New series beginning July Source : Department of Commerce ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT A long-range program designed to strengthen the structure of the American economy should include policies toward : Efficient utilization of the labor force ; Maximum utilization of productive resources ; Encouragement of free competitive enterprise ; Promoting welfare health and security ; Cooperation in international economic relations ; Combating economic fluctuations Efficient utilization of the labor force The Nation 's labor force is its greatest productive asset. Prudent use of our human resources requires a working population not only large and well-trained but enjoying high American standards of health education security and personal and political freedom We must develop and utilize fully the skills of our labor force. We must improve productive efficiency through industrial training and counseling focused on employment opportunities in various occupations industries and localities. I am directing the Federal agencies concerned to initiate a study of these programs in cooperation with State and local authorities in order to improve such training and services and to remedy inconsistencies and gaps The return of the Employment Service to State administration should not result in its disintegration into disconnected pieces nor in the subordination of the placement service to unemployment insurance. An efficient placement service requires uniform minimum standards and an integrated interstate system for disseminating job information and placing workers across State lines We must end discrimination in employment or wages against certain classes of workers regardless of their individual abilities. Discrimination against certain racial and religious groups against workers in late middle age and against women not only is repugnant to the principles of our democracy but often creates artificial " labor shortages " in the midst of labor surplus. Employers and unions both need to reexamine and revise practices resulting in discrimination. I recommend that at this session the Congress provide permanent Federal legislation dealing with this problem Maocirrvwri utilization of productive resources In our free-enterprise system we rely mainly upon private initiative to expand the productive base of the economy. Our productive capacity has grown not only through technological developments but also through a steady stream of additions to plant and equipment Output per man-hour has increased on the average some percent per year over the decades The whole history of America indicates that this progress can be entrusted mainly to the initiative and inventiveness within our business system. But we do need Nation-wide concerted action to remove the fear that demand will periodically be inadequate to absorb maximum production. This is what puts brakes upon inventiveness and initiative Even in times of prosperity aside from war a substantial portion of our productive facilities has been idle. Recurrent depressions have brought paralysis to as much as one-third or even one-half of our plants and machines ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT While the Government has a function in the encouragement of new industries and the development and dissemination of research the greatest incentive that the Government can provide for business productivity is through helping to prevent depressions. If production incentives are adequate business will expand without hesitancy when markets for its products are reasonably assured through a successful Nation-wide program for continuous maximum employment production and purchasing power Agriculture. The soil is one of the most valuable economic assets of the Nation. Most effective utilization and conservation of this resource should be an important aim of the agricultural program of the Government We have experienced amazing technological progress in agriculture and further progress is to be expected. This progress necessitates adjustments in farming adjustments in the processing and manufacture of foods and clothing and in the process of distribution American agriculture suffered a severe depression in the years following the First World War. This situation was generally recognized by ajl groups. It resulted in large-scale governmental programs to help the farmer get incomes more nearly in line with the incomes of other groups The long-range agricultural policy of the Government should be aimed at preserving the family-sized farm and preventing another agricultural depression as we go through the readjustments following the Second World War. I t should help to see that farmers ' incomes do not fall below those earned by other comparable productive groups This should involve the least possible interference in the management of actual farming operations. It should be accomplished without use of subsidies so far as feasible. We should seek to make it possible for farmers to earn good incomes through their own efforts Above all the long-range agricultural policy of the Government should be based upon the principle of plenty and not upon the encouragement of scarcity. The term " maximum production " in the Employment Act applies to the farm as well as to the factory. This basic policy is inconsistent with a policy of production restriction though we must take a realistic view of the proportion that agriculture as a whole bears to the economy and also of the relative amount of effort devoted to the several lines of production. Our domestic capacity to absorb the products of our farms if farmers are encouraged to turn their productive efforts in the right directions will be enormous as we get nearer to solving the problems of sustained employment and high purchasing power. How much of an export surplus from the United States the markets of the world will be able to absorb will depend in part on our international economic policies notably as to industrial imports and overseas investments Agricultural production increased more than percent during the war. Technological improvements in farming and in food distribution would make it possible not only to continue this high rate of production but also to increase it substantially during the next few years The high rate of agricultural production during and since the war has been supported by unusually high rates of food and fiber consumption. For the satisfactory solution of our agricultural problems during the next several years it is essential that we maintain these high ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT rates of consumption or even increase them. This is desirable not only from the farmer 's point of view but from the point of view of American diets and standards of living The Congress has recently authorized a permanent school-lunch program in cooperation with the States. I hope this program will be expanded until we are sure that every American school child gets an adequate diet. In addition we should study carefully the possible need for food and nutrition programs to reach low-income families The Congress also recently authorized a broad and strengthened program to improve the marketing and distribution of farm products This includes the strengthening of research and educational work as well as the improvement of the various marketing services performed by the Government. We shall need to give increasing emphasis to marketing during the next few years. Better marketing can go a long way toward maintaining adequate rates of consumption with benefit to farmers and the public alike We must honor the Government 's commitment to support farm product prices during the period of readjustment to a stabilized peacetime basis. However experience within the past year Jias demonstrated on a small scale some of the dangers that may result from holding the support level for any commodity too high. This only leads to maladjustments within agriculture to the wastage of food and to unnecessarily large Government expense The Government s long-range program to support farm incomes at reasonable levels must be kept flexible. I t should be designed to encourage adjustments of production in line with the capacity of markets to take products at a price remunerative to efficient farming. I t should promote well-managed use of our vast resources of farm land machinery and agricultural labor in such ways as to be profitable to farmers and of maximum benefit to the public as ' a whole The standard of living on farms depends on more than the amount of money income received by farmers. Farm communities have never received comparable treatment with cities in such matters as education housing medical care health nutrition and social security. Federal and State programs in these fields should give increasing attention to the needs of rural areas Regional development. Wide regions of this country still hold the promise of tremendous economic development. The Government should examine particularly the contribution it can make toward this development by stimulating production and distribution of low-cost hydroelectric energy by developing flood control and navigation by improving roads by enforcing fair competitive rates of transportation by removing barriers to truck transportation by land drainage and irrigation projects. We need to rebuild croplands grazing areas and forests. Future programs of resource and industrial development should be prepared so that we can move ahead rapidly at the appropriate time Even under today 's full employment conditions there are a few chronically depressed areas and some areas left stranded by the end of the war. These problem areas were created by the interplay of Nation-wide forces and our Government has the responsibility of assisting these communities in developing ways and means of improving their positions. The Council of Economic Advisers will give particular attention to these problems ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Federal-aid programs The Federal Government is engaged in several programs of grants-in-aid to State and local governments involving large amounts of money. Further programs are planned These programs particularly those related to health and education public works and road and airport construction contribute greatly toward bringing all sections of the country up to the levels of productivity consistent with American standards of living I have asked the Council of Economic Advisers to cooperate with the Bureau of the Budget and other Federal agencies concerned and with State and local advisory committees to undertake a study of Federal grants to State and local governments to determine to what extent revised standards for the distribution of these grants may take into account more fully the needs for support that exist in various parts of the country Public works. Aggregate expenditures for public works are large They obviously have a considerable effect upon the whole economy Further since many public-works projects are not related to the daily problems of business operations nor to the daily needs of consumers they are subject to adjustment in their time of commencement and their rate of progress. This had led particularly in recent years to an overemphasis upon the prospects of stabilizing our whole economy through the bold use of public works There are valid reasons why public works can not accomplish as much toward stabilization as some have supposed. In the event of severe unemployment they can not be generated in sufficient volume to avoid supplementation by other means. In a period of mild recession they can not be generated on time to be fully effective. If the tempo of the public-works program is geared to some business index the reserves accumulated for emergency use may be used after they are needed and they then become inflationary rather than stabilizing Even if advance preparations are made through the completion of plans the acquisition of sites and the accumulation of funds there will be an inevitable time lag between calling the emergency program into operation and the employment of men on the job These comments are substantiated by experience. The chief lesson to be learned is that no one device constitutes an adequate safeguard against recession or an adequate fighting apparatus against depression. All useful devices need to be thought through in advance and blended into a consistent program Instead of regarding public works as the first and foremost device to restore our whole economy when it sags we should attempt to stabilize public-works construction according to our long-term needs Increasing regularization of public-works expenditures at all levels of governmental activity over a long period will offer an assurance of a demand for capital of a market for materials and equipment and of a field for employment which will assist in stabilizing that segment of the business world. This approach to public works will have the further advantage of appraising their size and character in terms of our total national needs This policy by no means forestalls the expansion of public works as a sustaining factor if recessions or depressions should unfortunately develop despite our best efforts to avoid them. The very procedure necessary for long-term regularized expenditure will pave the way for more effective emergency use than in the past ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Research and patents The United States will this year invest more than billion dollars in research. In order to protect national security and the development of the domestic economy I have established by Executive Order a Presidential Research Board to survey Federal research and development programs. The continuance of a research program of large magnitude for many years to come together with the fact that many of the inventions resulting from it will be patentable calls for action to protect the public interest in inventions and discoveries resulting from expenditures of public funds I hope that suitable legislation for a uniform patent policy will be enacted by the Congress at this session Encouragement of free competitive enterprise It is imperative that there be no restrictions on free competition resulting in curtailment of production and employment or in maintenance of high prices or in interference with freedom to invest funds or in hampering the entry of new firms to any line of production or trade. I recommend that the Congress review the studies made by the Temporary National Economic Committee and by other Congressional Committees with a view toward supplementing or strengthening existing legislation in this field. Among the steps to be taken is the extension of Section of the Clayton Act to prohibit mergers by the acquisition of assets as well as by the acquisition of stock control Enforcement of existing antitrust laws. The Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission have both labored under inadequate appropriations. They should be better supplied with funds so that their activities can be more closely integrated. Accordingly I am recommending in the Budget Message increased appropriations for the control of monopolistic practices Encouragement of small business. The Government should take affirmative action to enlarge the opportunities for efficient and enterprising small businesses I believe that the Government should study ways and means of facilitating the availability of long-term credit and equity capital to small and promising business enterprises The Department of Commerce has developed and will further develop business service programs providing businessmen with such information on markets and technical and commercial facts as only large establishments can provide by their own staffs Consideration should be given to the impact which existing taxes have upon small and growing businesses Promoting welfare health cmd security1 There are certain programs of Government which have come to be looked upon as " welfare programs " in a narrow sense. This has placed them in an insulated compartment. They have not been sufficiently related to the needs of the economy as a whole. In fact they are a part of the problem of maximum employment production and purchasing power The Employment Act presents the opportunity to abandon this insu- lation and to put these programs back in the economic setting from which they must draw their sustenance Unemployment insurance is designed to take care of the unemployed as a matter of right rather than of charity but it also provides pur- ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT chasing power as a cushion against recessions and its tax features are of general economic significance. Retirement and pension systems exist to take care of workers who have given of their years in factory field or office. But these systems both on the income and outgo side have a profound effect upon volumes of purchasing power and the retirement age needs to be adjusted to the size and composition of our labor force and the trend of improved technologies. Health insurance relates clearly to the efficiency of workers and thus to the productivity of industry and agriculture. And this is even more true of education which must be reshaped continuously to meet the changing demands and job opportunities of the machine age or some day of the atomic age The total amounts of public outlays for these and other purposes need to be measured against the total size of our economy its wealth and resources today and the trends and policies which shape its future Many of these programs have been born of a depression psychology { They have proceeded from the assumption that our enterprise system will necessarily fail to employ given numbers of people from time to time and that these other programs must be brought forward to prime the pump or fill in the gaps. Here too we need a restatement. We should regard them rather as an inescapable obligation of an enlightened people and we should expand them as our resources permit The relationship between these welfare programs and general economic conditions has been inadequately explored. Proposals for maximum employment production and purchasing power and proposals traditionally regarded as being in the general-welfare area should be integrated because they are interrelated. Further studies will provide the basis for this integration Public health and education programs. Among those whose income is less than the minimum necessary for a decent subsistence are those who can not earn their living because of physical unfitness or lack of educational training A combination of public health nutrition education and regional development programs would create additional job opportunities and supply workers fit to fill these jobs. Relatively small Government expenditures for health and education yield a high national dividend It is more economical to prepare people to earn a decent living than to care for them through relief The Federal Government is now spending a large amount of money for health and education programs for war veterans but general expenditures in these fields are relatively small. I urge the Congress to give early consideration to expanded peacetime programs of public health nutrition and education Social security. Although maximum employment would protect wage earners generally from the effects of prolonged mass unemployment the individual is still exposed to many hazards of economic insecurity Our social security program has not kept pace with the times nor with our increase in general living standards. Many individuals are not covered by the present provisions of the Act and the benefit payments to those covered are inadequate under today 's conditions I recommend that the Congress cooperating with the States take action that will lead to increasing the amount and duration of unemployment benefits. Present unemployment reserve funds are ample to support such increases ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT I recommend that the Congress amend the social-security laws to extend the benefits of old-age and survivors ' insurance to the occupational groups now excluded and to include under unemployment compensation the employees of all establishments regardless of size in the industries now covered by the Unemployment Compensation Tax Act. In expanding general social security the Congress should not overlook the railway workers whose protection is under separate laws While we compensate workers for loss of wages due to unemployiment arising from lack of work opportunities we do not insure them against the risks of loss of earnings from temporary or permanent disability nor against the costs of medical care. This represents not only a heavy loss for the individual but a great waste of productive manpower There is an Urgent need to spread the risks arising from sickness and disability by insuring workers against the loss of income and by providing through social insurance ready access to essential preventive and curative medical services. I have in a previous message presented recommendations for a program of medical care and disability benefits. I urge early consideration of this program Our present social insurance system is financed by employee and employer contributions. We must recognize however that the employees ' contributions and the employers ' pay-roll tax curtail mass purchasing power and increase businessmen 's costs. From an economic point of view it would be desirable to finance a part of the social security system out of the general budget. Therefore I propose that the Congress in working out a system of financing an expanded social security program give full consideration to the economic as well as the social import of various methods of taxation for this purpose Cooperation in international economic relations While most of this Report has necessarily been devoted to the domestic aspects of employment production and purchasing power we must bear in mind that we are part of a world economy. Our sales of goods and services abroad amounting to about billion dollars in played an important role in the maintenance of domestic production employment and purchasing power and may be expected to do so this year. Such a high level of exports reflects in large part the war destruction of productive capacity in other countries. If we are to maintain a well-balanced prosperity over a long period our foreign trade must be established on a more permanent basis In the long run we can sell to other countries only if we are willing to buy from them or to invest our funds abroad Both foreign trade and foreign investment are vital to maintaining a dynamic economy in this country The shortages we have suffered during the war and are even now experiencing have proved to us our need for foreign imports. We will continue to need imports not only to add richness and variety to our standard of living but also as a means of conserving strategic materials. We do not have to fear so-called foreign competition when we have maximum production employment and purchasing ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT power. We must not of course indulge in indiscriminate reduction of barriers to imports. Such a policy is not contemplated For a few years we can not expect to buy as much from abroad as other countries buy from us. We will find it profitable to invest a part of our savings in developing the world 's productive resources through sound loans and investments of equity capital abroad. This is important not only in the first instance as an immediate outlet for our goods and services the supply of which will be increasing in the coming years but also as a means of permanently increasing foreign markets for our farmers and businessmen. The quickest demonstration of this can be seen by the fact that nations that are industrialized are our best customers Many countries fear economic depression in the United States as a threat to their own stability. If faced with the alternatives of smaller trade and economic insulation on the one hand or close relations with an unstable American economy on the other many might prefer some insulation as the lesser evil In preference to either of these alternatives these countries would choose closer relations with a stable American economy operating at high levels. They have already begun to cooperate toward achieving these related goals : economic stability ^ nd expansion of world trade The International Monetary Fund designed to stabilize exchange rates and the International Bank for Eeconstruction and Development set up to facilitate the international flow of capital have already started to operate. At our initiative experts of important governments recently worked out a tentative charter for an International Trade Organization. This charter embodies principles of commercial conduct designed to enlarge the beneficial flow of world trade to reenforce the domestic employment and development programs of the cooperating governments and by intergovernmental commodity agreements to remove the depressing effects of burdensome world surpluses. This charter represents the first major effort in the field of trade to replace unilateral action which often injured other countries and provoked retaliation by cooperation and joint action under a set of common principles. Continued progress in the formation of the International Trade Organization represents the most important step that we can take to reestablish a high volume of foreign trade on a sound basis The willingness of many other countries to enter the proposed trade organization will depend to a great extent on our attitude in connection with the reciprocal tariff negotiations scheduled for this year In return for our own tariff concessions we can hope to secure not only reduction of foreign tariffs and discriminations but also elimination of a mass of restrictions in particular rigid import quotas preventing our access to foreign markets. Thus we should press forward with our program to secure the reciprocal reduction of trade barriers If we fail to do our part in putting international economic relations on a healthier basis it is quite likely that some other countries will feel compelled to increase their own controls. Such a development would tend to break the world into trading blocs and could have profound effects upon world politics and the prospects for creating an enduring peace ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Combating economic fluctuations Only by blending all practicable programs in wise proportions can we be successful in stabilizing our economy at the highest feasible levels. The long-range policies I have outlined are designed to strengthen the structure of the economy and to reinforce its resistance to economic fluctuations The greater this power of resistance the less need there will be for some of the limited and specialized stabilizing devices which have received much attention in recent years I have directed the Council of Economic Advisers and the other appropriate Government agencies to make a continuing study of the stabilization devices that may become necessary and to recommend their being placed in operation in ample time to insure the anticipated effect Among these devices are a well-integrated program of employment stabilization ; improvements in the process by which workers find jobs and employers find workers ; improvements in the tax structure ; wise management of the public debt ; and a flexible credit policy Continuing policy can not be extemporized from month to month or even from year to year ; most policies designed to increase the stability of the economy are of long-range character. Fortunately we have time in which to plan deliberately and wisely and in which to secure the cooperation of all our citizens in driving toward our common goal : an expanding economy of maximum production employment and purchasing power under a system of free competitive enterprise with full recognition of the duties and responsibilities of forward-looking government TABLE OF CONTENTS OF APPENDIXES Page Appendix A : Explanation of the Nation 's Economic Budget Appendix B : Statistical Tables Eelating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power I. Gross national product or expenditure II. National income by distributive shares III. Income payments to individuals IV. Disposition of income payments V. Disposable income population and consumers ' prices VI. Consumers'prices VII. Wholesale prices VIII. Gross weekly earnings in selected industries IX. Average hourly earnings in selected industries X. Corporate profits before and after taxes XI. Total labor force classified by employment status and sex and veteran status of males XII. Estimated number of employees in nonagricultural establishments Appendix C : Excerpt from the State of the Union Message APPENDIX A EXPLANATION OF THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET The Nation 's-Economic Budget is designed to depict the flow of funds by which major economic groups are interrelated in the national economy. To this end it shows income and expenditures for consumers businesses and government as well as the balance of international trade. Broadly speaking the decisions to spend or to save of each of these groups of consumers may be considered as springing from a different set of considerations than those of the other groups The results of these decisions are embodied in four sets of accounts comprising the Nation 's Budget Expenditures. The expenditure side of the accounts is clear and unambiguous. The meaning of consumer expenditures is just what the name implies. One exception may be mentioned : residential construction is included with all other construction in business outlays Business expenditures are not the total expenditures of business but only that part which consists in additions to or replacements of plant machinery or other equipment and additions to inventories ( exclusive of inventory revaluation ) In contrast the operating expenditures of business are part of prices charged the consumer so that including them would involve double counting. The international expenditure figure consists of the net balance of receipts from the sale of goods and services over payments since it is this portion which is not balanced by an equivalent amount of foreign goods and services added to the domestic supply. Government expenditures consist mainly of payments for goods and services currently rendered but include certain other types of payments. In summing the components the latter are deducted as adjustments to obtain the total national expenditure for goods and services which is equal to the value of gross national production Income. The production of the national product involves an equivalent flow of income to individuals or businesses or government producing the product. The manner in which income is allocated to consumers business and government is somewhat complicated however Consumers ' earned income consists of salaries ancl wages dividends income of farmers and other unincorporated business and interest rents etc. going to individuals and fiduciaries. Income earned in production is not equivalent to income available for spending by consumers however and it is the latter quantity which is of more significance for the analysis of economic flows. Both additions and deductions must be made from earned income to arrive at spendable or disposable income In each period sizable additions to consumers ' earned income are made by the Government. For example in servicemen received mustering-out pay and dependency allotments and veterans received pensions and readjustment allowances. Old-age benefits from the social-security funds were a further addition to consumers ' disposable income. On the other hand in each period pay-roll income and ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT estate taxes are deducted from the total of consumer income. The residual income constitutes the disposable income of consumers appearing in the Nation 's Economic Budget table Of the income going to business some is withdrawn by the Government in the form of corporation income taxes excise taxes and other business taxes. The residual income of business after payment of dividends to shareholders consists of additions to reserves and corporate undivided profits. Undivided profits and reserves of all business ( with some adjustments to put the figures on a cash basis ) comprise the receipts appearing in the Nation 's Economic Budget table No entry is made on the receipts side of the international account since the excess of expenditures over income is shown in the expenditure column Government income is obviously the sum of business pay-roll and personal taxes plus some miscellaneous income obtained from the sale of surplus property contract settlement etc Surplus or deficit. The Nation 's Economic Budget table shows that total expenditures equal total incomes. This means that savings of some groups must equal the deficits of other groups. Expressed somewhat differently withdrawals from the income stream ( savings ) by some groups are offset by additions to the income stream ( deficit or investment ) by other groups The sum of the incomes of all groups is in excess of the incomes derived from the productive process however because it includes the " unearned " ( OF transfer ) incomes previously mentioned. These transfer incomes along with the expenditures which give rise to them do not reflect a current addition to goods and services and must therefore be deducted in order to arrive at the national production of goods and services. This is done by the adjustment shown at the bottom of the table. The deduction from incomes is equal to that from expenditures unless there are transfers abroad. No deduction need be made from incomes for transfers abroad since they do not directly augment domestic spendable funds The sum of income or expenditures less the adjustments for transfers of purchasing power is the gross national production of goods and services. By making an allowance for wear and tear upon existing machinery and equipment and depletion of natural resources the net national production is determined Sections through below contain a somewhat more detailed description of the accounts of consumers business and government and of international transactions which appear in the Nation 's budget table. The basic estimates of economic magnitudes are the gross national product national income and related series of the Department of Commerce. The series for Government receipts and expenditures conform to the concept of cash receipts from and payments to the public as presented in the Budget of the United States for fiscal ( Table p. A128 ) Minor adjustments between these series and the gross national product series are necessary because the latter are not on a cash basis Substantial revisions of the Department of Commerce series involving changes in classification of some components are expected to be published in the near future. These will hardly change the significance of the Nation 's Economic Budget picture however. Estimates for are based on incomplete data and are consequently tentative ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Consumers1 account. The account of consumers ' receipts expenditures and savings is shown in detail in table I TABLE I. Consumers ' account ] [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts : Disposable income of individuals Less : Adjustment to Federal cash income and expenditure series Adjustment for discrepancy __ Excess of receipts : Savings Equals : Adjusted disposable income Expenditures : Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total ' Detail may not add to total due to rounding Preliminary estimates Line : The derivation of disposable income of individuals from incomes received in producing the gross national product is shown in table II Line : The adjustments are as follows : ( a ) The excess of tax payments made by the public through pay-roll deductions or other means over receipts by the Government is added back into consumer disposable income ( b ) Benefit payments from national service and Government life insurance are added ( c ) Premiums paid for Government insurance and other payments to trust accounts are deducted since they become part of Federal cash income ( d ) The net accrued interest on Federal debt held by the public is deducted since it is not part of Federal cash outgo Line : This adjustment is necessary because the gross national product as estimated from the income side was somewhat higher in and than as independently estimated from the expenditure side. The whole of this discrepancy which arises from statistical imperfections is here deducted from consumer incomes Line : Does not include expenditures for residential construction even though financed and occupied by owners. These are included with private capital formation Line : Includes savings of unincorporated business TABLE II. Derivation of disposable income of individuals * [ Billions of dollars ] Gross national product Less : Depreciation depletion and other reserves Inventory revaluation Business taxes Adjustment for discrepancy Equals : Net national income Plus : Transfer payments to individuals Less : Corporate undivided profits ' Contributions to social insurance funds-. Equals : Income payments to individuals Less : Personal taxes and nontax payments._ E quals : Disposable income of individuals _ Detail may not add to total due to rounding Preliminary estimates Lines : For a description of these series see the Survey of Current Business May and August and March ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Business account. Table III contains a detail of the business account. Profits are those of incorporated business only while expenditures include the expenditures of both corporate and unincorporated business ( including farms ) and residential construction ( including that financed and occupied by owners ) Depreciation and other reserves also include allowances for unincorporated enterprise and dewllings. Unincorporated business savings are not included in business income because of the difficulty in separating them from income of individuals TABLE III. Business accountl [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts : Corporate profits before tax _.Less : Corporation income tax liabilities Dividends E quals : Corporate undivided profits Plus : Business reserves depreciation and depletion Government payments to business Less : Inventory revaluation adjustment Payments by business to government-._ Equals : Adjusted corporate profits and reserves Expenditures : p C t t i Construction.._ _ Residential NonresidentiaL15 Producers ' durables Net change in inventories Total gross domestic capital formation Excess of receipts ( ) or expenditures ( ) Detail may not add to total due to rounding Preliminary estimates Line : Department of Commerce concept which differs from that of the Bureau of Internal Revenue. Excludes profits arising from the sale or exchange of capital assets Line : Includes depreciation and depletion other business reserves and capital outlays charged to current expense Line : Includes refunds of business taxes loan transactions of Government corporations capital transactions renegotiation of war contracts and miscellaneous items Line : Includes renegotiation payments made in discharge of previous liabilities and excess of business tax payments over liabilities International account. Expenditures of foreign countries in the United States are reflected in current exports of goods and services Only the net balance of exports over imports and unilateral transfers is included in the Nation 's Economic Budget since other exports are matched by an equivalent volume of imports. Exports include transfers of surplus property abroad The Government account. The Government account includes revenues and expenditures for all governmental units Federal State and local ( table IV ) Federal receipts are cash receipts from the public except from borrowing and expenditures are cash payments to the public. The public includes individuals private corporations and State local and ECONOMIC REPORT OP THE PRESIDENT foreign governments. The cash receipts and expenditures series presents the financial operations of the Government as a unit. Government trust accounts and Government-owned corporations are considered part of the Government and the effect of transactions among these units is eliminated. Noncash payments.to the public such as accrued interest on Government bonds are not included. Cash receipts and expenditures rather than budgetary receipts and expenditures were chosen in order to give a better picture of the economic effect of the financial operations of the Government TABLE IV. Government accountl { Federal State and local ) [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts : Federal receipts from the public other than borrowing State and local _ _ Total Expenditures : Federal State and local Total Excess ( ) or deficit ( ) .___ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ * Detail may not add to total due to rounding Preliminary Adjustments In order to derive an estimate of the national production of goods and services expenditures which do not involve purchases of current output must be eliminated. Correspondingly a deduction must be made from the income side of the account for income not derived from current production. A detail of the expenditure adjustments is shown in table V below TABLE V. Adjustments Reconciliation between \ Government cash expenditures and expenditures for goods and services [ Billions of dollars ] Cash expenditures Federal State and local Less : Transfer payments To individuals To business Abroad Benefit payments national service and Government life insurance Refunds to individuals J Plus : Noncash expenditures for goods and services : Net accrued discQunt on United States securities Government contributions to retirement funds Interest on trust-fund investments Federal employees contributions to retirement funds Expenditures for goods and services Detail may not add to total due to rounding Preliminary Line : See section above Line : Includes veterans ' pensions and training and readjustment allowances servicemen 's allowances to dependents and mustering-out pay cash terminal leave pay public assistance unemployment compensation old-age and survivors ' insurance etc. These payments constitute a transfer of purchasing power from ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT the governmental units to individuals and consequently should not appear in the gross national product Line : See table III line Line : Includes loans to foreign governments subscriptions to international organizations reimbursable lend-lease etc. Since this expenditure has not been included in the income of any domestic group no deduction from income needs to be made for this item. However it must be deducted from expenditures Lines : These noncash expenditures are considered part of the gross national product and must be added to cash payments Gross and net national product. The expenditure side of the accounts is summarized in table VI. The adjustment for noncash expenditures and for transfers to the public and abroad is deducted to obtain the gross national production of goods and services. The gross national product contains an element of duplication however Replacement costs are included in business expenditures ; as depreciation they are also included in the price of goods aad services paid by the consumer or government. By deducting an allowance for depreciation and depletion duplication is eliminated and the net output of the economy is obtained as shown in table VI below TABLE VI. Reconciliation between the gross and net national product1 [ Billions of dollars ] Expenditures : Consumer ( purchases of goods and services ) __ Business ( private domestic capital formation ) Net exports Government ( cash payments to the public ) _ Total Less : Adjustments Equals : Gross national product.__ Less : Depreciation and depletion Equals : Net national product Detail may not add to total due to rounding Preliminary Line : See section above Line : Includes capital outlays charged to current expense Line : This is not conceptually the same as the net national income as defined by the Department of Commerce which excludes both depreciation and depletion and business taxes APPENDIX B STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT PRODUCTION AND PURCHASING POWER l TABLE I. Gross national product or expenditure Actual Dollars ( billions ) _ 1942_ _ Dollars ( billions ) Year Actual Dollars ( billions ) Year Dollars ( billions ) Gross national product is a measure of the goods and services produced including consumers ' goods and services producers ' goods for expansion or replacement and goods and services used by Federal State and local governments. The output of the private sector of the economy is valued at market prices while Government services are valued at cost The deflated series was prepared by breaking the gross national product into a large number of components each of which was divided by the most appropriate index or series of relative prices Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce TABLE II. National income by distributive shares l [ Billions of dollars ] Year Compensation of Employees Net Income of Proprietors Total National Income ._ _ Total Salaries and Wages Supplements Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Net Corporate Profits After Taxes Interest and Net Rents Total Dividends % O Savings c -L5 National income is the total net income earned in production by individuals or businesses. The concept of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in excluding depreciation and depletion allowances and business taxes. A reconciliation between these two series and income payments is shown in Appendix A table II for and Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT TABLE III. Income payments to individuals [ Millions of dollars ] Year or Quarter 1934._. II Ill IV III III IV Total Income Payments EntreprePublic DiviSalaries neurial In- dends Assist- Payments come and and ance and to Net Rents and Wages * Other Veterans2 and Interest Relief Royalties ( ) ( ) Other ( \ l6 ( * ) Differs from salaries and wages in Appendix B table II because it excludes employees ' contributions to social insurance Includes veterans ' pensions and compensation readjustment allowances ( unemployment ) payments to self-employed subsistence allowances to those going to school part of tuition payments ( payments to nonprofit institutions ) adjusted-service certificate compensation mustering-out pay terminal leave pay to enlisted personnel and the Government 's contribution to family allowances Estimates based on incomplete data * Not available Source : Department of Commerce ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT TABLE IV. Disposition of income payments [ Billions of dollars ] Income Payments to Individuals Year or Quarter _- i .._ v ._ Less : Equals : Personal Disposable Taxes on Income of Nontax IndividPayments uals Less : Consumer Expenditures Equals : Net Savings of Individuals Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rates : I II. Ill IV : Ii II1 Illi IV i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT TABLE V. Disposable income population and consumers1 prices Per Capita DisposDisposable Consumable Income Income of Individuals Population ers ' Prices ( billions of ( thousands ) ( = ) Actual dollars ) Dollars Dollars Year or Quarter _ _ < Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rates : I II III Seasonally Adjusted Annual Rates IV : I II Ill IV * * M,060 Estimated population of continental United States including armed forces overseas ; annual data as of July and quarterly data as of first of quarter The measurement of changes in purchasing power is explained below Interpolated from published data Estimates based on incomplete data Sources : Department of Commerce ( disposable income and population ) and Department of Labor ( consumers ' prices ) THE MEASUREMENT OF CHANGES IN PURCHASING POWER Actual incomes in current dollars do not give a fair picture of changes in purchasing power. For example if the income of a particular family should be raised from $ to $ ( or an increase of percent ) and if at the same time all prices were raised percent the purchasing power of the family would be unchanged. With $ the family could buy the same amount of goods and services as before with $ Actually of course all prices do not usually rise and fall at the same time nor by the same percentage. A rough measure of the average increases in prices paid by consumers is the Consumer 's Price Index This is shown in column table V Appendix B. A rough estimate of changes in purchasing power can be obtained by dividing incomes by the Consumer 's Price Index ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Table III page of the text makes certain comparisons in terms of per capita disposable incomes in dollars. These figures shown in table V were computed by dividing actual per capita incomes by the Consumers ' Price Index with = If any other base is preferred for example dollars or dollars it is a simple matter to compute the figures on that basis The comparisons made in the text are not affected in any way by the choice of dollars as a yardstick. Use of any other year as a base would show the same percentage changes in purchasing power Table I I I on page of the text compares the purchasing power of recent per capita incomes both with war years and with prewar years The report shows that the purchasing power of per capita incomes is now substantially higher than before the war but that it has fallen considerably from the wartime levels TABLE VI. Consumers ' prices [ = ] Year or Month January February. March April May June July August September October.. November December January.. February. March April May June July August September October November December. Usually surveyed quarterly Not available Preliminary estimate Source : Department of Labor All Items Food Clothing ( ) ( ) Rent ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) Fuel Electricity etc ( ) ( ) House MiscelFurnish- laneous ings ( ) ( ) * ( ) ( ) ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT TABLE VII. Wholesale prices January February March April May June July August September October -_ November December : January February March April May June.July August September October November * December $ _ _ i The published data on the = base have been converted to the = base * Preliminary estimates Not available Source : Department of Labor Miscellaneous Chemicals and Allied Products House Furnishing Goods _ _ __ _ _ " o Metals and M e t a l Products Building Materials Fuel and Lighting Textile Products _ Hides and Leather Products _ Foods Other Than Farm Products and Foods Farm Produ Year or Month All Gommodities [ = ] ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT TABLE VIII. Gross weekly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Year or Month Total Min- Private ing Bi- Build- Class I ing Steam tumiDura- NonConRailnous struc- roads ble durable Coal Goods Goods tion Telephone Whole- Retail Hotels sale ( YearTrade Trade Round ) $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ ._- 4V.05 ) January February March April \ f } May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August __ C1 ) September..- ( ) October J ) November December * $ Not available New series ; includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees Preliminary Source : Department of Labor ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT TABLE IX. Average hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Year or Month Total _ Mining BitumiDura- Non- nous ble durable Goods Goods Coal Private Build- Class I ing Steam Conrailstruc- roads tion $ $ L. I l l L L. L. $ $ $ : L. L. L138 L134 L. L. L113 L. : L.063 ] L.064 ] L.066 L. L. L. L383 L.392 : L.396 ] L. ] L. ] L.070 ] L.064 ] L. ] L. ] L. January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April.. May June July August September. ._ Octobers November _ December * i i ] ] i i i $ / \ i ) C1 ) C ) Telephone $ Whole- Retail Hotels sale ( YearTrade Trade Round ) $ % } $ $ * Not available New series ; includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees Preliminary Source : Department of Labor ECONOMIC REPORT OP THE PRESIDENT TABLE X. Corporate profits before and after taxes [ Millions of dollars ] All Private Corporations J Year or Quarter Large Private Corporations Profits after Taxes EH I Number of companies I II III IV I II III IV ( ) ( ) ( ) Kevised series ; not exactly comparable with that used as a component of national income Federal and State income and excess-profits taxes Preliminary estimate based on incomplete data and subject to revision Not available Note : Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce ( all corporations ) ; Board of Governors of the Federal Keserve System ( large corporations ) ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT TABLE XI. Total labor force classified by employment status and sex and veteran status of males l [ In thousands ] Employed Unemployed Civilian Labor Force Total Civilians Civilians Labor Force ( inYear or Month Male Male cluding AgriFemale Total culture Total Armed Total Forces ) Total Veteran J Total Veteran 1944_ _ January February March April May. June Julyi August September ._ October November.. December : January February March April... May June July August September October November3 December An improved interviewing procedure which resulted in a larger estimate of employment and a smaller estimate of unemployment was adopted July Data prior to this date are not strictly comparable with subsequent data World War II veterans only. Data are not available for the period prior to November Not available Source : Department of Commerce ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT TABLE XII. Number of employees in nonagricultural establishments [ In thousands ] Manufacturing Year or Month Production Workers Total Total November Durable goods Mining Nondurable goods Construction Transportation and Public Utilities Trade Finance Service Governand ment Miscellaneous * _. ' 5/461 January February March April May June July August September October November December : January __ February March _ April May June _ July August September. _ October November December _ Number of employees in nonagricultural establishments includes all full and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked or received pay during the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and personnel of the armed forces are excluded. Not comparable with estimates for nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force derived from data in Appendix B table XI because latter include self-employed proprietors and domestic servants and are based on population enumeration whereas estimates in this table are based on establishment reports Includes production and nonproduction workers * Excludes supervisory employees clerical and sales staffs and other nonproduction workers Date of peak employment in manufacturing and munitions-producing industries Not available Note : Detail will not necessarily add to totals because rounding Source : Department of Labor APPENDIX C EXCERPT FROM THE STATE OF THE UNION MESSAGE DELIVERED TO THE CONGRESS JANUARY The year just past like the year after the First World War was marred by labor-management strife Despite this outbreak of economic warfare in we are today producing goods and services in record volume. Nevertheless it is essential to improve the methods for reaching agreement between labor and management and to reduce the number of strikes and lock-outs We must not however adopt punitive legislation. We must not in order to punish a few labor leaders pass vindictive laws which will restrict the proper rights of the rank and file of labor. We must not under the stress of emotion endanger our American freedoms by taking ill-considered action which will lead to results not anticipated or desired We must remember in reviewing the record of disputes in that management shares with labor the responsibility for failure to reach agreements which would have averted strikes. For that reason we must realize that industrial peace can not be achieved merely by laws directed against labor unions During the last decade and a half we have established a national labor policy in this country based upon free collective bargaining as the process for determining wages and working conditions This is still the national policy It should continue to be the national policy But as yet not all of us have learned what it means to bargain freely and fairly. Nor have all of us learned to carry the mutual responsibilities that accompany the right to bargain. There have been abuses and harmful practices which limit the effectiveness of our system of collective bargaining. Furthermore we have lacked sufficient governmental machinery to aid labor and management in resolving differences Certain labor-management problems need attention at once and certain others by reason of their complexity need exhaustive investigation and study We should enact legislation to correct certain abuses and to provide additional governmental assistance in bargaining. But we should also concern ourselves with the basic causes of labor-management difficulties In the light of these considerations I propose to you and urge your cooperation in effecting the following four-point program to reduce industrial strife : Point number one is the early enactment of legislation to prevent certain unjustifiable practices First under this point are jurisdictional strikes. In such strikes the public and the employer are innocent bystanders who are injured ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT by a collision between rival unions. This type of dispute hurts production industry and the public and labor itself. I consider jurisdictional strikes indefensible The National Labor Relations Act provides procedures for determining which union represents the employees of a particular employer. In some jurisdictional disputes however minority unions strike to compel employers to deal with them despite a legal duty to bargain with the majority union. Strikes to compel an employer to violate the law are inexcusable. Legislation to prevent such strikes is clearly desirable Another form of interunion disagreement is the jurisdictional strike involving the question of which labor union is entitled to perform a particular task. When rival unions are unable to settle such disputes themselves provision must be made for peaceful and binding determination of the issues A second unjustifiable practice is the secondary boycott when used to further jurisdictional disputes or to compel employers to violate the National Labor Eelations Act Not all secondary boycotts are unjustified. We must judge them on the basis of their objectives. For example boycotts intended to protect wage rates and working conditions should be distinguished from those in furtherance of jurisdictional disputes. The structure of industry sometimes requires unions as a matter of self-preservation to extend the conflict beyond a particular employer. There should be no blanket prohibition against boycotts. The appropriate goal is legislation which prohibits secondary boycotts in pursuance of unjustifiable objectives but does not impair the union 's right to preserve its own existence and the gains made in genuine collective bargaining A third practice that should be corrected is the use of economic force by either labor or management to decide issues arising out of the interpretation of existing contracts Collective bargaining agreements like other contracts should be faithfully adhered to by both parties. In the most enlightened unionmanagement relationships disputes over the interpretation of contract terms are settled peacefully by negotiation or arbitration. Legislation should be enacted to provide machinery whereby unsettled disputes concerning the interpretation of an existing agreement may be referred by either party to final and binding arbitration Point number two is the extension of the facilities within the Department of Labor for assisting collective bargaining One of our difficulties in avoiding labor strife arises from a lack of order in the collective-bargaining process. The parties often do not have a clear understanding of their responsibility for settling disputes through their own negotiations. We constantly see instances where labor or management resorts to economic force without exhausting the possibilities for agreement through the bargaining process. Neither the parties nor the Government have a definite yardstick for determining when and how Government assistance should be invoked There is need for integrated governmental machinery to provide the successive steps of mediation voluntary arbitration and ultimately in appropriate cases ascertainment of the facts of the dispute and the reporting of them to the public. Such machinery would facilitate and expedite the settlement of disputes ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Point number three is the broadening of our program of social legislation to alleviate the causes of workers ' insecurity On June in my message vetoing the Case bill I made a comprehensive statement of my views concerning labor-management relations. I said then and I repeat now that the solution of labormanagement difficulties is to be found not only in legislation dealing directly with labor relations but also in a program designed to remove the causes of insecurity felt by many workers in our industrial society In this connection for example the Congress should consider the extension and broadening of our social security system better housing a comprehensive national health program and provision for a fair minimum wage Point number four is the appointment of a Temporary Joint Commission to inquire into the entire field of labor-management relations I recommend that the Congress provide for the appointment of a Temporary Joint Commission to undertake this broad study The President the Congress and management and labor have a continuing responsibility to cooperate in seeking and finding the solution of these problems. I therefore recommend that the Commission be composed as follows : to be chosen by the Congress from the members of both parties in the House and the Senate and representing the public management and labor to be appointed by the President The Commission should be charged with investigating and making recommendations upon certain major subjects among others : First the special and unique problem of Nation-wide strikes in vital industries affecting the public interest. In particular the Commission should examine into the question of how to settle or prevent such strikes without endangering our general democratic freedoms Upon a proper solution of this problem may depend the whole industrial future of the United States. The paralyzing effects of a Nation-wide strike in such industries as transportation coal oil steel or communications can result in national disaster. We have been able to avoid such disaster in recent years only by the use of extraordinary war powers. All those powers will soon be gone. In their place there must be created an adequate system and effective machinery in these vital fields. This problem will require careful study and a bold approach but an approach consistent with the preservation of the rights of our people. The need is pressing. The Commission should give this its earliest attention Second the best methods and procedures for carrying out the collective-bargaining process. This should include the responsibilities of labor and management to negotiate freely and fairly with each other and to refrain from strikes or lockouts until all possibilities of negotiation have been exhausted Third the underlying causes of labor-management disputes Some of the subjects presented here for investigation involve longrange study. Others can be considered immediately by the Commission and its recommendations can be submitted to the Congress in the near future I recommend that this Commission make its first report including specific legislative recommendations not later than March