The Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS * o-i * Januafy Together With a Report to the President THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS January Together With a Report to the President THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. G Price of single copy cents ( U ) LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE Washington D. C. January The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SIRS : I am presenting herewith my Economic Report to the Congress as required under the Employment Act of In preparing this report I have had the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers members of the Cabinet and heads of independent agencies Together with this report I am transmitting a report the Annual Economic Review January prepared for me by the Council of Economic Advisers in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ( in ) Contents Page THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT The Nation 's economy grows stronger How we use our strength The harder job ahead The real meaning of economy Top issues for policy action Reaching our objectives for defense strength Aiding other free nations Expanding our productive capacity Supporting civilian strength Controlling inflation Requirements for additional taxation Saving Credit control Price control Rent control Wage stabilization Equality of sacrifice Summary of legislative recommendations Summary of economic developments in THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY ( a report to the President by the Council of Economic Advisers ) ( V ) To the Congress of the United States : The past year has been marked by great gains in our basic economic strength. These gains have enabled us to move forward toward our security objectives with far less strain upon the economy than would otherwise have been possible It is the tragic necessity of our time that we and other peace-loving peoples must devote so large a part of our resources to building up our military strength. But it is because we seek peace a just and lasting peace that we have shouldered this burden. If despite our best efforts another world conflict should come the cost would be beyond description. If we succeed in the effort for peace our productive ability will enable us to achieve a material well-being never before known This effort for peace finds the people of the United States substantially in agreement. We all know that we must stand firm against aggression build up our defenses cooperate with other free peoples and hold the door open for the fair settlement of international disputes. Our basic international policy is backed by national unity But our foreign policy can not succeed if there is excessive division on domestic matters. Economic issues and international issues are now inseparably connected. It is a fundamental fact that the defense program itself and our aid to friendly nations must be related to the capacity of our economy. If we overestimated the strength of our economy we could weaken our power to resist aggression. If we underestimated its strength we could fall short of doing the things that can and must be done to prevent aggression Without continued economic growth the defense burden could make us weaker year by year. Without economic stability and control of inflation the resulting hardships could disastrously affect millions of our people. Without agreement on economic fundamentals at home group conflicts or political conflicts could weaken our ability to withstand the communist threat It is only natural that the scope and operation of a program of this magnitude should evoke some disagreement and criticism. This can be constructive. But it would be most unfortunate if in those economic matters which affect our world security we were divided by narrow partisanship rather than united by the desire to find the best possible solution To agree upon wise policies it is essential to know and understand the facts. These facts are available and they are compelling. They show that our basic economic strength is greater than it was a year ago. They point the way to the necessary policies that we should follow. They reveal why all of us can and need to stand upon common ground The Nation 's Economy Grows Stronger The decision to resist aggression in Korea was not the first postwar evidence of American strength which confounded the communist imperialists The first and equally important evidence came earlier when the American economy after World War II instead of slipping into a depression moved forward to greater strength Comparing the year with the year before our economy was greatly affected by the new defense program civilian employment rose from million to million. Unemployment during those years averaged about million which was low by previous peacetime standards. Our total annual output measured in uniform ( ) prices rose from about billion dollars to about billion This growth in our economy accelerated rapidly after the Korean outbreak. In the year and a half since then our annual rate of total output in terms of prices has risen by about billion dollars or percent to billion dollars. By the end of civilian employment mounted to about million and unemployment was about million Thus comparing with the current situation the annual output of the economy in constant prices has risen by about billion dollars. Total civilian employment is now about million higher than years ago This expansion of our economy has occurred because the American people have never lost faith in progress. They have rejected the idea that we have reached or will ever reach the last frontiers of our growth. Businessmen workers and farmers have dared to produce more and more confident that we had the ingenuity and the imagination to utilize this increasing abundance. They have not been held back by the fear that we would get into a depression by not knowing how to make use of the blessing of full production and full employment An expanding economy has paid particularly rich dividends in helping us to assume new burdens of world responsibility. In we justly regarded ourselves as having reached remarkable levels of production and productivity compared with any prewar year. Our total output measured in prices was more than billion dollars higher than in and more than billion above But since the 60billion-dollar increase in annual output has been greater than the total cost of the security program in ( See chart ) The high level of production helped to hold inflation in check during most of despite a rapidly rising security program. The growth of production during the last few years now enables us to carry the security program without undue impairment of CHART BUILDING OUR STRENGTH GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN PRICES In we should be able to increase total production by about percent. This will help to meet the needs of the expanding security program BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I960 .NATIONAL SECURITY BOTHER FEDERAL.STATE LOCAL \ OBJECTIVE ^ DEVELOPMENT OF NATURAL AND HUMAN RESOURCES NOTE : NET FOREIGN INVESTMENT IN ALL YEARS AND NATIONAL SECURITY IN NOT SHOWN SEPARATELY SINCE AMOUNTS ARE RELATIVELY VERY SMALL SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS the rest of the economy. Despite the defense burden the past year witnessed a production of tools factories automobiles housing household goods and food that was very high and in some cases record-breaking In the light of this experience we should hold fast to the principle of an expanding economy. During we can and should lift employment by another l1/ ^ million. Some further reduction in unemployment may be possible despite the fact that additional defense-created unemployment in some local areas appears inevitable. We can and should lift our total output by at least another percent or by to billion dollars We should adopt policies which pave the way for a continuation or acceleration of these productive gains in the years further ahead Such progress will have many advantages. It will give us even greater strength to meet any aggressor. If the world situation stabilizes so that we can after or years taper off the defense program we will then be producing enough to remove many unpleasant controls without risking inflation and to have a higher standard of living than we had even in And if we succeed in attaining a durable peace our expanding economy can double our standard of living within a generation Viewing the next hard years the productive capacity of the United States leaves no room for faintheartedness or defeatism about our ability to carry whatever necessary burdens the international situation may impose upon us. But we can not afford to be complacent. In moving ahead confidently to what must be done we should not overlook the points of weakness or vulnerability in our economic system. Our resources are bountiful but we must make the most of them by careful use How We Use Our Strength Economic strength in these times is not only a matter of size. If we should devote too much of our productive power to building up our standard of living while the communists build up their armaments we could fall far behind despite our immensely greater economic potential. We must use our strength in the right way In a total war our course would be plain. We would build up our striking forces as rapidly as possible and sacrifice all else to that purpose In a fully peaceful situation our course would also be plain. We would reduce armaments and devote our full resources to the pursuit of what we count as the good things of life. But for the time being and perhaps for a long time we must sail a middle course in an uncertain sea The whole mobilization effort is based upon the economic strategy of following this middle course. This means keeping strong all three components of our total strength military industrial and civilian. We are making allowance for the possibility that war could come suddenly. But we are also making allowance for the possibility of a long period of international tension without total war. It is a mistake to oversimplify this problem by calling it a conflict between guns and butter. We must strive for the amounts and kinds of " guns " of " tools " and of " butter " which will do most to advance our security and well-being in the long run While too slow a defense build-up would imperil the Nation too rapid a build-up also has dangers. It could burden us with a mass of out-ofdate weapons deplete our economy and weaken public support for a program which may be needed over a long period If the build-up of our industrial capacity were too slow the very foundation of our economic and military strength would be impaired. But if our industrial build-up were too fast or were made indiscriminately it CHART GROWTH IN BASIC CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION STEEL PRODUCTION MILLIONS OF NET TONS r I r ELECTRIC POWER GENERATING CAPACITYU MILLIONS OF KILOWATTS r [ F ^ /1 ALUMINUM PRIMARY PRODUCTION MILLIONS OF SHORT TONS I I PETROLEUM ~ T ~ | REFINERY CAPACITY MILLIONS OF BARRELS ( DAILY AVERAGE ) I I n 1952-2/f c ' EXCLUDES INDUSTRIAL 2/PROJECTIONS BY DEFENSE PRODUCTION ADMINISTRATION SOURCES : AMERICAN IRON AND STEEL INSTITUTE FEDERAL POWER COMMISSION AND DEPARTMENT OF INTERIOR ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) could feed an inflationary boom by placing too heavy a demand upon scarce materials If we maintained civilian consumption at too lush a level under current world conditions we would be deceiving ourselves tragically. But excessive cutbacks of civilian supplies and essential public services would weaken the ultimate source of our collective strength million Americans The defense mobilization effort thus far has been based upon this rounded concept of total national strength for the long pull. Since the Korean outbreak the size of our armed forces has more than doubled Deliveries of military goods including military construction have totaled billion dollars. Nearly 5J/2 million workers are now engaged directly or indirectly in defense production. Government outlays for the major national security programs the military services atomic energy stockpiling military and economic aid abroad Defense Production Act programs civil defense and merchant marine activities have increased from an annual rate of billion dollars to about billion While increasing these major security programs we have also been rapidly building up our productive economic strength. Since the Korean outbreak private investment in producers ' equipment and nonresidential construction has averaged billion dollars a year compared with a 32-billiondollar rate from through the middle of billion in and billion in all measured at the price level. In steelmaking capacity increased percent and electric power capacity percent and the year 's steel output of million tons exceeded the previous record by percent. Aluminum output at present is running percent higher than during the middle of ( See chart ) Additions to farm equipment and larger use of fertilizers have made it possible to set a realistic agricultural production goal above any previous year 's output and almost percent higher than the Nation 's average farm production in the years before World War II This growth in the productive sector of our economy indicates that neither the size of the military build-up nor the high level of taxation enacted to finance that build-up has repressed business investment initiative. Instead the problem has been to hold the expansion down to noninflationary proportions Despite the great demand for resources to enlarge the military build-up and to expand the industrial mobilization base the year and a half since Korea has witnessed an extremely high level of general civilian supplies While per capita consumption in constant dollars declined about percent from the pre-Korean level to the final quarter of this was mainly because of a fall in demand for durable goods. Considering the increase in consumers ' stocks of durable goods since the end of the war and the steady improvement in housing accommodations it seems clear that living standards have thus far been rising. Compared with per capita consumption expenditures after adjustment for price rises have'increased about one-third. ( See chart ) There have been some shortcomings to set off against these evidences of progress. Bottlenecks and shortages and problems of design have delayed production of some important military items. Some of the materials expansion programs have not moved forward as rapidly as we had anticipated As was to be expected in the first stages of a mobilization effort the development of smoothly operating administrative machinery took time to accomplish. In some areas of the country although not generally dislocations have resulted in unemployment and business hardship. Furthermore particularly during the first months after the Korean aggression a rapid inflationary upsurge caused undue hardship to many families Nonetheless the facts which have been recited make it clear that the Nation has been gaining steadily and vigorously in economic strength CHART GAINS IN LIVING STANDARDS By almost any measure the standard of living has improved-markedly since the pre-World War II period CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES PER CAPITA -V INDEX = FOOD CONSUMPTION PER CAPITA U INDEX = HOMES WITH FARMS WITH ELECTRICITY PERCENT OF TOTAL FARMS ELECTRIC REFRIGERATORS PERCENT OF TOTAL HOMES ' PASSENGER CARS PER HUNDRED PERSONS NUMBER SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION EXPENDITURES PER STUDENT ENROLLED * * INDEX = I U INDEXES BASED ON EXPENDITURES IN I9SI PRICES. SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION EXPENDITURES FOR INCLUDE WORKS PROGRESS ADMINISTRATION PROJECTS AND ARE ADJUSTED FOR PROBABLE LOWER PRODUCTIVITY & END OF YEAR DATA SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE MCGRAW HILL PUBLISHING COMPANY DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE FEDERAL SECURITY AGENCY AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Moreover the utilization of our resources under the mobilization program has kept the three major components of our strength in reasonably balanced proportion But the defense program is still in the build-up stage ; the main effort lies ahead. This will impose new strains upon the economy. It calls for improvement in existing programs and new adjustments to meet new events The Harder Job Ahead As opens we face a period during which the burden of the defense program will increase greatly both in absolute terms and relative to the total size and strength of the economy. This increasing burden while indispensable to our security will place an additional strain upon our manpower our physical plant our natural resources and our standards of living. It will inescapably cause Government expenditures to rise greatly and even with the additional taxes I am recommending it is estimated that there will be a large deficit this year and a larger one next year. This deficit along with the other strains upon the economy will increase inflationary dangers. We must analyze these strains carefully and decide how best to meet them. With sound policies there is no doubt that we shall be able to meet them Government outlays for the major security programs are estimated to rise from a current annual rate of billion dollars to almost billion by the end of this calendar year. As a proportion of total output the increase will be from percent to more than percent. These over-all figures do not fully portray the impact. In more than a third of the output of the construction and metalworking industries will be taken for military purposes. Military production and construction will claim more than a fourth of our copper supply and half of our aluminum supply Though the major expansion will take place this year the program which I am submitting will call for a further increase in the rate of security outlays during calendar We can not hope that security program expenditures will start declining toward a lower rate until But the most difficult problems will be within the next months. After we cross this hurdle continued expansion of our raw materials base and slackening of military requirements for materials will considerably ease the strain. In the meantime however it will be necessary to curtail the use of critical materials for many peacetime products. Serious problems will be faced by some smaller manufacturing firms unable to convert their plants to defense production or to find substitute materials I want to direct special attention to that part of our security effort which is aimed at increasing the strength of other free nations. Most of our aid is going to Western Europe. During the years of the Marshall Plan prior to the Korean outbreak industrial production in Western European countries rose percent. Nevertheless their recovery was far from complete when they had to undertake heavy new defense burdens. Since June they have added substantially to their armed forces and have more than doubled their defense expenditures. While their industrial production has risen another percent during this period it still is far below the level required for defense and for economic stability The Western European countries can shoulder only part of their heavier defense outlays through increased productivity. In addition cuts must be made in their domestic consumption which only recently has been restored to the prewar levels and in capital investment which is needed to build long-run economic strength. Exports which are necessary if self-support is to be achieved are also being limited. If these countries tried to produce or buy abroad solely with their own resources all the goods needed for defense the probable result would be drastic cuts in living standards intolerable inflation and grave danger to political stability It is only a matter of intelligent self-interest on our part to add something to the resources of these countries. And it is essential for us to understand that whether we make this addition in the form of " military aid " or " economic aid " the objective and the function are the same : common security. When we supply military goods some of the most dangerous cutbacks in European civilian production can be avoided. When we supply economic assistance some European productive facilities and foreign exchange are released for defense. The form of aid that best serves the purpose in a particular case is not something which can be decided in the abstract. It depends upon the changing circumstances in the individual European countries We are also providing aid to the nations in the Near East and Africa in Asia and the Pacific and to the other American Republics. Much of it is military aid. A somewhat lesser amount but one which has been steadily increasing is being directed to attacking the more general problems resulting from underdevelopment. Chronic poverty now affects the ability of some of these countries to maintain independence in the face of threatened aggression or subversion. This calls for a demonstration by positive and sustained action by the free nations as a whole that the economic aspirations of underdeveloped countries can best be realized in association with the rest of the free world Our reliance on other nations of the free world is not simply a matter of combined military strength. Our productive potential is vitally dependent on supplies of critical raw materials particularly metals coming from abroad. We are joining with the other free countries in efforts to encourage the production and achieve a fair distribution of such materials In addition we must undertake in some other efforts which will make us stronger for the long pull even though they will increase immediate strains. Steelmaking capacity already above million tons is to be expanded to more than million by with related expansions of iron coke and ore-producing facilities. The aluminum program should double the mid-1950 rate of output by Electric power capacity is scheduled to expand percent this year and a 40-percent expansion by the end of is proposed. Petroleum refinery capacity is scheduled to expand about percent between now and the end of These and the other highpriority Government-assisted industrial expansion programs will absorb this year about a quarter of the supply of copper available for civilian uses and about one-third of the civilian supply of steel There are also a few public programs which must be continued at fairly high levels or expanded because they are essential to supply our defense requirements and to expand our mobilization base. Federal expenditures for long-range conservation and development of natural resources must be adequate to assure maintenance of the resource base and to prevent the gradual deterioration of this fundamental segment of our economy. Programs for conservation and development of minerals are being enlarged Public electric power projects which will make up about a fourth of the 30-million-kilowatt total expansion programmed for completion in the next years are going forward. Many of these public developments are multi-purpose hydroelectric projects which also yield other important benefits. Initial development of certain hydro projects which will be required in or more years must also go forward now These various types of defense-related expansion both military and civilian will absorb scarce resources such as steel and copper at a much faster rate than we can expand the supply during the next months or so The meaning of this is simple : In order to accomplish what we can not afford to do without we must give up many of the things that we can afford to do without. It is even more true of than of that we can not have business as usual consumer enjoyments as usual or Government programs and services as usual The demand for vital business expansion means that many nonessential forms of private investment must be deferred. The total of private investment in construction and producers ' equipment which was close to billion dollars in should be held in the neighborhood of to billion dollars in This will cause some hardships and dislocations although we are doing our best to minimize them. But measured against earlier years the general level of private investment even outside of the industrial mobilization base will be relatively high and profitable. The holding back of some less essential investment will be helpful immediately by reducing inflationary pressures ; and helpful in the long run by creating backlogs of opportunity for investment when the security program levels off The American consumer which means all Americans will also have to relinquish some of the enjoyments which would be possible if the cost CHART PRODUCTION OF CONSUMER DURABLE GOODS CONTRASTED WITH FIRST HALF OF Fourth quarter production of major consumer durable goods was sharply below the first half of I960. For the first quarter of the allocations of steel-are only percent of usage in the first half of PERCENT OF FIRST HALF isso- i 4th QUARTER PRODUCT ON WASHING MACHINES VACUUM CLEANERS ELECTRIC RANGES t. j TELEVISION SETS ? RADIOS ' i..... ' ii i PASSENGER CARS ( i, ELECTRIC REFRIGERATORS l-r1 4th QUARTER ^ ^ STEEL ALLOTMENT 1st QUARTER " STEEL ALLOTMENT ' BASE PERIOD FOR CALCULATION OF STEEL ALLOTMENT NOTE : PRODUCTION DATA BASED ON DAILY AVERAGES. BASE PERIOD OUTPUT FOR REPORTED OUTPUT DUE TO ADJUSTMENTS FOR WORK STOPPAGE PASSENGER CARS DIFFERS FROM SOURCES : VARIOUS TRADE ASSOCIATIONS AND NATIONAL PRODUCTION AUTHORITY of security were not so high. The over-all level of consumer supplies particularly food and clothing should remain at least as high as last year Such items as food and clothing do not compete sharply with the defense program or with the industrial build-up. But housing starts which were million in and about million in will have to be reduced to units or less. And to reach even this number will require substantial economies in the use of scarce materials. Less than million new passenger cars will be made compared with million last year. Household appliances radios and television sets must also be cut back from recent levels. ( See chart ) Current production of most metal-using durables will be below the level of the period. But with very high existing stocks of these durables in the hands of consumers supplies will be ample to meet all essential needs II During a national emergency when business and consumers are being called upon for larger sacrifices we can not expect to have normal peacetime Government services. This presents a difficult problem because world conditions since have required us to hold many types of outlays below the needs of an expanding economy and a growing population. For example measured in uniform prices construction expenditures for both highways and natural resources excluding atomic energy were considerably larger in than in any year since. New public construction expenditures for these and other development programs including education health and housing have fallen from about percent of the gross national product in to less than percent in After World War II the American people properly looked to their Federal State and local governments to resume certain programs and services devoted to their well-being. We were able to make substantial progress for some time but in the present defense emergency we have necessarily had to cut down again on many government programs We must continue to hold back on the construction of hospitals. Total construction expenditures for schools although at record levels must be held below the real need. New natural resource development projects including flood control navigation and reclamation projects are being postponed unless they are essential because of electric power or other urgently needed features. Low rent public housing starts in as in will be well below the levels contemplated in recent housing legislation The postponement of these programs is unfortunate. But like deferred business investment it may have some good effects later on. When the defense program levels off the resumption of these programs can help to take up any slack The year ahead and also will pose more difficult problems in the management of the fiscal affairs of the Federal Government than any we have faced since World War II. Total budget expenditures by the end of the fiscal year ending on June will be running at an annual rate between and billion dollars. The security effort together with veterans ' services and benefits and interest on the national debt both in the main resulting from World War II will comprise roughly percent of total expenditures in the fiscal year The remainder reflects persistent efforts to bring other outlays to the lowest point consistent with recognition that a nation of million people can not survive through armament alone For the fiscal year the total of Federal expenditures is estimated at approximately billion dollars and receipts at about billion. While the resulting deficit is undesirable it has not prevented effective economic stabilization during the past months. But with expenditures for security programs rising sharply a dangerously large deficit of close to twice that size is estimated for the fiscal year if there is no additional taxation Even with the additional taxes that I am recommending the deficit will remain large until the security program has passed its peak and tapers off as we hope it can do in about or years. In this period substantial problems will also arise in connection with the management of the national debt and the financing and refinancing operations of the Treasury Rising expenditures and rising deficits add to inflationary pressures The expansion of defense production will cause the spendable incomes of consumers to rise during the year more than civilian supplies. Moreover price and wage movements responsive to the decisions of business and labor could add fuel to the inflationary fires. Ample funds will be available to most businessmen to engage in excessive inventory buying if they should desire to do so. There are large reserves of liquid savings in the hands of consumers and business Looking at the situation as a whole however the essential security program neither imposes excessive strains upon the economy nor makes it impossible to contain inflation. If we realize as fully as possible our productive potential business investment and real consumption while curtailed will still be high except when measured against the last years the highest in our history. Certainly these are not large sacrifices in view of the dangers against which we must protect ourselves. Further if the people as a whole are willing to avoid excesses and extravagances the recent containment of inflation can be made more effective during this year. We contained inflation under more difficult circumstances during World War II although we did not do a good enough job of forestalling postwar inflation. We must learn from past mistakes as well as from past successes The Real Meaning of Economy True economy is desirable at all times. It is imperative during a national emergency. But as shown by the foregoing review of events since true economy means conserving and expanding the economic strength of the Nation as a whole. It can therefore be achieved only by recognizing all the basic factors in that strength and not neglecting any of them When we look at the whole picture we find that true economy embraces two equally important elements : The first is the avoidance of unnecessary outlays ; but the second and equally important is the making of necessary outlays. A nation which spent its resources foolishly would dissipate its strength. But a nation which was too timid or miserly in applying its resources to urgent needs would fail to build up its strength We must exert every effort through business action consumer action and government action to avoid unnecessary outlays. But we can not by this method alone achieve world peace or a highly productive economy The main reason for not spending on the things that we do not need is to afford the things that we do need We must hold defense outlays to the lowest levels consistent with safeguarding our national security. This means constant weeding out of waste. But it would be false economy to cut the defense program below the requirements for our safety Our economic and military aid to free nations banded with us against aggression must be kept under vigilant and continuous review. It must be coupled with assurance that the countries receiving it are doing their full share. But it would be false economy after all our efforts since World War II to help rebuild economic life and maintain political stability in war-damaged countries to reverse the process by weakening the aid program. We must recognize that strength or weakness at any point in the free world adds to strength or weakness at every point. It would not be true economy to spend a dollar for the common defense on one side of the Atlantic when it would contribute more to the common defense if spent on the other side of the Atlantic There has recently been growing appreciation in the United States that the defense programs of the countries of Western Europe should not move so fast as to reduce standards of living below a level consistent with political stability and immunity against internal subversion. Some adjustments are now being made to take account of this fact. But it would not be true economy because some partners in a joint enterprise have not the resources to do all that would be desirable for the strongest partner to relax from doing its best If our own security efforts through their demand upon raw materials and their effect upon world prices are imposing an excessive burden upon other nations there are right and wrong ways to meet this problem. We are lessening the pressures upon prices and raw materials not by relaxing our security program but rather by cutting somewhat into nonessential consumption and investment ; by holding down domestic inflation through an effective anti-inflationary program ; and by making cooperative efforts to share scarce materials and to stabilize international prices. This is the right approach. The proposal to solve the whole problem by drastically cutting the security effort everywhere is false economy because the nub of the problem is to maintain a mutual security program which in total is adequate to the danger confronting us. It would be superficially easy but disastrous to reduce the defense strain by torpedoing the defense program We must cut nonessential spending both private and public so that unnecessary shortages and unnecessary inflation do not imperil the defense effort. But it would be false economy to repress the types of private and public investment which are building up our essential productive power It would be false economy to set revenues at a far lower level than the Nation can well support under current circumstances and then to say that the defense garment must be cut to the revenue cloth. A balanced budget achieved the easy way by sacrificing the defense program and putting the balance of world power in the hands of the Kremlin would be false economy. The sound course in these times is to base outlays upon essential national needs and then obtain the funds to cover these needs by current taxation insofar as possible. But if the only choice is either to run a deficit of limited size and duration in the Federal budget or to run a deficit in our national security effort by far the lesser hazard now is to run a deficit in the budget There is also a superficially easy way and a genuinely sound way to combat inflation. The superficially easy way would be to avoid inflation by reducing the security program below safe levels. The sound way is to achieve and maintain a strong and vigorous anti-inflationary program Top Issues for Policy Action Policies to promote the success of the security program and to ease the burden upon the economy were recommended to the Congress in and and with some important omissions were adopted. We must apply these policies with maximum effectiveness. To do this some legislative changes and additions are now desirable Reaching our objectives for defense strength The military program which I am submitting to the Congress calls for steady increases in military output during the next months and for continuance at a high level for at least an additional months. Meeting these production schedules will require for at least two more years the authority under the Defense Production Act for those controls which promptly channel scarce materials and tools into defense production. I urge the Congress to adhere to the sound policy it followed in the original act of not encumbering it with detailed prescriptions concerning how materials should be distributed. The administering agencies need to exercise flexibility and discretion based upon up-to-the-minute study in order to avoid or remedy hardships upon business and workers whenever this can be done without hurting the defense program Under the present law we are administering a system of priorities and allocations to channel scarce materials into the most essential uses. Stockpiles of strategic materials are being built up. While shortages of materials are bound to cause many inconveniences and some hardships the Controlled Materials Plan operates to reduce these and to promote the more important types of production while reducing the less important The great expansion of productive facilities for defense makes it essential that there be the widest possible distribution of defense business with particular emphasis upon maintenance of free competitive enterprise The Government has for a long time particularly through the leadership of the Department of Commerce assisted small business in playing its significant role in the economy. The Reconstruction Finance Corporation has also been engaged in this effort. These services have now been adapted to the defense effort. In addition the Department of Defense and the mobilization agencies have in a variety of ways promoted the placement of contracts wherever feasible with small businesses. This is important not only to obtain a faster build-up of defense output but also to avoid unnecessary unemployment and distress and to help preserve the competitive vigor of our economy. The Small Defense Plants Administration has recently been established to coordinate Government policies and programs in behalf of small business and to expand the role of small plants in defense and essential civilian production. This part of the Government 's economic program is one of great urgency. It is most important that the Congress make available the necessary funds for the Small Defense Plants Administration Aiding other free nations We must maintain a realistic attitude toward foreign aid. Mindful of the limitations of our own economy we must also be mindful that some other countries are confronted by economic and political strains far more serious than ours. In the final analysis the free world must be made more secure if we are to be secure Our foreign policy objectives require continued provision of both military and economic aid to free nations. Both types of aid are necessary. Our North Atlantic Treaty partners in particular are undertaking heavier burdens whether they rebuild their defenses by buying military equipment from other countries or by cutting civilian production to produce military goods themselves These countries are making great efforts to shoulder these burdens through their own productive efforts. This requires among other things that they have outlets for some of the goods which they can produce and want to exchange for other goods which they need to import. In this connection I again recommend the repeal of Section of the Defense Production Act which restricts our imports of certain goods which the European and other countries have available for export to us on mutually advantageous terms It is necessary to encourage the efforts which underdeveloped countries are making to further their own economic development and to support these efforts by providing as much technical and economic assistance as we can afford and as they can effectively use for that purpose We shall continue to share scarce capital goods by providing priority and other supply assistance for the export of such goods for essential purposes abroad. We shall also continue to participate actively in international ar- rangements to encourage production and equitable distribution of scarce raw materials in the free world. Such measures help to expand the supply of goods and to restrain dangerous inflationary forces Expanding our productive capacity Building up our productive capacity is a many-sided operation. The mainspring of this expansion is private initiative and investment. But the Government has had to exercise important responsibilities. It has had to program and guide expansions in various key industries. This has been effected by materials allocations and by selective aids and inducements such as tax amortization loans loan guarantees and purchase agreements. The authority provided by the Defense Production Act and related legislation to use these aids to expand production has been very valuable and will continue to be necessary A number of public programs play an important role in expanding the total productive capacity of the economy. Roads other transport facilities public power developments and pilot plant research in metals and fuels are illustrations. The Government is equipping and building certain facilities for the production of war materiel and is carrying out a large atomic energy program. To support needed expansion of production certain urgently needed development projects particularly the St. Lawrence seaway and power project should be started now The report of the Materials Policy Commission which I appointed a year ago will be finished shortly and should provide long-range policy guides for increasing and improving supplies of raw materials In general the labor force thus far has proved adequate to meet the needs of increased production and a growing military establishment. But in certain categories of skill and in certain industrial and farm areas shortages exist. Appropriate measures are being taken to encourage training recruitment and the movement of workers when necessary and to promote efficient use of the labor supply by employers. Manpower problems will probably grow more difficult as defense production approaches its maximum level. A serious need has already appeared for additional housing and community facilities and services in defense areas While there are labor shortages in some areas there are other areas where localized but serious unemployment exists particularly in centers of automobile production. Strong efforts are being made to find ways of reducing this unemployment including the placing of defense contracts in labor surplus areas Experience has proved that our basic labor-management statute hampers the maintenance of the sound and healthy labor relations and the uninterrupted production which are so essential to a sustained mobilization effort The law should be promptly revised to accord the fair treatment to both labor and management which is vital to industrial harmony and steady production Farmers are now being asked to produce more than ever before. The " sliding scale " in existing price support legislation has aroused concern in the minds of many farmers who fear that their cooperation in expanding production to meet the present emergency might later result in serious losses to them. The Government 's price support operations obviously should further attainment of production objectives and they should not penalize producers for their full and patriotic cooperation with the agricultural program I therefore recommend that the sliding scale provisions of the present agricultural legislation be repealed for this purpose We need to strengthen the agricultural program by finding a more effective way of supporting the price of perishable farm commodities. One method is by direct payments to farmers. This and other methods are now being studied by the Congress. I hope that the Congress will provide legislation authorizing a sound and workable program for supporting prices of these perishables Price supports in this emergency period must of course continue to be administered in a manner which achieves a proper balance between the goals of adequate production and of economic stabilization. The Secretary of Agriculture and the Director of Price Stabilization will continue to work together toward this end In addition I recommend that the Congress enact legislation to make clear the Government 's policy of encouraging the organization and sound growth of cooperatives. The tax bill which was passed last year included a tax on the unallocated reserves of farmer cooperatives. This should be modified in such a way that newly-organized cooperatives will not be subject to it until they have had a limited period of years in which to establish themselves. Farmers are marketing their products and purchasing their supplies through more than cooperatives with an estimated membership of more than * /2 million. Their organization in this form of business has had a healthy effect on the rural economy and it is especially important to encourage this form of self-help when farmers are being asked to do a record job of production Supporting civilian strength Faced with the necessity of maintaining a large national security program for an indefinitely long period we should not lose sight of the importance of human productiveness and morale. These depend upon adequate supplies of food shelter and clothing and adequate education health services and social security. However for the next year or so while the defense program is placing such heavy demands upon materials and the labor force we must recognize that only limited progress can be made in this direction Some increase in food and clothing can be achieved without adding to the demand for scarce materials. On the other hand many types of civilian metal-using output will have to be curtailed further because of competing higher priority uses for certain metals notably copper and steel. While housing also must be curtailed a sufficient quantity should be built this year to take care of the most essential needs In education health and social security programs we must continue to be highly selective deferring improvements and extensions not clearly necessary now in support of the total defense effort. Education of children however can not be postponed nor should health standards be allowed to fall. I recommend a program of general Federal aid to help meet teaching and other school operating costs and a more adequate program of Federal aid for school construction and operation in critical defense areas To meet urgent needs in the health field programs for Federal aid to medical education and the strengthening of local public health services should be enacted promptly. I have recently appointed a Commission on the Health Needs of the Nation composed of professional and lay persons which will make an objective study of vital health problems including the provision of adequate health care to all our people at prices they can afford to pay Certain extensions and changes in the old-age and survivors insurance program in line with longer-range objectives would if undertaken promptly yield the additional advantage of helping those groups who have been hit hardest by past inflation. Raising the level of benefit payments is especially desirable and other improvements should include raising the taxable wage base extending the coverage to farmers and certain other groups and providing for permanent and total disability To provide more adequate protection against unemployment I recommend the enactment of legislation to strengthen the present Federal-State unemployment insurance system along the lines suggested in my message to the Congress on April Legislation for this purpose is now pending before the Congress providing specifically for extension of coverage to additional workers establishment of nation-wide minimum levels for amounts and duration of unemployment benefits establishment of adequate methods to assure payment of benefits to workers who move from one State to another and improvements in administration of the system Controlling inflation In determining the national economic policies necessary to maintain stability in the economy in the coming year the basic fact to take into consideration is that the progress of the security program will involve a steady increase in the requirements of the Government for goods and services The increase will bring Government demand at the end of the year to a level billion dollars higher than the current annual rate of Government purchases for this purpose and will entail a corresponding increase in the amount of labor materials and other productive resources diverted from the civilian economy to the security program. At the same time the security program will place large additional buying power in the hands of businessmen and consumers Consumer spending is the most uncertain factor determining the general inflationary outlook for While it is possible to make a reasonably satisfactory estimate of the volume of new business investment in plant and equipment this year since it will be limited by the allocation of scarce materials there is no certainty at all in any estimate of consumer spending For the last three quarters of consumers have voluntarily elected to buy at a level no higher in total physical units than in the period before the initial attack in Korea. Instead they have added to their personal saving much of the large increases which have taken place since that time in their income after taxes The exceptionally high rate of personal saving has not been due to any general lack of goods available to consumers. Even in the case of durable goods which have been cut back in production by allocation orders such as automobiles and major household appliances no market pressure has been noticed since the first quarter of Textiles and some other types of soft goods have been produced at a rate well below capacity not on account of any shortage of labor or materials but because consumer demand has fallen off in many lines. Manufacturers and retailers have been struggling with overlarge inventories which in many cases have not yet been brought down to the levels they desire It is impossible to foresee how long this extraordinarily high level of personal saving will continue. It is not even certain that it may not be raised. But national economic policy may safely be based upon these assumptions : the progress of the security program will bring an increase in personal incomes and enlarge the potential market demand of consumers ; the longer consumers elect to save rather than to buy goods the larger will become the accumulated fund of liquid assets ; and the fund of liquid assets when coupled with the higher current income of consumers will add greatly to the potential consumer demand and may increasingly tend to turn potential demand into abnormally active buying This is a precarious situation and any day some combination of events could cause consumers to reverse the prudent attitude of recent months It is essential that we maintain and perfect the policies which will effectively curb such an inflationary outburst The effective policies open to us for use if private demand begins again to expand rapidly are those which enlarge output those which limit the size of demand itself and those which prevent surging demand from causing price increases. Since consumer output can not be increased very much because labor and materials must be diverted to defense-related production primary reliance must be upon those measures which limit demand or restrain its effect upon prices. Taxation by a very direct process reduces disposable income. An increase in voluntary saving reduces spending. Restrictive credit policy limits the expansion of business and consumer buying. Allocation and limitation orders prevent businessmen from piling up inventories again and from stepping up their investment plans in an effort to exploit the larger markets they envisage when there is a great market boom. Price and wage controls are directed both to restraining income increases and to holding the price line against unavoidable increases in demand Requirements for additional taxation. Adequate taxation is essential both to assure a sound fiscal position and to maintain economic stability If the added Government spending for the defense program is not to lead to price inflation private spending by consumers and business must be held in check. Taxation pays for the Government spending and at the same time reduces funds available for private spending Three major tax laws have been enacted during the past months They have increased the annual yield of the Federal tax system by about billion dollars or approximately by one-third. This is a good record But it falls short of the amount of additional revenue needed Early last year I asked for a minimum tax program to yield billion dollars or more. The bill enacted by the Congress came late in the calendar year added only about one-half of this amount and included a number of provisions which lost the Government revenue and reduced the equity of the tax system. A budget deficit of about billion dollars is expected for the current fiscal year ending June This is expected to be followed by a budget deficit approaching twice this size for the fiscal year unless further vigorous action to raise taxes is taken very soon In view of this fiscal outlook I urgently recommend that the Congress as a minimum provide additional revenues in the amount by which last year 's legislation fell short of my recommendations. This can be achieved by eliminating loopholes and special privileges and by some tax rate increases While new tax legislation along these lines could scarcely affect the deficit for the current fiscal year and would not restore a balanced budget in the fiscal year it would make a major contribution to the Government 's budgetary position and to the stabilization program. The additional tax revenue will help to minimize borrowing by the Government from the banks Borrowing from banks more than borrowing from any other source tends to enlarge the spending stream and thus to increase inflationary pressures With the tax system strengthened as I recommend there should be sufficient revenue under the security program now planned to cover fully the Government 's expenditures after the peak of the defense build-up has been passed and defense expenditures have been adjusted downward. It is important that we return as quickly as possible during the period of defense mobilization to a current pay-as-we-go basis for Government financing Saving. If we are to hold down private spending to the level of available supply while the national security programs are expanding it is necessary also to promote a high level of saving. Dollars of income which are not spent by consumers or businesses do not add to inflationary demand During most of personal saving was at an unusually high rate Relatively stable prices encouraged increased saving and increased saving helped to stabilize prices. We must continue to maintain conditions which will favor both saving and stable prices Increasing the investment of private savings in Government securities will reduce the need for the Government to borrow from banks for the purpose of refunding maturing security issues and financing deficits. Buying United States savings bonds and other Government securities is a good method of saving and it is also a good method of supplying the Government 's borrowing requirements in a noninflationary manner. Holders of maturing Series E savings bonds now have the privilege of maintaining their investment in these bonds for another years during which the bonds will continue to earn interest at the same over-all rate. The efforts of the Treasury and other Government agencies will continue to be directed toward encouraging individuals to buy and hold savings bonds and other Government securities Credit control. Since private borrowing can augment the spending power of individuals and businesses and thus add funds to the aggregate spending stream credit control is also being used to help stabilize the economy. This type of control can not be used indiscriminately since credit plays a vital role in the functioning and growth of the economy especially now when rapid expansion in certain vital sectors of the economy is necessary Periodic reviews are being made at my request of the policies of the Government lending agencies to make certain that they promote the objectives of the defense effort by restraining less essential lending. The Voluntary Credit Restraint Program which operates under the sponsorship of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System continues to be helpful in discouraging loans for less essential purposes although continuous care needs to be exercised not to discourage activities important for a strong defense economy Selective credit controls are particularly useful under current conditions because they reduce borrowing and spending for some of the less necessary kinds of goods particularly those which compete for scarce materials. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System is using its powers under the Defense Production Act to limit borrowing for the purchase of durable consumers ' goods and new housing. The Congress last year reduced the authority to control these forms of credit. I recommend restoration of full administrative discretion in setting these credit terms During the months ahead we may face considerable pressure for excessive expansion of bank credit. I repeat my earlier recommendations that the powers of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to impose reserve requirements be enlarged A related problem is control of margins for trading on commodity ex- changes. The Congress has not acted upon the recommendation that the Secretary of Agriculture be authorized to regulate margins in order to head off excessive speculative trading on the commodity exchanges Fortunately we have had no runaway commodity markets recently but it is desirable to grant this authority in advance of any such situation Price control. The relative stability of prices during most of was encouraging. But this does not mean that we can now afford to relax price controls. In many important areas prices are straining at the ceilings In others softness exists which can not be counted on to persist for long Greater pressures loom ahead. At this stage of the mobilization program it is more prudent to strengthen controls than to weaken them We must continue the effort to hold the price line. Prices and profits are in general high enough to provide ample incentives to producers and to permit considerable absorption of cost increases. The Office of Price Stabilization has made great progress during the past year toward a balanced price structure which can be held firmly. It is developing simple enforceable regulations to cover individual industries and commodities But if we are to hold the price line adequate legislative authority must be granted. When the Defense Production Act was renewed last summer the power to control prices instead of being strengthened was seriously weakened One weakening amendment permits any producer or seller of services regardless of his need to pass on all increases in all costs incurred from the first half of to July Another weakening amendment requires the maintenance of customary percentage margins for distributors thus virtually guaranteeing that every dollar in cost increase will become much more than a dollar in the price paid by the consumer Still another weakening amendment forbids the establishment of slaughtering quotas. Slaughtering quotas were a strong bulwark of the beef ceilings by providing a fair distribution of the available supply of cattle among slaughterers and areas thus helping to avoid black markets in meat. Last fall this amendment upset the distribution pattern forced very high cattle prices and endangered the continuance of the beef ceilings. Temporarily the situation has improved but we can not afford to take another chance To achieve our stabilization objectives these defects in price control legislation should be corrected and the law should be strengthened when it is extended. We can not afford to gamble further with inflation Rent control. Although rent controls cover only a part of the total rental housing in the country they are of great importance in stabilizing rents in many major industrial areas and should be continued. Vigorous use is being made of the authority provided last July by the Congress to reinstitute rent controls where necessary in critical defense housing areas including areas around military posts. Thus far full rent control has been or is about to be reimposed in of these areas and will be reimposed in other areas as needed Wage stabilization. Wage stabilization like price control cuts the inflationary spiral and limits the rise of prices and costs and should be continued It also helps to prevent buying power from rising too far above the available supply of civilian goods. The policies of the Wage Stabilization Board are designed to put a brake upon excessive wage adjustments while at the same time recognizing that some adjustments in a free and dynamic economy are essential from the viewpoint both of equity and of incentives. Adjustments to take account of increases in the cost of living are a matter of simple equity because price inflation is not a fair way to impose the burden of national defense. The fair way to impose the burden of national defense is by taxation and other restraints which can be equitably imposed. Wage adjustments to allow for increases in productivity if carefully limited and firmly administered can provide incentives which outweigh any possible inflationary effect. There are a few other specialized problems with which the Wage Stabilization Board must deal To avoid inflation we must maintain a firm price policy and a firm wage policy throughout the peak of the defense effort and we must maintain a fair relationship between the two Equality of sacrifice Where sacrifices are necessary and many are they must be equitably imposed so as not to inflict public hardship in order to support private gain. That is a main purpose of a strong anti-inflation program. Special attention is also being directed toward the problems of small business and those who are unemployed in local areas so that a limited segment of the population shall not be made to bear an excessive part of the burden of national defense The year is not going to be an easy year for the economy. It is going to be a year of strain. We must expect this and prepare to bear some inconveniences and hardships. For most of us the hardships will be minor. There will be plenty of food and other essential commodities and the highest civilian employment in our history. As the economy becomes adjusted to the new conditions and grows in size and especially when defense expenditures decline we may confidently look forward to the relaxation and removal of many kinds of controls and restrictions. In the meantime all of us must join in the vast effort to safeguard our national security Summary of Legislative Recommendations I summarize below the legislative recommendations contained in this Economic Report to promote the defense effort strengthen the economy and maintain economic stability Renew the Defense Production Act for two more years and strengthen its provisions particularly those relating to production expansion and to the control of prices and credit Provide continued military and economic aid to free nations ; and as a step toward removing ^ trade barriers repeal Section of the Defense Production Act which restricts our imports of certain goods which European and other countries could export to us on mutually advantageous terms Aid small business by providing the necessary funds for the Small Defense Plants Administration Provide for certain urgently needed development projects particularly the St. Lawrence seaway and power project Provide for the construction of needed housing and community facilities in defense areas Revise the basic legislation concerning labor-management relations so that it will not hamper sound and healthy labor relations and uninterrupted production Repeal the sliding scale provisions in existing agricultural price support legislation ; provide a workable support program for perishable commodities ; and modify the tax on unallocated reserves of farmer cooperatives Provide at least enough additional revenues to reach the revenue goal proposed last year by eliminating loopholes and special privileges and by tax rate increases Provide powers to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to impose additional bank reserve requirements ; and provide authority to control margins for trading on commodity exchanges Raise the level of benefit payments and make other improvements in our system of old-age and survivors insurance ; and strengthen the Federal-State unemployment insurance system Authorize Federal aid to help meet school operating costs and increase aid for school construction and operation in critical defense areas Authorize Federal aid to assist medical education and provide for strengthening local public health services Summary of Economic Developments in Government outlays for national security programs almost doubled during In the fourth quarter these outlays were running at an annual rate of billion dollars compared * with billion a year earlier. They represented percent of the total output of goods and services compared with percent at the end of The impact was much greater in some industries. Currently more than a quarter of the output of the metalworking and construction industries is being taken for defense Production of goods and services ( gross national product in prices ) was about billion dollars in or percent higher than the output of about billion dollars. ( See chart ) In the fourth quarter of total production reached an annual rate of about billion dollars a gain of percent over total output in the fourth quarter of The bulk of the increase took place during the first half of ; in the second half total output was practically stable Industrial production fluctuated within a narrow range through most of In December it was at the same level as a year earlier and percent higher than in December Defense and defense-supporting activities continued to increase. The output of consumer goods declined because of materials cutbacks and sagging demand Agricultural production despite adverse weather developments in the fall was near the previous record year. Average civilian food consumption was slightly above the pre-Korean level while we met the food requirements of a,n expanded military force Employment of civilians at the end of was million the same as the average level for the year. This was about million higher than in although the civilian labor force was less because of the rapid increase in the armed forces Nonagricultural employment averaged million and was 1J/2 million higher than in The largest increases were in the industries associated directly or indirectly with defense production which now engage 5J/2 million persons compared with million at the outbreak of hostilities in Korea Agricultural employment continued its long-run decline amounting in to about million or less than in The workweek which had averaged more than hours in manufacturing industries in the last half of dropped slightly during the first half of and averaged almost 40J/2 hours during the second half. The workweek expanded in defense industries while it declined somewhat in the consumer goods industries Unemployment decreased from million persons or percent of the civilian labor force at the end of to million or about percent at the close of However the impact of materials shortages and sagging demand for textiles and other consumer goods has increased unemployment in a number of areas Work stoppages resulted in less loss of man-days of labor than in any comparable postwar period. Less than one-fourth of percent of total working time was lost by strikes Prices were relatively stable during most of in sharp contrast to the violent waves of general price increases which marked the second half of CHART ECONOMIC INDICATORS CHANGES FROM TO PERCE NTAGE CHANGE PERCENTAGE CHANGE EMPLOYMENT ^ P7773 WZ \ yy/ ; V77 * " PRODUCTION S B EQUIPMENT ( NONFARM ) RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION INCOME TAX PRICFS ~ ! ij n * i ALL COMMODITIES FARM PRODUCTS SOURCE : APPENDIX B i FOODS fm W INDUSTRIAL ALL ( OTHER THAN FARM ITEMS PRODUCTS AND FOODS ) FOOD | i r ~ and which were quieted after the imposition of the general price and wage freeze late in January Wholesale prices which had advanced almost percent between the outbreak of the Korean aggression and the general freeze then declined percent by the end of the year. The drops took place mainly in some farm commodities textiles hides and leather and fats and oils Consumers ' prices which had risen percent from the Korean aggression to the imposition of general price controls continued to creep upward advancing another percent between February and November The largest increases have occurred where controls under the law could be imposed only partially or not at all Wages rose during although at a much lower rate than in the second half of Wages and salaries were at an annual rate of billion dollars in the fourth quarter of contrasted with billion a year earlier. The rise was greater in the durable goods industries than in nondurables. Average weekly earnings advanced proportionately less than the increase in hourly earnings because of the decline in working hours. In manufacturing average weekly earnings rose from $ in November to $ in November a rise of percent Corporate profits before taxes in were the highest on record reaching an estimated billion dollars. The previous peak was billion reached in However because of lower sales and prices in many industries profits declined substantially after the first quarter Corporate profits after taxes were much lower in than in because of the higher tax rates. In they were an estimated billion dollars compared with billion in the peak year Unincorporated business and professional incomes for the year were billion dollars compared with billion in After rising sharply in the first quarter of the year they declined substantially until the fourth quarter when it is estimated that they again rose Farm income in was billion dollars compared with billion in It rose slowly throughout the year reaching a level of billion in the final quarter billion higher than the fourth quarter of Personal income in the aggregate kept growing in although at a slower rate than in For the year as a whole it was billion dollars compared with billion in In the fourth quarter personal income was at an annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion a year earlier. Despite increased personal tax liabilities spendable personal income was percent above its pre-Korea level in the fourth quarter of When the figures are adjusted for price changes however total spendable income in did not regain late levels until after midyear Personal consumption expenditures were billion dollars in compared with billion in They dropped sharply after the first quarter peak and then rose gradually to an annual rate of billion in the fourth quarter or billion higher than a year earlier. Adjusted for price changes however the volume of consumer purchases in the second half of was about percent lower than in the second half of Consumer supplies in the main were extraordinarily abundant. About million new houses were built. About million automobiles were assembled and about 12J/2 million radios and more than million television sets were produced. Food consumption was above the average Clothing supplies exceeded the demand Personal saving the difference between disposable income and expenditures bounded upward from percent of income in the first quarter of to a rate above percent for the rest of the year. This high rate of saving was almost twice the pre-Korean postwar average. In personal net saving was billion dollars contrasted with billion in In the fourth quarter of the annual rate was billion dollars Domestic investment was higher in than in any previous year the total being billion dollars contrasted with billion in Mainly because of the bulging of new inventories in the first half of the year the rate of growth was uneven. Gross private domestic investment accounted for percent of total national output or slightly more than in Expenditures on nonfarm plant and equipment grew throughout with increasing emphasis on programs for urgently needed expansion in key industries. These expenditures totaled billion dollars in compared with billion in More new construction was put in place in than in any previous year The total for was billion dollars compared with billion for But starting in September the total rate dropped below that of the comparable month in with the principal reductions occurring in commercial and recreational construction. The volume of public construction exceeded by nearly billion dollars as new defense and defense-related projects more than offset reductions principally in highways and conservation and development projects. Inventories were accumulated by manufacturers and distributors in at the highest rate on record billion dollars. The annual rate reached a peak of billion in the second quarter as consumer buying dropped sharply ; it dropped to billion in the fourth quarter with retailers once again achieving a more comfortable inventories-sales position Corporations financed expansion programs during without great difficulty. A smaller proportion about percent of total funds used came from internal sources than in recent years and a larger proportion came from outside sources. New stock and bond issues totaled almost percent higher than in with the proportion of bonds relatively high Government financial aids stimulated expansion in selected areas but contributed only a small fraction of total funds used Private credit expanded at a much slower rate in than in Nonbusiness loans of commercial banks including their consumer and mortgage loans increased by about billion dollars in compared with billion the year before. Such loans totaled billion dollars at the end of As a result of the financial needs of defense-supporting activities commercial and industrial loans by banks grew almost as rapidly as in The privately-held money supply expanded nearly billion dollars in as a whole. It declined sharply in the first quarter as heavy tax payments were made and then grew steadily in the last three quarters of the year International transactions of the United States during saw the expansion in exports of goods and services which reached a peacetime record of more than billion dollars exceed the expansion in imports. Imports also reached a new high despite a slump in commodity imports in the second and third quarters. Exports of semi-finished and finished products increased in quantity as well as price. The export surplus which had fallen to an annual rate of billion dollars in the second half of increased to a rate of about billion in the second half of Foreign aid extended during increased by much less than the export surplus and the gold and dollar outflow was reversed. Exports of private capital dropped below their level. United States private investors continued to encounter obstacles to investment abroad In other free nations total industrial production money incomes and prices rose in compared with but agricultural production showed little change from the preceding crop year. The balance of payments positions of some countries notably the United Kingdom and France became worse during the year and the general economic situation deteriorated in a number of countries. The worldwide rise in prices set off by the Korean hostilities slowed up or was partly reversed in most countries during the first half of although in many it was resumed during the second half of the year Government finances involved for the Federal Government a shift from a sizable surplus to a substantial deficit during the course of calendar year For the year as a whole Federal expenditures were billion dollars and net budget receipts were billion. This left a calendar year budget deficit of about 3/s billion dollars billion more than in Expenditures for the major national security programs totaled billion dollars. On a " cash " basis which includes the cash receipts of the social security and other trust funds a surplus in the first half of and a deficit in the second half added up to a cash surplus of billion for the year as a whole In its management of the public debt the Treasury not only did some new borrowing but also refinanced a substantial portion of the outstanding debt during the year. Of importance in keeping the debt outside the banking system and hence minimizing its inflationary potential was the exchange of billion dollars worth of marketable long-term bonds for nonmarketables and the legislative extension of the interest-bearing period for Series E bonds State and local governments with revenues increasing slightly more than expenditures since showed a deficit of million dollars in a reduction of million from HARRY S. TRUMAN JANUARY The Annual Economic Review January A Report to the President By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D. C. January The PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits a report the Annual Economic Review : January in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ' ./ Chairman ( Contents Page I. THE ECONOMIC STRATEGY OF THE DEFENSE PROGRAM II. DETAILED DEVELOPMENTS DURING The basic security build-up Production and employment Production Employment Prices wages and profits Prices Wages Profits Credit and money supply Credit Money supply The flow of goods and purchasing power Personal income consumption expenditures and saving Investment and finance International transactions Government fiscal operations III. CENTRAL PROBLEMS FOR Advancing the security build-up The proposed build-up Speed of the build-up Allocating scarce materials The availability of metals Major required adjustments Major problems in materials allocation Increasing production Production and inflation Factors limiting increase of total production Increasing the supply of raw materials Enlarging the labor supply Guiding investment Increasing agricultural production Over-all production objective for Minimizing business dislocation Minimizing local unemployment and geographical dislocations ' Utilization of small business III. CENTRAL PROBLEMS FOR Continued Supplying consumer needs Outlook for consumer goods Housing Essential public services Helping to strengthen other free nations Western European developments and their appraisal. The economically underdeveloped countries Sharing of scarce commodities World aspects of inflation and stabilization Financing the Government program Savings through budget economies Tax legislation of and Nature of the financing problem aheacl State and local government fiscal policies Maintaining economic stability Outlook for inflationary pressures Relationship among stabilization measures Credit policy Separate note by Mr. Clark upon monetary and credit policy Price control Wage stabilization The problem of longer-range stability APPENDIXES A. Statistical tables relating to the Nation 's Economic Budget. B. Statistical tables relating to employment production and purchasing power INDEX page I. The Economic Strategy of the Defense Program T HE United States has undertaken an economic strategy and supported it with a program to achieve national security and that degree of general well-being essential to security throughout a dangerous period of indefinite duration. We must be prepared either for a sudden shift to total war if others force the issue or for a gradual transition to the more peaceful conditions for which we strive. Meanwhile this generation must deal with something new in American experience a prolonged neitherpeace-nor-war existence in which this Nation has a major responsibility for world leadership National economic policies both private and public must serve our ultimate goals of security peace and a sound economy. But we need to view in broad perspective the basic purposes of current economic policy before turning to a more detailed review of the objectives and problems of and policy issues raised thereby The basic purposes of economic policy listed in the next few pages are not new in January Our approach to these purposes in the past however too often has been of a piece-meal character with inadequate attention to the meaning of the whole pattern of our national effort Under current conditions economic policy must cope with more unpredictable factors than would beset the country in either a total war or a completely peaceful situation. But the unavoidable presence of many uncertainties does not mean that all policy actions should be kept fluid. True some policies must be kept more flexible than would be necessary under other circumstances. Nonetheless we must seek a course of policy which is sufficiently far-sighted and firm to elicit general understanding and support The great effort now under way clusters around these central purposes toward which the operations of the whole mobilization effort are being vigorously directed : ( ) A clear definition and prompt execution of the basic defense program Since the aggregate demand for resources is expected greatly to exceed their supply achievement of the goals of national economic policy requires that resources be allocated and used as efficiently as possible. If this is to be accomplished it is of major importance that the definition of the military program whatever its substance be as clear and firm as feasible Otherwise with such a considerable portion of the.total economic effort going to basic defense it would be virtually impossible to keep the other components of the effort consistent with the military program and among themselves. It would be impossible to determine the portion of resources that would be available for the expansion of basic productive facilities or to design policies needed to restrict private consumption and less essential private and public investment From the viewpoint of general economic policy the speed of the military build-up is of similar interest. If the rest of the economy is to keep in step with basic defense and serve it properly it is necessary both to know what the schedule of the defense program is and to achieve the goal on schedule In thus stressing the need for clearly defining the military program and achieving it on schedule the Council is passing no judgment on the defense program as such. The Council has the responsibility of seeking to throw ligh * on the implications for the economy of all Government programs including the defense program. There is always the necessity of appraising the economic costs of different programs and of developing the information and analysis that will make it possible for the ultimate decisions to reflect a correct balancing of costs against expected benefits. However the Council does not claim any special competence to make recommendations regarding the size composition or timing of the basic defense program that may be required by the international situation except in the event that the program became so large that there was real doubt about the adequacy of the Nation 's economic resources to meet it. The program for this emergency promising at the most to involve about half the relative burden shouldered at thfe peak of World War II has not in the Council 's judgment reached that size ( ) Expansion of output General economic growth is one of our primary objectives in peacetime It has properly been regarded as the main avenue to an increasing abun- ^ dance more generally enjoyed throughout the Nation. For this growth we have relied mainly upon the enterprise of producers coupled with the voluntary expression of popular wants In the early stages of a defense emergency when our resources are clearly not adequate to support all types of expansion at once the emphasis upon economic growth must be selective. Currently this involves concentration upon munitions production basic materials-providing and energyproducing industries such as agriculture steel aluminum electric power and oil and such basic economic services as our transportation system. To achieve this concentration and to restrain types of expansion which would interfere with it requires public policies for the guidance of production to which the Nation would not resort in more normal times However the rapid expansion of these vital types of production has desirable consequences besides serving our immediate defense needs. The capacity now being built up would go a long way toward meeting the needs of full mobilization should events suddenly thrust that upon us. Moreover productive growth in these fields ( except munitions ) will provide a base for further growth in civilian supplies and in civilian-serving industries later on even if defense outlays remain high. As this process continues it hastens the time when the relative portions of defense and nondefense output can move closer toward their pre-emergency patterns. Thus the expansion programs now under way if skillfully adjusted and timed will in the longer run ease the relative burden and the relative inflationary pressures of the defense program Provided that the expansion of output is conducted on this balanced basis it can make a highly important contribution toward carrying whatever burdens the Nation may have to bear. Toward this end we should draw fully upon our still incompletely utilized resources of technology manpower and managerial skills ( ) The maintenance of a strong civilian economy A strong civilian economy is a foundation of military power. We must maintain civilian strength first with respect to private consumption. Much has been said about " guns and butter. " No one in a responsible position has claimed that we can have as much " butter " while the basic defense program grows as we could have if our supply of " guns " were not being increased The defense program during the coming year will affect many civilian durable commodities. The cutbacks will be real. Unless demand in particular markets behaves in an unexpected fashion some shortages as measured by market demand also are to be expected. But there is every reason to believe that Americans will continue to have enough " butter " in terms of ordinary standards of consumer well-being if the distribution of goods and services is not badly distorted by further inflation. There will be adequate civilian supplies to maintain the indispensable public support upon which execution of the defense program depends if stabilization is effective and if the people and the Government join in a clear understanding of the nature of the program and its urgency But " guns and butter " is deficient terminology. It is much too categorical in its assumption of a sharp line between the factors that are essential for security and those that are not. In a race which promises to be more a marathon than a sprint good diets health shelter education recreation and the good morale that depends upon all of these are essential for endurance in our national security effort. Striking a balance between our needs in these respects and for primary defense is a vital problem Striking this balance also requires a judicious comparison of services rendered through the private economy and those rendered by government. Undoubtedly at all levels of government there are peacetime pro- grams which must be cut. True economy and efficiency in public operations desirable at all times is imperative at a time when our resources face a persisting strain and when public financial burdens are unavoidably heavy. Yet there can be no general presumption that public outlays are wasteful or nonessential compared with private outlays. The building of a highway or a school may be far more essential to the conservation and advancement of our national strength than the building of a motion picture house or the production of luxuries. In an emergency a sense of priority is highly important and while many desirable public services need to be restrained until we can afford more of them it would be false economy to strip them excessively in order to preserve materials and manpower for nonessential or wasteful private investment and consumption We should also seek to preserve civilian strength by avoiding unnecessary inequities and dislocations. The very essence of a rapid shift toward defense production is a substantial reallocation of economic resources. Some consequent dislocations are unavoidable. But it is an important objective of economic policy to avoid unnecessary dislocations and to minimize the inequities among different producer and income groups. The worst potential inequities of course are those that would arise from serious inflation Beyond this however it is highly desirable to minimize the dislocation of both employment and enterprise resulting from materials curtailment with particular attention to the problems of small business ( ) Maintenance of economic stability The curbing of inflation is necessary to facilitate the defense production program to prevent inequities to maintain public support for the defense effort by moderating conflicts among economic groups to minimize the financial burden of defense and to avoid unnecessary burdens upon our allies. Consequently the prevention of inflation is a vital element in the success of all our efforts For this very reason it is important to recognize that the problem of inflation does not exist in isolation and that stabilization measures can not be effectively administered in a vacuum. Stabilization in large measure is a means to other ends. Stabilization policies are constantly being tested not only by their immediate effect in reducing inflationary pressures but also by their longer-range effect upon production and the utilization of our resources. Stabilization policies which are desirable for a presumably long period of partial mobilization are different from those which would be necessary in the more acute situation of total war. The programs now under way are intended to reconcile the application of controls adequate to the current situation with allowance of sufficient play in the workings of our enterprise system for it to function more productively and more efficiently year by year ( ) Integrating our efforts with those of our allies In all of its economic endeavors the United States needs to strive for a free-world-wide perspective. This is not only a matter of calculated selfinterest but is dictated by our basic concern for improving the economic and social underpinnings of democratic institutions throughout the world As a logical consequence of processing and consuming a major share of the free world 's resources the United States must make available to others some of its resources including its productive techniques and skills ( ) Unity of programs and policies There is no question that this Nation has the over-all resources to do the job if it uses them wisely. In governmental operations under emergency conditions the basic principles to guide the wise use of resources are similar in some respects to those in a business organization. A business feels that it is using its resources well when ft appraises accurately the whole situation with which it has to deal decides upon its objectives and determines how much of its total resources it can afford to allot to various purposes. From the viewpoint of the economist the same criteria should be applied to the immense array of complex undertakings which the Government is now performing in the mobilization effort. It would be no answer to say that the job is too big and difficult to be brought within any such vigilance. The very size of the job and its impact upon the whole Nation make the cost of avoidable inconsistencies or mistakes beyond the limit of what we can afford There are necessary limitations in this matter arising from the very nature of our system and from the fact that we are not now engaged in a total war. Confidence can not be placed safely in any overrefined or overdeveloped " master planning " concept which seeks to blueprint every detail and to cover every contingency. The capacity and desire to think for ourselves is one of our greatest assets. Nonetheless it is of the essence in defense mobilization that the decisions made at various points within the Government be interrelated. Thus if the defense program proper is not reasonably firm and clear the civilian programs are left in the dark. For example a specialized agency may best determine how much housing or schools the localities need. But while supplying these needs in full would be desirable under other circumstances the specialized agency needs guidance when a defense program and an industrial expansion program must be given some priority because of the pressure of large total demands upon limited total supplies The Council has called this necessary process during the current emergency " programming. " In our Midyear Economic Review last July we broke down this " programming " process into four main parts : ( ) The clear definition of major goals military international industrial and civilian and continuous testing of their feasibility one against the other to keep them in balance. The desired balance of course may change with changes in the international situation ( ) A continuing determination of the relative part to be played in achieving these goals through the expansion of some supplies on the one hand and the reduction of some demand on the other. This means an integration of all major economic policies toward a common purpose ( ) A continuous scheduling and timing of specific major program objectives ( ) A reasonably complete and continuous synthesis or inventory at one central point of all the vitally important facts about the progress of the whole effort so that those concerned with policy may have immediate access to what is happening as a guide to what needs to be done With all the sizable gains which have been made the Council believes that for ensuing stages of the mobilization effort the " programming " process should be further advanced. As the impact of the defense effort upon the economy increases the importance of over-all policy integration will increase correspondingly ( ) The enlistment of public support In a democratic nation particularly during a defense emergency one can not draw a sharp line between the exertions of the government and the exertions of the people whose government it is. What the Federal Government does is only a fractional part of our total national effort ; most of the planning and work are carried forward by industry agriculture labor and the other major elements in our enterprise system The great danger that we face in the long run is not an inadequacy of our combined private and public resources. The great danger is rather that faced with problems so different from any confronting us before we might get an admixture of private and public action not best suited to our native genius and not compatible with advancing the strength of our free institutions. The emergency indeed requires that the Government do more things than in normal peacetime and influence the economy in more ways But this fact does not diminish the force of the proposition that the Government should do only what is essential and what others can not do as well But whatever may evolve as a proper dividing line between private action and public action the scope of public action will remain large during the emergency. Consequently the sharing of responsibility for public action should be upon a broader base than in normal peacetime While progress in this direction has been made during the past year the Nation has not yet found an adequate formula for welding together the brains and experience of our enterprise system with that of our public service in dealing with problems at the national level. This is not simply a matter of recruiting people from private enterprise into government jobs although that too is important. The leadership of our great economic groups while functioning as such must be brought into a sympathetic relationship to some of the great decisions of national economic policy It is no answer to this need to recite the old cliche about avoiding conflicts of interest. The conflicts of interest are there whether we see them or not and the only question is whether they are allowed to mount to the point where they could imperil our security and impair our whole economy or whether some way can be found to reduce these conflicts to manageable proportions. And the only way to reduce such conflicts in a democracy is for people to find ways of working together The active and integral participation by major group leaders in the shaping of national economic policy through the channels of their organizations carries a keener sense of active responsibility for the defense effort to great numbers of our people. In addition there is need for efforts to increase the effectiveness of broad-scale citizen participation in the over-all defense program through local and regional activities. The success of these attempts will depend heavily upon the extent to which those at the center of the effort are able to convey to the Nation at large a comprehensive picture of national policies and problems These problems arise out of the essential nature of our economic system a system in which freedom and flexibility are held precious ; a system in which command can never take the place of assent ; but a system in which nonetheless group interests have become so strong that their apathy or defiance could imperil the whole national effort Many steps have been taken during the past year to face up to this problem of unity as it arises out of the relationship between a free people a free enterprise system and a free government in a time of emergency No one would claim that the solutions thus far attempted have yet been entirely satisfactory. But in this connection the National Advisory Board on Mobilization Policy represents a prime vehicle and a great forward step This Board has made a good beginning and may become even more effective with further improved staffing and agenda But this problem can not be solved simply by the creation of more machinery ; it requires that the will to solve it exist in the minds and hearts of men both inside government and outside government. It depends upon the common consciousness that we are confronted by world dangers which make the things that can hold us together infinitely more important than those that might tear us apart II. Detailed Developments During TIKE March in the old adage the economic year came in a ^ lion and went out a lamb. The inflation that raged at the beginning of was replaced near the end of the first quarter by stability of such persistence that the causes and probable duration of " the lull " became a foremost topic of speculation among economists and businessmen Broadly speaking the dominant trends of the year were the rise in Government buying for the security program and the change in the pace of consumer buying which surged to a crest in the first quarter then abated and remained relatively stable during the rest of the year. In the first months of private demand for goods reinforced an ascending Government demand to bring inflation ; later it counteracted an expanding Government demand to help bring stability The bad news from Korea in the first weeks following the intervention by China caused consumers to continue buying at a high rate after the close of the Christmas season. Though retail sales dropped from billion dollars in December to billion in January and to billion in February this was less than the usual seasonal decline At seasonally adjusted annual rates retail sales rose percent from the fourth quarter of to the first quarter of Manufacturers and merchants took an exceedingly optimistic view of prospective market demand and the former expanded their output while the latter flooded their suppliers with new orders. The increase in Government purchases for national security programs combined with the heavier buying in civilian markets to extend and in some cases to speed the rapid rise in prices that had begun in The situation was reversed in the second quarter. Retail sales were percent greater than in the first quarter but this was much less than the normal increase for those months. On a seasonally adjusted basis retail sales were percent lower in the second quarter than in the first quarter. The inflow of many kinds of merchandise ordered in the optimistic mood of the first quarter piled up in the inventories of merchants and in the warehouses of manufacturers to hang over the market for the remainder of the year During the second half of retail sales ( seasonally adjusted ) were not much above the second quarter level. National security expenditures continued to rise though more slowly than in the first half of the year but private investment fell off principally because of a lower rate of inventory accumulation. Prices remained fairly stable and total output after remaining steady in the third quarter rose moderately in the fourth. The lull that had begun near the end of the first quarter persisted through the second half of the year The first months of active inflation were marked by some financial factors which are believed by many people to reduce inflationary pressures while the months of relative quiet were characterized by several factors which similarly are believed to generate inflationary pressures. There was a record Government cash surplus in the first quarter of and an accompanying decline in the privately-held money supply. Outstanding consumer credit after rising rapidly through December fell to a lesser degree in the first quarter of On the other hand during the months of stability there was a Government cash deficit which rose steeply from quarter to quarter the money supply climbed more sharply than in the same period of and after midyear consumer credit and loans of commercial banks resumed their expansion. In the case of these series the year demonstrated the hazards of interpreting short-range developments in the economy as a whole through the use of a limited number of indicators many of which are likely to reflect seasonal movements Some important financial factors showed a different pattern. Total bank loans increased more than twice as much during the months from July to March as during the following months. During the former period long-term Government securities found a ready market without risk of loss in the Federal Reserve banks which was not true during the latter period. Heavy tax increases passed in became fully effective in and further increases were hanging over the heads of consumers and businesses through most of The Revenue Act of passed in October applied higher rates to corporate income and imposed increased withholding and excise tax rates which became effective November Moreover the lags in the impact of the financial factors must not be overlooked in interpreting their effects on inflationary pressure In general was a year of some surprises and in a sense of some paradoxes. We shall try in this Part to set down the facts of the year 's economic record. In Part III we shall consider the principal economic problems which will confront the Nation in the year ahead as a result of the combination of these facts and of our broad policy objectives THE BASIC SECURITY BuiLD-Up During the past months the annual rate of expenditure for the major national security programs both domestic and international increased by more than billion dollars reaching a rate of billion dollars in the fourth quarter. Currently the national security programs are taking about percent of gross national product compared with percent a year ago ( See chart ) CHART NATIONAL SECURITY EXPENDITURES FOR GOODS AND SERVICES IN PRICES During the annual rate of national security expenditures increased by about billion dollars. The build-up of our military establishment and military aid to other countries accounted for more than percent of total Security expenditures BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * I960 4th Qtr 2nd Otr TOTAL SECURITY .EXPENDITURES 4th Qtr. ^ DEFENSE DEPARTMENT AND MDAP FOREIGN ^ ATOMIC ^ OTHER AID ENERGY * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES \ J PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The rate of expansion of the security programs slackened toward the end of During the last quarter security expenditures are estimated to have increased only billion dollars at an annual rate compared with an average increase of billion dollars in each of the previous three quarters Since the middle of the year foreign economic aid expenditures have not increased and there has been a considerable reduction in stockpiling expenditures. The decline in stockpiling expenditures reflected not only a general reduction in purchases for the stockpile but also an actual suspension of purchases of some strategic materials a reduction in the availability of some that come from foreign areas and sharply rising domestic requirements for defense production and expansion of industrial capacity During the first half of last year military expenditures including expenditures for foreign military aid increased steadily and rapidly partly as a result of the large increases in military pay and purchases of soft goods associated with rapid expansion in the size of the armed forces. In the second half as the composition of the program shifted more towards expenditures on hard goods and military construction expansion in total spending was necessarily slower. At the present time about half of total military outlays are for hard goods and military construction While deliveries of military hard goods and military construction put in place increased by about percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of the increase in actual military production during the period was somewhat greater. It was to be expected that during the earlier phase of the program expansion of military production pipelines would be larger than the increase in actual deliveries. Deliveries of types of military equipment which are easier to produce like ammunition weapons and vehicles increased enormously over the levels of the autumn of On the other hand the gain in aircraft deliveries which will account for about percent of the military production program was more moderate As will be indicated in Part III future increases in security expenditures will be very largely for military hard goods especially for items which are more difficult to produce PRODUCTION AND EMPLOYMENT Production Total output of the economy measured by gross national product adjusted for changes in prices rose about percent from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of The bulk of the increase occurred in the first half of the year ; in the second half aggregate output was nearly stable. For the year as a whole total national output was percent above and the rise in the private sector of the economy was percent. ( See chart and appendix tables B-2 and B-3. ) Industrial production. Industrial production fluctuated within a narrow range through most of The index estimated at in December was at about the same level as a year earlier. ( See chart and appendix table B-16. ) This relative stability of total industrial production for the past year resulted from differing trends in the defense and consumer goods sectors of the economy. Defense and munitions output continued to increase. Aircraft manufacture railroad equipment production and shipbuilding activity rose on the average by about percent from January to November. Machinery output climbed during most of and by November was percent above the beginning of the year Output of both durable and nondurable consumer goods decreased after the first quarter of the year. Consumer durable goods output dropped by about one-third from March to November partly in response to cutbacks in materials partly in response to the decline in consumer demand. Passenger car production fell from an annual rate of million units in the first quarter to a rate of million in the last quarter. The rate had been million in the fourth quarter of and million in the same quarter of Output of major appliances such as washing machines refrigerators CHART PRODUCTION Total output of goods and services continued to climb in the first half of but leveled off in the second half Total industrial production was somewhat lower in the second half as the continued advance of producers durable equipment and munitions was more than offset by declines in the consumers ' sector of durable and nondurable manufactures TOTAL PRODUCTION 2nd Qtr. = ^ TOTAL PRODUCTION OF GOODS AND SERVICES ^ / 2nd Qtr 3rd Qtr t h Qtr st Qtr 2nd Qtr 3rd Qtr t h Qtr INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION JUNE I J J A S JL/ INDEXES BASED ON SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DATA 2/ INDEX BASED ON GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN PRICES 3/ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS AND BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM stoves and vacuum cleaners suffered particularly sharp declines and the production of radios and television sets fell steeply after February Total production of nondurable goods industries declined gradually during most of the year. By November production was percent below January. The textile industry in particular greatly curtailed output during the second half of the year. Even the production of chemical products which had risen continuously since early reached a plateau toward the end of Minerals output moved irregularly higher during the year to a new record in October largely because of the rising production of crude petroleum The latter was at an all-time high in October and then tapered off somewhat as production allowed in the Texas fields was cut. Bituminous coal output rose substantially in the latter part of the year as exports to Europe increased Production of electric power which is not included in the industrial production index reached record levels in and averaged percent above the previous year The year 's developments in the construction industry are summarized in the discussion of investment activity during Agricultural production. Despite adverse developments in the fall months in the outturn of some crops notably cotton and corn agricultural production in maintained the high level of recent years. ( See appendix table B-16. ) High-level agricultural output enabled us to meet the expanded demands for food and fiber of a military force which more than doubled in the past year to increase shipments of food to friendly foreign countries and to raise average food consumption in this country slightly above the pre-Korean level The production record is all the more impressive in view of the handicaps of drought and floods and a continuation of the long-run decline in agricultural employment as some farm workers shifted to defense industries. There were also shortages of some materials particularly fertilizers Current estimates for cotton indicate a crop of million bales in percent larger than in Expected domestic and foreign demand for cotton in relation to total available supplies point to little if any buildup in the present relatively low cotton stocks. Record supplies of fats and oils are available. But production of feed grains and concentrates indicates that supplies for the feeding year will be about percent smaller than for when carryover stocks were being reduced Poultry and egg production in was nearly percent higher than in and hog slaughter was up about percent. Cattle slaughter was relatively small in partly because producers expanded their breeding herds. The number of cattle on farms in early was at record levels several million head above a year earlier. Reduced feed supplies and a continued high output of livestock and livestock products point to a further cut in reserve stocks of feed grains during the feeding year Services. Personal expenditures for services in constant prices rose about percent above a smaller increase than that recorded in any other recent year. ( See appendix tables B-2 and B-3. ) Employment The total labor force civilian and military increased from about million in December to more than million in December But because of the growth in the armed forces the civilian labor force increased only slightly during the same period from million to million Total civilian employment rose from million in December to million in December Over the year total civilian employment averaged about million higher in than in ( See chart and appendix table B-ll. ) While the long-run decline in agricultural employment continued nonagricultural employment during averaged about million above with each month of the year outstripping the same month of the previous year ; but the margin became generally smaller as the year progressed December employment in nonagricultural activities was million compared with million a year earlier The number of employees in manufacturing in averaged million the highest since World War II. The shifting pattern toward increased defense activity was evidenced by the fact that employment in durable goods industries was higher in November than a year " earlier while employment in the nondurable goods field was about lower. ( See appendix table B-l2. ) The increase since Korea of about million persons engaged directly or indirectly in defense work was made possible primarily through the shifting of workers from nondefense work and also through a considerable absorption of unemployed persons About million persons are now engaged directly or indirectly in defense production excluding work on privately-financed facilities construction. Of this total about are in aircraft private shipyards and ordnance ; the rest are employed in Federal defense agencies or work in mining in the production or transportation of metals machine tools machinery scientific instruments chemicals or rubber products or in other activities needed for supplying the armed forces. These adjustments in employment were made while we continued to maintain our civilian economy at a high level. Material shortages have in some instances restricted the output of certain specific goods but so far lack of manpower has not played a significant part in holding down civilian output. In fact layoffs in many consumer goods industries in the latter part of were the highest recorded for that time of the year since The workweek which had averaged more than hours for total manufacturing in the last half of dropped slightly during the first half of CHART CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE The civilian labor force in was almost as large as in I960 .despite the growth of the armed forces. Total employment averaged million or an increase of I million compared with the previous year. Agricultural employment continuing its long-run decline ^ decreased about ] /2 million while nonagricultural employment rose by ^ million MILLIONS OF PERSONS ^ MILLIONS OF PERSONS * J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D Unemployment for the year averaged about million a decrease of about \ % million or percent from the I960 average /vs p I EM PL 0> 'M ENT N PE RC EIN T OF c VltJA N LA R FO RC r rm J F M A M J J A S O N D TIT ill J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D * I4 YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE- ' DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE and after the vacation months leveled off at about 405/2 hours For the year as a whole the workweek averaged slightly higher in than in Many plants in the durable goods area particularly in the machinery and metalworking groups were on a 48-hour week. Curtailment in nondurable goods production reduced the workweek in that sector slightly more than hour from November to November ( See appendix table B-13. ) Unemployment. Unemployment decreased from about million persons or percent of the civilian labor force at the end of to million or about percent at the close of ( See chart and appendix table B-l ) Important changes have occurred in the duration of unemployment Over the year the number who had been seeking work weeks or more declined more than percent from to The national averages obscure somewhat the unemployment which has developed in some areas as a result of the shift from civilian to defense production. In some geographical areas the increase in defense output has failed to provide enough employment to offset the declines resulting from the defense program. In Michigan for example the number of persons drawing unemployment compensation in November was nearly /2 times that in November In Detroit the impact of material and production regulations and a slackening in automobile demand have carried to the point where in the Nation 's largest durable goods producing center somewhat more than people are reported out of jobs In November despite the low level of unemployment nationally there were major labor market areas as well as minor ones which were characterized as areas of substantial labor surpluses. Some of our larger metropolitan centers such as New York and Providence are included in this group. Few if any of these areas have been pushed into this surplus labor category by the controls required by the defense program ; many in fact are communities in which unemployment has been a problem for some time. Defense production in these places is either relatively unimportant or has been insufficient to absorb the labor surpluses which have developed as a result of long-standing economic problems Among the States where unemployment has been growing are Michigan Wisconsin Massachusetts Tennessee Georgia North Carolina and Rhode Island. Cutbacks in orders for such consumers ' goods as textiles apparel shoes and jewelry aggravated the persisting unemployment problems in such local areas as Lawrence Lowell Manchester Providence and Brockton Work stoppages. During less than one-quarter of one percent of total estimated working time was lost by strikes. Total man-days of labor lost through work stoppages during this period were lower than in any other postwar year A work stoppage on major railroads of the country began near the end of January when several hundred yard workers took " sick leave " Eventually the stoppage involved about workers in the industry. The last workers returned to work about February Steel production was affected by a work stoppage at various locations of the Tennessee Coal Iron and Railroad Company in Alabama which lasted from February to March and idled workers at its peak Another significant labor stoppage in the first part of was in the textile industry. Between mid-February and late April members of the Textile Workers Union ( CIO ) engaged in strikes of varying durations at some woolen and worsted mills mostly in New England and the Middle Atlantic states On August there was a serious work stoppage curtailing copper production. It involved an estimated workers mostly members of the Mine Mill and Smelter Workers Union. On August about of these workers returned to their jobs after a settlement was reached with the Kennecott Copper Corporation. Following an injunction issued under Federal labor laws ordering a return to work and a resumption of collective bargaining settlements also took place with three other major copper producers PRICES WAGES AND PROFITS Prices During most of prices were relatively stable with wholesale prices showing a moderate decline and consumers ' prices rising slowly. This pattern of price movements was in striking contrast to the violent waves of general price increases which marked the second half of and early and which were finally curbed only after the imposition of the general price and wage freeze late in January Since the General Ceiling Price Regulation was issued consumers ' prices have advanced percent ; wholesale prices have declined percent ; and the index of " sensitive " primary market commodities has shown a large drop of percent. But consumers ' prices are percent higher than at the Korean outbreak wholesale prices are percent higher and the prices of primary commodities percent higher. ( See charts and also appendix tables B-22 and B-23. ) Wholesale prices under controls. Wholesale prices have gone through three periods since the general freeze. ( See table ) First they continued to rise for a short time after price controls were imposed but much more moderately than in the period immediately preceding control. The rise was primarily concentrated among those agricultural and food prices left uncontrolled for legal or technical reasons. The rise in these prices virtually ended in February CHART WHOLESALE PRICES Average wholesale prices declined during the spring and summer of and at the end of the year were moderately lower than at the time of the general price freeze INDEX. JUNE IOO INDEX JUNE A M J J ! A S ^ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) In the middle of the second quarter as excessive inventories developed a selective drop began in wholesale prices which continued until autumn The markets particularly affected were those closely tied to consumer demand notably textiles hides and leathers and some farm products. Inflationary pressures continued heavy in markets where the expanding security program exerted a strong pull. ( See chart and appendix table B-23. ) By the beginning of the fourth quarter the period of major price declines was over as inventories had been brought more closely in line with sales Subsequently there was only a moderate stiffening in price trends In December wholesale farm prices were percent lower than at the time of the general freeze. The declines began in late spring and continued through the summer. They were caused by the expectations of very good crops the sagging demand for such commodities as cotton and wool seasonal declines in fresh fruits and vegetables and the relaxation of general inflationary pressures. But by early autumn farm prices began to strengthen again as crops proved to be smaller than expected. Particularly noteworthy was the recovery of cotton prices which brought them at times close to the ceilings. The lagging demand for textiles however prevented a full return to ceiling levels TABLE Changes in wholesale prices I5ercentage chang8 Korean out- General Ceiling break to Korean outGeneral Ceiling Price Regulabreak to tion to Price December > Regulation December Commodity group All commodities Farm products Grains Livestock Foods ._ Meats Other than farm products and foods Hides and leather products Textile products _ Fuel and lighting materials Metals and metal products >_ Building materials Chemicals and allied products Housefumishmg goods Miscellaneous,. _ ^ ^ ^ ._ ._ ._ _ U ^ _ J ___.. i i June data used for computing changes since the Korean outbreak and February data for changes since the Genera ) Ceiling Price Regulation. The latter most nearly reflect the level at the time of the general price freeze injate January Source : Department of Labor. ( See appendix table B-23. ) Beef cattle prices continued strong through most of the period. The abolition of slaughtering quotas created considerable difficulty for the control of beef prices during late summer and early fall when marketings continued small as farmers further built up their cattle herds. There was great pressure for the elimination of all controls on beef which may have contributed to the unusually small marketings of beef cattle. Prices of some grades of cattle rose at times to levels considerably above those which reflected the retail beef ceilings. However by November the seasonal increase in marketings became heavier than usual leading to alleviation of the supply situation and to a moderate decline in cattle prices Hog prices which were strong during the first half of became weaker beginning in late summer as marketings increased seasonally. However the total decline in the autumn was a little less than usual in percentage terms and prices at their seasonal low in December were about the same as a year before The parity ratio reached a post-Korean peak of in February and then declined to a low of in September. This drop reflected primarily changes in prices received by farmers as prices paid by farmers fluctuated within a very narrow range after April. The ensuing strengthening of farm prices resulted in a rise in the parity ratio to in December which was slightly lower than a year earlier. In June the ratio was,97. ( See appendix table B-24. ) CHART WHOLESALE PRICES OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS Industrial prices showed mixed trends in Metals and metal products were strong because of the impact of the growing security program. Sagging consumer demand and excessive inventories caused declines particularly in soft goods INDEX JUNE = INDEX JUNE = I ' | CHEMICALS AND ALLIED PRODUCTS * * V * * * BUILDING MATERIALS * no FUEL AND LIGHTING MATERIALS I J J A I S I O i l l N D J F I M I A I M I960 I J I J I A -I I S I N DJ INDEX JUNE = INDEX JUNE = J J A S O N D J F M A I960 * ALL COMMODITIES OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS j/ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) M J J A S O N D Unlike farm and industrial prices wholesale food prices were virtually unchanged at the end of the year compared with their level at the time of the general freeze. After mid-February they fluctuated irregularly within a narrow range with compensating price movements largely seasonal in different groups of foods. ( See chart ) During the same period industrial prices declined percent. ( See chart ) The drop was highly selective. Many prices fell below ceilings some drastically while at the same time many other prices strained at the ceilings. The declines affected large areas where problems of " excessive " inventories developed in the spring. The sharpest declines were in commodities like cotton hides rubber tin wool and tallow in which there had been great speculative price increases immediately after Korea. The price decline in most commodities in this group was concentrated in the spring and summer. By autumn the downward movement had more or less spent itself and some minor upturns in prices took place The textile and the hides and leather products groups showed the largest average declines from the general freeze to the end of the former dropping percent and the latter percent. Within these subgroups the declines like the earlier rises were greatest at the raw material levels and least at the final stages of fabrication. Thus hides registered the largest decline and shoes the least ; cotton grey goods the most and cotton clothing the least Other industrial products in which there were substantial price declines were chemicals which fell percent after the general freeze mainly as a result of a sharp drop in the prices of fats and oils following steep rises prior to the freeze. Prices of industrial chemicals fertilizer materials and drugs and pharmaceuticals were firm or advanced Both metals and metal products and fuels and lighting accounting for more than percent of the industrial products group advanced after the general freeze the former by percent and the latter by percent. The metals and metal products group is particularly subject to the impact of the expanding security program. The large demand for fuel contributed to strength in the prices of petroleum and other fuels. Since these groups are subject to price control little upward movement was recorded except to reflect permitted adjustments in ceiling prices as in the cases of automobiles and lead and zinc. ( See appendix table B-23. ) Consumers3 prices under controls. The trend of consumers ' prices following the general freeze was quite unlike that of wholesale prices. After the general freeze the consumers ' price index continued to rise until May then leveled off and remained virtually unchanged until September when it began a new rise The greater strength of consumers ' prices during this period compared with wholesale prices is accounted for by a number of factors. For many commodities winter clothing for example it normally takes a considerable ~ TABLE Changes in consumers ' prices I3ercentage change Korean outbreak to General Ceiling Price Regulation i Item All items Food Apparel Rent Fuel electricity and refrigeration Housefurnishings Miscellaneous General Ceiling Price Regulation to November Korean outbreak to November * June data used for computing changes since the Korean outbreak and February data for changes since the General Ceiling Price Regulation. The latter most nearly reflect the level at the time of the general price freeze in late January A preliminary survey indicates that food prices advanced by percent from November to December.15 Source : Department of Labor. ( See appendix table B-22. ) time for price increases at wholesale to show up at retail. Part of the strength of the index was due to the rise in food prices as consumers maintained a high demand for what are basically nonpostponable purchases The consumers ' price index includes many items over which controls are lacking or are only partial thus permitting further price increases. In addition part of the increase in the index was due to the new excise taxes All major components in the index have continued to advance since the inauguration of price controls with the largest increase percent occurring in rents which are subject only to partial control. ( See table and chart ) The tempo of increases in rents which have been rising steadily during the postwar period has been sharply stepped up in the last year and a half as more and more areas have been exempted from controls and more liberal rent adjustments have been required by law. In addition the increased demand for housing under the impetus of the defense program has played an important role in many areas. Progress has been made however in returning areas to rent control under the new law Prices of the miscellaneous group of goods and services have increased percent since the imposition of the General Ceiling Price Regulation More than percent of the rise came in November following the imposition of increased Federal excise taxes which became effective in that month The percent rise in apparel prices the major part of which occurred in September reflected the accumulated effect of the cost increases since the year before in the pricing of the new lines of fall merchandise Retail food prices have been generally strong throughout the period February to November with only minor dips. The rise in retail meat prices has been slightly greater than the average rise in food prices amount- CHART CONSUMERS ' PRICES Consumers1 prices were relatively stable for several months after February but in September they began a new rise INDEX JUNE ( = INDEX JUNE = MO I I J I J I A i S i O I JI I N O J F i M I A I M I J I J l A I S l O I N D SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR ing to percent compared with percent for all foods and percent for the consumers ' price index Wages The upward creep in wage rates was one of the most important factors responsible for the increased total labor income in In manufacturing industries average hourly earnings rose cents from $ in November to $ in November Workers in the durable goods manufacturing industries received average hourly wages of $ in November an increase of cents or about percent from November The rise in the nondurable goods sector was smaller from $ in November to $ in November ( See chart and appendix table B-14. ) Hourly earnings in manufacturing exclusive of overtime pay rose cents or about percent from November to November somewhat less than the rise in gross pay. From February the first month of operation of the v/age stabilization program to November gross hourly earnings rose cents or percent. Straight-time hourly rates also increased by cents or percent Average weekly earnings in manufacturing rose by less than hourly rates since average hours of work were lower in November than in the CHART AVERAGE EARNINGS IN MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES Average ' hourly earnings rose slowly throughout but when adjusted for price changes were fairly constant. There was a smaller rise in a v e r a g e w e e k l y earnings due to a slight decline during the year in the workweek AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS .CURRENT PRICES DURABLE GOODS CONSTANT PRICES .CURRENT PRICES NONDURABLE GOODS _ I J I J I A t S I t O N O J F M uEARNINGS JN CURRENT PRICES A M J i J A S DIVIDED BY CONSUMERS ' PRICE INDEX ON BASE JUNE SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS i " T O N D same month of In all manufacturing industries average weekly wages rose by about $ or percent to a level of $ in the months beginning November In the durable goods sector weekly earnings advanced by $ while the rise in nondurable goods industries was $ ( See appendix table B-15. ) It has been estimated that average weekly earnings of clerical and professional workers as distinct from wage earners rose around percent in the 12-month period Wage negotiations. During the year wage negotiations were conditioned by the wage stabilization program which affected practically every contract signed in As a necessary prelude to the development of a wage stabilization program the Wage Stabilization Board froze wages on January Just prior to this freeze an unusually large number of settlements took place Many new contracts were negotiated at that time through mutual consent since the terms of existing contracts did not contain wage reopening provisions effective in January. Many deferred increases negotiated in also became effective in that month. In addition there were numerous instances of consent to the immediate payment of increases which were scheduled to become effective later in The freeze was relaxed on January by a regulation which authorized increases that were to become effective before February when called for by agreements antedating the freeze. The bituminous coal and anthracite agreements which raised wages $ a day fell within this category In the or weeks following the freeze order wage settlements were few With the removal of the freeze and the initial development of Board policy wage settlements became more numerous. These settlements represented mainly a completion of pre-stabilization wage movements and negotiations interrupted by the freeze. As a result wage increases were agreed upon or put into effect for more workers during March than in any of the preceding months. A wage settlement which contained a cost-of-living escalator clause and which affected about million railroad workers was reached on March Announcement of the BLS consumers ' price index for January brought cost-of-living wage increases for more than a million workers covered by contracts with automatic escalator clauses. Many of the settlements negotiated during this period particularly in the textile industry provided for general increases and supplementary benefits in excess of the limit allowable without prior approval of the Wage Stabilization Board. In other instances employers voluntarily raised wage rates of large groups of workers to the maximum permitted without specific Government authorization In May the Wage Stabilization Board in a decision that was the forerunner of the Board policy of gearing wage stabilization to changes in the cost of living allowed the meat packing workers who had received an increase of cents in an additional increase of cents. The Board held that it would not be fair to penalize the parties because in their previous contract they had decided to use a reopening clause rather than a formalized escalator clause as a protection against higher living costs. Later an additional amount averaging cents an hour was allowed to increase the differentials among job classes. In June a wage increase of cents was approved for the Atlantic Coast shipbuilding workers on the ground that wage rates in shipbuilding were abnormally low in the base period which WSB had included in its general adjustment formula Many settlements later in the year provided for wage increases to offset the rise in the cost of living as well as for fringe benefits. Among the more noteworthy settlements in the second half of the year were those in the paper glass electrical rubber nonferrous mining and smelting and food industries. Contracts also were signed covering many workers in transportation communications and construction. In addition wage increases were granted most Federal Government workers and many State and local government employees At the year 's end a most significant contract negotiation was taking place between the steel industry employers and the steel workers union The CIO Steelworkers Wage Policy Committee presented a 22-point set of proposals covering some million workers. Key bargaining points included a " substantial wage increase a guaranteed annual wage a union shop a 'drastic ' revision of the incentive system time and one-half for Saturday work and double time for Sunday as such paid holidays and a more liberal vacation program. " On December after the parties had failed to reach an agreement the case was referred by the President to the Wage Stabilization Board Profits Corporate book profits before taxes in were the highest on record reaching an estimated total of billion dollars. In the previous peak year corporate book profits before taxes amounted to billion ( See chart and appendix table B-32. ) The profits trend however changed drastically in the course of After reaching a postwar peak of billion ( annual rate ) in the first quarter of corporate profits before taxes declined sharply reaching a level of billion in the third quarter. Lower levels of sales and prices in many industries as well as the upcreep of costs accounted for the change In the fourth quarter as sales increased somewhat and prices firmed slightly corporate profits before taxes according to preliminary indications rose to an annual rate of approximately billion dollars Corporate profits after taxes were an estimated billion dollars in compared with billion in most of the reduction being a result of higher tax rates. In the combined Federal State and local taxes on profits took about percent of profits before taxes compared with about percent in The level of corporate profits after taxes was exceeded in only previous years and Although corporate profits as a whole were substantially lower at the end of than at the beginning there were significant differences among industries. ( See appendix tables B-33 through B-36. ) Petroleum refining and printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) showed before taxes a higher rate of return on sales in the third quarter than in the first. Profits of the following industries dropped moderately during the same period : food tobacco furniture chemicals leather and leather products stone clay and glass nonferrous metals iron and steel machinery ( except electrical ) transportation equipment instruments and motor vehicles and parts CHART CORPORATE PROFITS Profits before tax were in at an all-time high but in the latter part of the year fell substantially. Profits after tax for the year were reduced below the level because of higher tax. rates BILLIONS OF DOLLARS B I L L I O N S OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES ] / NO ALLOWANCE FOR INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT 2/ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) Steep declines were reported by corporations producing textiles apparel and lumber and wood products where inventories were particularly excessive The decline in profits during affected both large and small firms However the largest manufacturing firms those with assets of million dollars or more reported a smaller decline in their profit-sales ratio ( before taxes ) than did those with assets of $ or less CREDIT AND MONEY SUPPLY Credit Most forms of private credit expanded during though at a lower rate than in Total loans of commercial banks which had jumped billion dollars or percent in rose about billion or percent during the past months. The difference was largely accounted for by the behavior of nonbusiness loans. While commercial and industrial loans of banks rose close to billion dollars during about the same as in loans of all other kinds such as consumer and real estate loans expanded approximately billion in compared with billion the year before. ( See chart and appendix table B-27. ) A major factor that sustained the growth of commercial and industrial loans while the expansion of most other classes of bank loans slowed down considerably was the rising demand for credit to finance defense-supporting activities. Approximately percent of the increase in outstanding business loans during the second half of as reported by banks in leading cities represented borrowing by firms engaged in defense or defense-related production. Much of the rest of the increase in commercial and industrial loans during this period was seasonal Commercial bank holdings of U. S. Government securities showed little change during while the drop during had been billion. Investments in other securities rose by nearly billion during compared with billion in The combined effect of changes in the three major components of commercial bank earning assets was to lift total loans and investments about billion dollars or percent during The rise in total earning assets of banks in had been billion or percent Outstanding consumer instalment credit declined billion dollars during the first months of and then rose slowly but at the end of the year it was still below the December level. During consumer instalment credit had grown by billion or percent with nearly half of the increase occurring in the third quarter. ( See appendix table B-26. ) Farm mortgages held by all groups of investors rose approximately billion dollars or percent during which was about as much as in while total nonfarm mortgages of $ or less increased about CHART BANK LOANS AND INVESTMENTS The increase in total bank loans was only about two-thirds of the increase although commercial and industrial loans expanded nearly as much in as in the previous year BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D ^ END OF MONTH COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL LOANS ( GROSS ) -i/ \ I /i * i J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N D ^ END OF MONTH JL/ ZJ VALUATION RESERVES INCLUDED IN GROSS LOANS ; EXCLUDED FROM NET PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) billion dollars or percent during compared with billion or percent in Money supply The privately-held money supply ( deposits adjusted and currency ) expanded nearly billion dollars or about percent during compared with billion or percent in ( See table ) The rise in the last three quarters of exceeded substantially that of the comparable period in the previous year. ( See chart and appendix table B-28. ) After declining billion dollars in the first quarter of or more than half again as much as in the same months of largely because CHART MONEY SUPPLY The privately-held money supply after a seasonal contraction in the first quarter of rose at an accelerating rate during the next three quarters. The growth for the year was considerably larger than in I960 BILLIC ) NS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OFDO LLARS TOTAL DEPOSITS AND CURRENCY * * " * " * N_ii.i " " " * " ' X TOTAL EX CLUD1NG U. S. GOVERMrtENT DEPOSITS ( PRIVATELY-HELD MONEY SUP PLY ) DEMAND DEPOSITS ADJUSTED TIME DEPOSITS CURRENCY OUTSIDE BANKS * ^ k K-S>_ ^ >-<>-O-O- ^ ^ O-X ) ^ ^ -< ^ ' * O O--O- O O Q--O O O-O " * < U.S. GOVERNMENT IJEPOSITS J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N D ! / I960 END OF MONTH LIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF E CONOMIC ADVISERS SOURC E : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF FHE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTE M ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) of the surplus of Treasury cash receipts the money supply moved upward in each succeeding month TABLE Factors changing the volume of the privately-held money supply * [ Billions of dollars ] Factors total Total Loans of commercial and mutual savings banks -H.4 Securities of U. S. Government held by bank-.1 ing system Securities of State and local governments held by commercial and mutual savings banks. Treasury deposits * Monetary gold stock _ _ _ _ Other factors net Net change in privately-held deposits and currency 1QXQ First half Second Total half First half Second half l i Includes State and local government deposits * Estimates based on incomplete data ; second half by Council of Economic Advisers Includes commercial banks mutual savings banks and Federal Reserve banks * A decrease in Treasury deposits is denoted by a positive figure and an increase by a negative figure In the case of other specific factors the reverse is true See appendix table B-29 for aggregate money supply and its components ! NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding. Signs preceding figures in columns Indicate effect on the money supply Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) : The monetary expansion of more than billion dollars in the past months reflected ( ) the growth of the loans and investments of the banking system including mutual savings banks ( ) the drawing down of U. S. Government deposits to meet part of the cash deficit and ( ) to a lesser extent the reappearance beginning in the third quarter of net gold imports after more than a year and a half during which the United States had lost gold to other nations THE FLOW OF GOODS AND PURCHASING POWER Personal income consumption expenditures and saving Personal income. Personal income has gained quarter by quarter since Korea but the rate of increase was slower in ( See chart and appendix table B-7. ) One important component of consumer income unincorporated business and professional income reached a peak in the first quarter of last year. Labor income advanced less and less rapidly as the momentum of increases in wage rates slackened the average factory workweek was reduced and employment gains were only moderate. Farm income which declined sharply from to continued upward from the postwar low reached in the second quarter of In the fourth quarter of personal income attained an annual rate of billion dollars. This was more than billion above the pre-Korean level ; but CHART PERSONAL INCOME SPENDING AND SAVING Consumption expenditures in the second half of remained below the first quarter peak despite the continued rise in income. Saving rose to percent of disposable income BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * ? NET SAVING AS PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE INCOME SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES ^ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) only billion of the increase took place in the second half of the 18month period Tax increases since Korea have slowed down gains in spendable income Personal tax liabilities rose from billion ( annual rate ) in the second quarter of to about billion in the fourth quarter of Nevertheless personal disposal income rose by more than billion dollars or percent over the period. Total disposable incomes in real terms have gained by about percent since Korea but the sharp price rises in December and January caused a temporary drop in real income. It was not until the third quarter of that total consumer purchasing power regained the level of the fourth quarter of On a per capita basis real disposable income did not regain the level of the fourth quarter of ( See chart and appendix table B-10. ) Although in general gains in income have more than kept pace with the cost of living they have been unevenly distributed throughout the population. Since Korea farm incomes have risen somewhat more than those of other groups compensating for the decline that extended through the CHART PER CAPITA DISPOSABLE INCOME Per capita disposable income in constant prices rose very slightly during but in the final quarter of the year was still below the peak reached in the last quarter of I960 DOLLARS * DOLLARS * PRICES CURRENT PRICES m I960 * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL R A T E S i/PRELlMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS first half of while annuitants and other fixed-income recipients have of course become worse off. Average hourly earnings of workers in durable goods manufacturing industries increased by cents between June and November compared with cents in nondurable goods industries After adjustment for price increases and trends in average weekly hours ( but not allowing for higher taxes ) > real earnings of workers in nondurable goods manufacturing in November were slightly below June while real earnings of workers in durable goods manufacturing were moderately above. Average weekly earnings in the construction industry rose more than those in manufacturing while those in trade and services rose much less and fell behind the rise in living costs. The gains in income of a large proportion of Government workers were commensurate with those of workers in private industry Consumption expenditures. After the December 1950-February buying wave total consumption expenditures declined abruptly falling at the seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars or percent from the first to the second quarter. Since then they have moved up slightly but CHART PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES FOR DURABLE GOODS There was a significant decline in demand for most categories of consumer durable goods from the second half of I960 to the second half of Expenditures for passenger cars and major appliances both dropped almost one-third while all other durable goods were percent lower BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * ALL OTHER DURABLE GOODS MAJOR HOUSEHOLD APPLIANCES J I I * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES J-'PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS have not regained the first quarter level. The decline in demand was concentrated in durable goods purchases which fell from the almost unprecedented annual rate of billion dollars in the first quarter ( compared with billion dollars in as a whole ) to billion dollars in the second quarter and remained somewhat below that level for the rest of the year Sales of automobiles and major appliances declined substantially as is shown in chart Purchases of nondurable goods which had moved up as prices rose in remained fairly constant in while expenditures for services continued to expand slowly. ( See appendix table B-4. ) The extent of the decline in consumer demand is indicated by the fact that the volume of consumer purchases in the second half of after adjustment for price changes was below the level of the second quarter of despite an increase of percent in real income. In terms of prices expenditures for durable goods were lower by billion dollars while outlays for services increased by a somewhat smaller amount. Expenditures for nondurable goods remained at about the level of the second quarter of despite a population increase of million. ( See appendix table B-3. ) Personal saving. The drop in spending in the second quarter was associated with a rise in the rate of saving from percent of disposable income in the first quarter a rate not far below the postwar average to percent. Later in the year as incomes continued to increase saving rose to an even higher rate. ( See chart and appendix table B-9. ) This rate of saving the highest reached since World War II undoubtedly reflected a combination of factors some temporary and some of a more permanent character. The rate appears unusually high in contrast with that of the rest of the postwar period during which special reasons ranging from the backlog of demand and purchasing power built up during the war to scare buying following Korea tended to raise spending especially for durable and semidurable goods The increase in the rate of saving in may have represented primarily the disappearance of backlog demands particularly for automobiles the temporary saturation of some other markets for durable goods and the desire to replenish liquid reserves. Other factors such as restraints on consumer credit and resistance to high prices were also undoubtedly among those contributing to this development. Moreover the price calm of the last three quarters of probably helped to moderate the previously high level of spending that had been initiated in part by the anticipation of rising prices In recent years there has been a marked preference for tangible forms of personal saving such as investments in homes and in the assets of unincorporated businesses compared with more liquid types of saving. The buying of durable goods which has many of the characteristics of saving has also been at a high rate. In fact in the period through the in- crease in mortgage consumer and personal business debt in connection with investment in tangible forms of saving and consumer durable goods was greater than the increase in the ownership of such assets as deposits stocks and bonds and insurance equities. This tendency was reversed in when total saving expanded. As shown in table the high level of saving in the second and third quarters of compared with the corresponding period of largely reflected a rise in liquid saving. Estimates of the change in personal business debt are not yet available but consumer debt rose much less rapidly than in the previous year while additions to currency deposits and corporate and other securities were greater TABLE Liquid and total personal saving [ Billions of dollars ] Type of saving Second quarter Liquid saving : Currency deposits and savings and loan shares Private insurance reserves ___ Securities : U S. Government State and local government Corporate and other Debt liquidation : Mortgage OonsiiTTier Total liquid saving Third quarter Second quarter -f.4 Third quarter i Total personal saving s i Estimates based on incomplete data * Includes liquid saving and personal tangible investment less depreciation and the increase in farm end business debt : not adjusted for seasonal variation and therefore can not be computed from saving data in appendix table B-9 NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce Investment and finance There were wide swings in the movement of business investment during reflecting in more extreme form the same mixture of strength and weakness which characterized economic events generally. After reaching a peak annual rate of billion dollars or percent of total output in the second quarter of gross private domestic investment declined percent to billion or percent of total output in the fourth quarter ( See chart and appendix table B-5. ) Even at this lower level investment was taking about the same proportion of total output as in such previous peak years as In spite of the downward trend in the second half the 59-billion-dollar level of business investment for as a whole was higher than for any previous year both in real and money terms and as a proportion of total output The peaking of total investment in the second quarter of reflected an extremely high rate of inventory accumulation and a continued rise in the rate of outlays for producers ' equipment and nonresidential construe- CHART BUSINESS INVESTMENT Investment in producers'durable equipment continued to rise rapidly through but private construction and inventory accumulation both dropped in the second half of the year BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * TOTAL GROSS PRIVATE DOMESTIC INVESTMENT tofc ^ * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES J/ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES .BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) tion. Residential construction meanwhile was receding from the record level reached in the latter part of ( See chart ) The decline in total business investment during the second half of was due primarily to two factors. The more important was the extremely sharp drop in the rate of inventory accumulation as many industries took steps to bring production and inventories in line with the decline in consumer demand which developed early in the spring. The second factor which was becoming increasingly significant toward the end of the year was cutbacks in commercial and some other categories of construction effected primarily by controls over materials Plant and equipment. During business investment in plant and equipment rose to record levels placing a major strain on the supply of scarce materials. ( See appendix table B-19. ) The expansion in basic areas was stimulated and encouraged by Government action to ensure a productive capacity capable of meeting a growing demand for defense and related output. As the year progressed it became necessary and possible to shift the emphasis toward the more urgently needed types of expansion and to reach decisions on specific goals for the expansion of key industries Through most of business expenditures for new plant and equipment continued the rapid rise that had begun in the spring of By the fourth quarter of private nonfarm plant and equipment outlays were running percent higher than in the same quarter of and percent above the pre-1951 peak reached in the fourth quarter of ( See appendix table B-19. ) In terms of physical volume the increase from the fourth quarter of was probably about half that much This unprecedented surge of investment in new productive facilities reflected in some measure the stimulus of defense buying and Government inducements such as accelerated tax amortization. The largest increases during were in the industrial and utility fields and particularly in the aircraft and primary metals industries. ( See charts and ) But it is noteworthy that the investment boom of was too broad and began too early to be explained wholly or even primarily as the direct result of military procurement or Government aids. The basic factors were the growth in civilian demand until near the end of the first quarter of the general absence of surplus productive capacity even before Korea ready availability of funds during most of the period an outlook for increasing demands and shortages of materials and equipment and the encouragement given by excess profits tax provisions to the debt financing of new investment In the latter part of increasing demands on scarce materials and equipment for military goods and top-priority industrial expansion programs made it impossible to continue other types of business construction and equipment investment at the record rates which had been attained. By the fourth quarter plant and equipment outlays in the commercial communications and miscellaneous field were percent below the level of a year earlier. The decline was percent in the textile industries and percent in the food and beverage industries. ( See chart and appendix table B-19. ) The more urgent types of expansion were given the right of way by priorities on the necessary materials and equipment ; by various forms of Government financial assistance ; by allocations of several critical materials ; and in some instances by controlled scheduling of output and distribution of key component items. Financial aids or inducements have been supplied where necessary in the form of Government loans loan guarantees purchase contracts and certificates of rapid amortization of facilities for tax purposes The accomplishments of in terms of expansion of productive capacity were impressive by any standard. In a private survey made late in manufacturers reported plans for a percent expansion in total capacity in and a considerably greater expansion in certain defenserelated lines such as machinery transport equipment and chemicals. The actual plant and equipment outlays of suggest that these anticipations were probably not wide of the mark The expansion achieved in certain types of basic industrial facilities related to defense is shown in table TABLE Expansion of capacity or output of selected industries Industry or product Capacity expansion during : Electric utilities Petroleum refining _ Steel ingots Pig iron .__ Coke ( byproduct ovens ) Motor trucks and tractors * Railroad freight cars Railroad locomotives Percentage increase Industry or product Capacity expansion during Con Cotton duck Output expansion to : Aluminum Chlorine Zinc _ Newsprint IVToIybdp.rmrn Percentage increase g * Excludes vehicles for military use * Based on increase in number of units ; does not take account of increased average ton-mile capability per unit Domestic primary production * Domestic primary production plus secondary recovery Source : Defense Production Administration Since a large part of the facilities investment of went into projects not completed within the year value of work put in place is a better criterion of accomplishment during the year. Table measures in those terms the progress made on the major programs covered by tax amortization For projects assisted by tax amortization which will entail in all about billion dollars of investment on the basis of the certificates already approved work was about percent in place at the end of September and at that time was expected to be about percent in place by the end of CHART NEW PLANT AND EQUIPMENT OUTLAYS IN SELECTED DURABLE MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES The major durable goods industries invested in plant and equipment at a rising rate through and BILLIONS OF DOLLARS RATIO SCALE BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES NOT ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION * TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT EXCLUDING AUTOMOBILES ^ / * SEASONAL INFLUENCES TEND TO RAISE OUTLAYS IN THE FOURTH QUARTER AND LOWER THEM IN THE FIRST J/ INCLUDES FABRICATED METALS STONE,CLAY AND GLASS PROFESSIONAL AND SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS- LUMBER- FURNlTUREj ORDNANCEv AND MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURESjNOT SHOWN ON CHART jy POINTS FOR FIRST THREE QUARTERS OF I960 ARE AS FOLLOWS'. J/ ANTICIPATED EXPENDITURES REPORTED BY BUSINESS DURING LATE OCTOBER AND NOVEMBER SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION CHART NEW PLANT AND EQUIPMENT OUTLAYS IN SELECTED NONDURABLE MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES The chemicals and petroleum and coal products industries continued to invest in plant and equipment at a rising rate through In other major nondurable lines investment declined in the latter part of the year BILLIONS OF DOLLARS RATIO SCALE BILLIONS OF DOLLARS MISCELLANEOUS NONDURABLE GOODS17 * SEASONAL INFLUENCES TEND TO RAISE OUTLAYS IN THE FOURTH QUARTER ANO LOWER THEM IN THE FIRST ^ INCLUDES PAPER ANO RUBBER.NOT SHOWN ON CHART ^ INCLUDES TOBACCOi APPAREL- LEATHER ; PRINTING AND PUBLISHING ^ ANTICIPATED EXPENDITURES REPORTED 8V BUSINESS DURING LATE OCTOBER AND NOVEMBER SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION the year. The actual year-end figure however may have been somewhat lower in view of the severe shortage of structural steel and some other vital construction materials and equipment items in the fourth quarter Work put in place during the third quarter was for similar reasons about percent less than had been anticipated at midyear In the case of some expansion programs such as iron and steel and synthetic fibers the " proposed investment " shown in table comprises the bulk of that now planned over the next years. Other important private investment programs are covered only to a minor extent or not at all by tax amortization. This applies for example to oil and gas wells and pipe lines electric power agricultural equipment and mining facilities generally Moreover in both electric power and the munitions industries direct public investment plays an important part in addition to private investment TABLE Progress on facilities projects aided by tax amortization Necessity certificates approved through November Status of projects ( percentage of proposed investment in place at date shown ) * Industry Tax amortiProposed zation investment ( millions Sept. Dec. a ( millions of dollars ) of dollars ) MO Iron and steel Railroads _ Chemicals ( excluding synthetic fibers ) Petroleum refining Aircraft ordnance ^ and accessories Electric light and power _ _ Aluminum ( primary refining ) Machinery __ Pulp paper and allied products Welded and heavy riveted pipe Synthetic fibers ______ Great Lakes transportation Coke and byproducts _ _ __ All other __ _ All industries i Status reports cover only projects approved through September * Figures are in most cases not directly comparable with those shown in table partly on account of differences in industry classification and partly because ( as noted in the text ) not all projects are covered by tax amortization certificates Advance estimates reported as of September In addition to this total amount certificates for which the amount of tax amortization to be allowed was still undetermined were issued on projects entailing million dollars of proposed investment distributed by major industry groups as follows ( in millions of dollars ) : railroads chemicals ( including synthetic fibers ) primary metals mining machinery pulp paper etc. and all other Source : Defense Production Administration Construction. A record value of total new construction was put in place in billion dollars. Although this was percent more than in the physical volume of construction was about the same in the years. ( See chart and appendix table B-18. ) Less essential construction especially recreational commercial and private residential was cut back while defense industrial and public utility construction increased CHART CONSTRUCTION Expenditures for private nonfarm residential construction dropped sharply in while private industrial and utility rose. Total private construction outlays in were about the same as in while public construction increased percent BILLI DNS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLL.ARS * TOTAL PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION ^ ^ * r ^ ^ V l S >l r PRIVA rs RESIDENTIAL NONFARM ) ' TOTAL PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION ^ ^ V ^ * < * * " * ^ " " " j ' \ A i PRIVATE INDUSTRI AL AND UTILITIES ALL OTHER PR VATE r i i K SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE sharply during the year. Beginning in September the value of total new construction on a seasonally adjusted basis has been less than in corresponding months of The shift to military industrial and defense-related construction in general continued during Construction projects of these types received priority in the allotment of controlled materials under the Controlled Materials Plan. From December to December military and naval construction increased by more than six times on a seasonally adjusted basis while private industrial construction increased percent. For as a whole however private industrial construction was about percent above The largest and most consistently sustained decreases in construction expenditures on a seasonally adjusted basis were for new private residential commercial and recreational building. Partly as a result of credit controls private nonfarm residential construction fell after September with only two significant interruptions. From a high in February of billion dollars ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) residential construction had declined almost one-quarter by December to billion. The number of new nonfarm housing units started in including about public housing units amounted to about million a drop of about percent from the all-time high of close to million in Although seasonal declines followed a temporary upturn in September a relatively high level of starts was maintained through the last quarter caused partly by the easing of credit regulations. Sustained demand and a generally adequate supply of materials were also factors of importance Significant decreases were effected in less essential construction categories such as warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants and garages and other nonresidential buildings. This reduction was achieved by a variety of specific limitation orders and by credit restraints and beginning in the fourth quarter of by drastic cutbacks in allotments of controlled materials Total public construction seasonally adjusted though higher for each month in compared with the corresponding month of showed a slight upward trend during most of the year with increases in military and naval residential and industrial construction more than offsetting decreases principally in highways and conservation and development projects. ( See discussion under Government Fiscal Operations. ) In November the volume of public construction turned up significantly lifting the year 's total to about percent above Nonfarm inventories. The year was a period of unprecedented inventory accumulation. ( See appendix tables B-3 and B-5. ) But even more noteworthy were the tremendous fluctuations within the year with an unusually high rate of accumulation being reached in the first half of By the end of the year the rate of inventory accumulation had dropped drastically. On the other hand the needs of the expanding security program led to a continuous build-up of inventories in the industries primarily concerned with defense activity During the accumulation of nonfarm inventories was about billion dollars the highest rate on record. This compares with billion in and billion in the previous record. The rate of inventory accumulation on a seasonally adjusted annual basis was billion dollars in the first quarter of then soared to the unprecedented level of billion in the second quarter dropped to around billion in the third quarter and declined further to billion in the fourth quarter The rapid rise of total inventories in the first half of and the even more rapid fall in the rate of accumulation in the second half represented basically the over-anticipation by manufacturers and sellers of the level of consumer demand and the subsequent steps taken to adjust to actual sales levels There was after midyear a major divergence in trend between retail inventories and those in manufacturing. ( See appendix tables B-20 and B-21. ) Retail inventories after rising in the first half of began to turn down and by the end of the year were at about the same level as at the beginning. The problem of " excess " inventories was particularly acute in the case of retailers ' stocks of durable goods and apparel where very heavy ordering by retailers had taken place to avoid anticipated shortages which did not materialize Manufacturers ' inventories on the other hand continued to rise during the second half of the year but at a much slower rate than during the first half. The increase in manufacturers ' inventories occurred primarily in the expanding defense industries. Inventories of nondurable goods remained stable during the second half of the year while inventories of durable goods continued to expand CHART SOURCES AND USES OF CORPORATE FUNDS From to I95l,there was a large increase in corporate outlays for plant and equipment and inventories. External financing was more important in the past year than in i960 SOURCES RETAINED EARNINGS I BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I I I DEPRECIATION RESERVES OTHER SOURCES ( EXTERNAL ) USES PLANT AND EQUIPMENT OUTLAYS CHANGE IN INVENTORIES OTHER USES J/ PROFITS ESTIMATES FOR THIRD AND FOURTH QUARTERS BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS NOTE : EXCLUDES FINANCIAL CORPORATIONS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ESTIMATES BASED ON SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION AND OTHER FINANCIAL DATA ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) At the end of the inventory-sales ratio was at about the levels prevailing during the previous postwar high but it was below prewar levels. In manufacturing the ratio expanded through the first three quarters and then declined slightly. In retailing the rise was concentrated in the first half of the year. The ratio declined in the second half as retailers were successful in reducing their inventories Corporate finance. The financing of business expansion did not give rise to major problems during As already noted Government inducements through tax amortization loans and aids such as loan guarantees helped to expedite some more urgently needed projects but covered in all only a minor fraction of capital investment requirements Despite a large decline in their earnings after taxes nonfinancial corporations ' total use of funds in for fixed and working capital was about billion dollars as large as during and billion dollars larger than in any other postwar year. ( See chart and appendix table B-37. ) Corporate outlays for plant and equipment were about billion dollars greater than in There were sharp declines in the rate of increase in customer accounts and acquisitions of liquid assets. For the year as a whole the book value of corporate inventories showed a slightly greater increase than during but by the end of the year inventory accumulation had become very small About percent of total uses of funds was internally financed a smaller proportion than in any of the other postwar years. As a result of high corporate taxes and large dividend disbursements retained corporate earnings declined to about two-thirds of the level of Approximately percent of total corporate profits was accounted for by tax liabilities and about percent of profits after taxes was paid out in dividends Corporate depreciation allowances expanded about billion dollars above increased somewhat by rapid amortization as an inducement to certain types of expansion A record total of billion dollars was obtained from external sources of funds including the corporations ' own reserves of about billion for Federal income taxes. Increases in bank loans and mortgage loans were moderately larger than during ; net new issues of stocks and bonds exceeded the total by percent. The huge increase in bond issues which occurred despite significant increases in interest rates was mainly for the financing of capacity expansion in the utilities and in the iron and steel nonferrous metals machinery and chemical industries International transactions In the expansion of defense and private demand in other countries of the free world supported by increased military aid from the United States brought about an expansion of United States exports of goods and CHART EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES Since early rising exports and slackening imports have increased the United States export surplus BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES1 ' ^ IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES-1 ' I I I I I I I I J I I960 * ANNUAL RATES ^ INCLUDES INCOME ON INVESTMENTS ^ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC AOVISERSs SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) services to a peacetime record of more than billion dollars. Imports of goods and services reached a new high during the year despite a large decline in the quantity of commodity imports during the second and third quarters which accompanied the lull in private demand. The rise in exports of goods and services during the year exceeded that in imports and the United States export surplus which had fallen to an annual rate of billion dollars in the second half of under the impact of the sharp post-Korean rise of merchandise imports increased to one of approximately billion dollars in the second half of ( See chart and table ) United States exports. Total exports of goods and services in were about percent above the level with commodity and service items both running higher. ( See appendix tables B-38 and B-39. ) The large volume of commodity exports in reflected the high demand for goods in virtually all foreign countries resulting from the rearmament programs abroad the high incomes of the raw-material-producing countries and TABLE United States exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of dollars ] Exports of goods and services * Period Surplus of exports Annual rates : First half Second half _ _ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter a Fourth quarter Imports of goods and services i Includes income on foreign investments * Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) accelerated programs of economic expansion in underdeveloped areas Recorded commodity exports reached a peak value of billion dollars compared with billion dollars in as a result mainly of increased quantities of goods shipped and to a lesser extent higher prices for exports. ( See appendix tables B-41 and B-42. ) Exports financed under the Mutual Defense Assistance Program in nearly tripled their level of million dollars and exports excluding MDAP shipments rose from billion dollars to approximately billion dollars All economic classes of exports increased above their levels in dollar value with exports of coal and wheat for example doubling not only in value but in quantity as well. Exports of semi-manufactured goods and finished manufactures were more than percent above their dollar values judging from data for the first months of Approximately three-fourths of the increase in the value of exports of finished manufactures represented larger quantities ; the remainder represented higher prices. Despite domestic scarcities exports of machinery in were more than percent greater in dollar value than in the previous year The value of agricultural machinery exports was percent above the level construction machinery percent higher and mining equipment exports were up by more than percent United States imports. Purchases of both goods and services abroad increased above their levels despite a large decline in commodity imports in the second and third quarters of ( See appendix tables B-38 B-43 and B-44. ) These imports in the year as a whole were billion dollars compared with billion in There was also an increase in Government purchases of goods and services abroad in connection with the defense program and the war in Korea with Government expenditures for services abroad rising rapidly The impact of the Korean outbreak on United States commodity imports began to weaken after the first quarter of Total commodity im- ports after rising to an all-time high in March declined steeply from April through September and increased somewhat in the final quarter. The decline was almost entirely due to smaller quantities of goods entering the country. Average unit values of imports continued to rise through June and have since declined only slightly. Although spot prices of worldtraded materials had begun to slip after the first quarter the decline was not reflected in unit values until the third quarter because of the lag between the placing of orders and deliveries. In addition to seasonal movements the fall in imports reflected in part the leveling off of general consumer and business buying which characterized the United States economy and in part the availability of ample inventories of imported commodities which had been accumulated during the second half of and the first quarter of in a wave of anticipatory buying. Although the decline in imports occurred in all commodity categories and from all areas it was largest both in dollars and in percentage terms in crude foodstuffs imports of which dropped percent. Imports of crude materials declined percent during the same period This substantial 6-month decline in total imports illustrates among other things the extreme short-run sensitivity of our imports to domestic business activity and to the level of inventories of imported commodities Imports in of certain scarce basic materials including tin lead and zinc were considerably below their levels as table shows In the cases of lead and zinc the decline was due mainly to foreign prices being higher than the domestic ceilings. The decline in tin imports began in late but its continuation in reflected the decision of the Government early in March when prices were about $ a pound to suspend tin purchases until prices were more reasonable After the United States withdrew from the market tin prices fell ; but since July when they were as low as $ on the London market they have gradually risen. Despite the decline of imports during tin consumption in the United States was maintained at about its level As a result industrial stocks were reduced and by the end of the year they were at very low levels TABLE United States imports of selected metals [ Thousands of short tons annual rates ] Period Copper First half Second half First half Second half * Lead Tin Zinc _ _ _ i Estimates based on data available through October Source : Department of Commerce Imports of copper in although at a lower level than during the first half of were fairly well maintained in the face of tremendous world demand Foreign aid and other financing of export surplus. In the United States export surplus of goods and services was smaller than foreign aid expenditures and foreign countries were able to accumulate gold and dollar reserves. In aggregate foreign aid rose only slightly above levels and at approximately billion dollars was less than the export surplus. ( See appendix table B-40. ) Foreign countries as a whole accumulated gold and dollar assets in the first part of the year but in the second half losses by the United Kingdom France and a few other countries outweighed continued accumulation elsewhere Although private capital exports declined below their level in when they had been inflated by a speculative movement in the third quarter reinvestment of undistributed earnings from direct investments abroad which are not counted as part of capital outflow probably increased in Direct investment of United States capital abroad which had declined in dropped further in Much of the decline in direct investment is accounted for by reduced investment in foreign petroleum properties resulting from the fact that facilities necessary to meet the estimated requirements of the near future have been completed. Despite the measures to encourage foreign investment noted in Part III of this Review there has been little reduction of the basic obstacles to United States investment abroad Government fiscal operations There was a marked shift in the budgetary position of the Federal Government during calendar Early in the year at the time of the heavy income tax payments a large surplus was accumulated in the conventional budget accounts. Thereafter the seasonal decline in receipts and the steadily rising trend of expenditures for national security programs caused a sizable budget deficit For the year as a whole Federal expenditures aggregated billion dollars and net budget receipts billion. Both totals represented substantial increases above the preceding year. Only in the wartime years were expenditures higher than in while last year 's budget receipts were by far the highest in the Nation 's history The budget deficit of billion dollars in calendar compares with the deficit of million dollars in The increase in the public debt was from billion dollars at the end of to billion at the close of A reconciliation of these changes with trust accounts and other transactions and with changes in the General Fund balance is shown in table The trend of the total Federal debt is illustrated in chart The rise in budget receipts permitted some debt retirement in late and early In fact not until October did the total public debt rise significantly above the amount outstanding at the end of June Exclusive of the amounts held by U. S. Government agencies and trust funds TABLE Summary of Federal fiscal operations [ Billions of dollars ] Calendar year Calendar year Item Budget accounts : Net receipts1 E xpenditures ._ _ Surplus or deficit ( ) Trust accounts clearing account and other transactions excess of receipts or expenditures ( ) Investments of Government agencies and trust accounts in public debt securities ( net ) excess of investments ( ) Total First half Second half ( _ ) Total Net increase or decrease ( ) in public debt Net increase ( ) or decrease in General Fund balance _ ? " Total. Public debt General Fund balance i Gross receipts less appropriations to Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and refunds of 8receipts Less than million dollars End of period Note : Public debt excludes guaranteed obligations which total less than million dollars Source : Treasury Department the debt was lower at the end of than at.mid-1950. ( See appendix tables B-29 and B-30. ) Public debt operations. In addition to a moderate amount of new borrowing during the Treasury engaged in a substantial volume of refinancing the greater part of both operations falling within the second half of the calendar year. All new marketable issues were short-term as were the marketable issues offered in exchange for maturing or called marketable obligations. New money was obtained from the public by increasing the volume of 3-month Treasury bills by floating two issues of a new type of Treasury bill the tax anticipation series and by issuing a new series of nonmarketable Treasury savings notes made more attractive by interest rates in line with those on other short-term issues Public debt transactions of special significance in furthering the policy of keeping the debt outside the banking system were the offer in March of long-term nonmarketable convertible bonds in exchange for two series of long-term marketable bonds and the optional extension of maturing Series E savings bonds. Of the billion dollars long-term bonds to which the exchange offer applied billion were turned in for the new nonmarketables. Under legislation approved in March holders of maturing Series E bonds were given the privilege of holding the bonds another years during which they would earn an over-all rate of return equal to that of the first period of ownership or of exchanging them for Series G CHART THE PUBLIC DEBT At the end of Government debt held outside Government investment occounts was unchanged from a year ago. The increase in the holdings of these accounts equaled the rise in the total debt BILLIO NS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF LLARS END OF QUARTER # s TOTAL PUBLIC DEE TOTAL EXCLUDING ^ DEBT HELD BY ^ U.S. GOVERNMENT INVESTMENT ACCOUNTS I I ~ ! r- i I i i I960 CALENDA R YEARS i/ OBLIGATIONS ISSUED OR GUARANTEED BY THE U.S. GOVERNMENT SOURCE : TREASURY DEPARTMENT bonds. These options were made available in order to minimize the volume of cash redemptions Most new Treasury borrowing during was at rising rates of interest For example the average yield on new issues of 3-month Treasury bills which had been percent for as a whole was percent in the first quarter of and climbed to percent by the fourth quarter. The approximate yield to maturity on the new Treasury savings notes was raised to percent compared with percent on the previous series. ( See appendix table B-31. ) Consolidated cash accounts. On a consolidated cash basis there was a surplus of billion dollars in the calendar year As shown in chart which is in terms of seasonally adjusted annual rates the large excess of cash receipts over cash payments in the first half of the year was replaced by a cash deficit in the second half The difference between the surplus in the consolidated cash accounts summarized in table and the calendar year deficit in the conventional budget accounts given in table is largely accounted for by net cash receipts in the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and TABLE Government cash receipts from and payments to the public [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Federal Government : Cash receipts Cash payments Calendar year Calendar year Receipt or payment _ ._. ! Total i First half Second hain State'and local governments : Cash receipts ._.__-_. Cash payments. _ State and local cash surplus or deficit ( ) Total government : Cash receipts _ Cash payments Federal cash surplus or deficit ( ) ._ Total cash surplus or deficit ( ) i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix table A-5 other trust funds. Most of the payroll taxes for example are appropriated directly to the OASI Trust Fund and are excluded from net budget receipts All of the important sources of receipts shared in the rise from to Not only has the tax base grown as a result of the marked business expansion and the price rise but substantially higher tax rates have become effective. Three major revenue bills estimated to yield a combined total of about billion dollars in a full year of operation were enacted between September and October In addition the tax base for OASI was broadened as of January TABLE Federal cash payments to the public by function [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Function Total cash payments Military services _ __. International security and foreign relations Veterans ' services and benefits Social security welfare and health _ Agriculture and agricultural resources Interest Other Deductions from Federal employees ' salaries for retirementClearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Calendar year Total i First half Second half * sTi i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix table A-7 Calendar year A functional breakdown of Federal cash payments is presented in table in terms of seasonally adjusted annual rates. Apart from the increases for the military services and the international programs which are discussed below the major changes in expenditures from to were the reductions of about one-third in payments for veterans ' services and benefits and of more than one-third in agricultural programs and the increase of about one-third in social security and related programs. The latter increase was associated in large part with the liberalization of benefits provided by the amendments to the Social Security Act. The " other " category in the table includes such programs as atomic energy and Defense Production Act activities which expanded in In the special classification of Federal cash payments by type of recipient and transaction presented in table the major change from to TABLE Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Classification of payment Direct cash payments for goods and services excluding military services : To individuals for services rendered _ To business and foreign countries for goods and services Loans and transfer payments to individuals Loans investments subsidies and other transfers to business and agriculture Loans and transfer payments to foreign countries and international institutions ._ __ Military services cash payments for goods and services __ Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphioreports Total Federal cash payments to the public Calendar year Calendar year Total First half Second half * i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix table A-8 is shown to be in payments for goods and services for the military. Loans and transfer payments to individuals declined largely because of lower dividend payments to veterans holding National Service Life Insurance while loans and transfers to foreign countries and international institutions increased Further tabulations of Government financial transactions will be found in appendix A in connection with the supporting tables for the Nation 's Economic Budget Major national security programs. Cash expenditures for the military services advanced from billion dollars in to billion dollars in This increase was larger than the rise in total cash payments in this period. In the second half of payments for the military services were about percent larger than in the first half. Outlays for the international programs increased to billion dollars in but they were somewhat lower in the second half of the year than in the first half CHART FEDERAL CASH RECEIPTS FROM AND PAYMENTS TO THE PUBLIC Steadily rising cash payments in turned the surplus in the f i r s t half of the y e a r into a deficit in the second half BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * I CASH RECEIPTS CASH PAYMENTS 1st HALF 2nd HALF I st HALF CALENDAR YEARS End HALF * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES SOURCES'- TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND BUREAU OF THE BUDGET The category of " major security programs " includes in addition to the programs mentioned above these other programs which are not shown separately in table ; atomic energy maritime civil defense economic stabilization and Defense Production Act activities. In the aggregate these programs came to billion dollars in bringing the total for all of the major security programs to billion dollars These expenditure data are somewhat different from the estimates in the national income and product accounts of the value of current production being absorbed by the security programs. ( See appendix table B-l. ) The difference is explainable partly by the lag of Federal payments behind deliveries of goods and services and partly by the fact that Federal expenditures are not always for currently produced goods and services but sometimes instead represent transfer payments or purchases of land or of existing facilities or equipment Major nonmilitary construction programs. Movements in total seasonally adjusted expenditures for public construction ( excluding military and naval construction but including State and local as well as other Federal con- struction ) showed mixed tendencies during ; in contrast total private construction expenditures fell continuously after the first quarter This contrast partly reflected greater inherent difficulties in reversing the trend of many large-scale public projects and partly the important role which some of these public programs must play in sustaining the economy 's strength in the " long pull " defense period. Table which shows specified types of new public construction expenditures in prices for selected years since sets the record in better perspective During the past years public construction of the developmental type has increased but by less than would have occurred had there been no mobilization program. The increases from to were for school construction and for housing much of it in defense areas. Both were TABLE New public construction expenditures for major development programs [ Millions of dollars prices ] Program Total Education __ Health _._ Development of natural resources Transportation _ Housing ._ __ _ _ i _ i * -_ _ i Includes Works Progress Administration projects adjusted for probable lower productivity NOTE. Construction expenditures by Federal State and local governments are included Source : Department of Labor almost entirely State and local programs. Decreases took place in transportation ( principally highways ) and in natural resources development It is significant that for neither of these did the postwar peak of expenditures in reach the level in real terms State and local finance. Receipts of State and local governments increased by about billion dollars or percent from to Most of the major sources of revenue shared in the increase which while reflecting in some degree recent adoptions of new taxes or higher rates was attributable for the most part to the prevailing high level of economic activity. The increase in the total spending of these governmental units from to was less than the growth in receipts. The combined State-local deficit was reduced from million dollars to million in ( See table ) Despite record revenues increases in tax rates were more general than reductions among State and local governments in Caution was also shown in undertaking programs which would involve new expenditures although the increase of population creation of new suburban areas population shifts associated with defense activities and other factors placed State and local authorities under strong pressure to extend and improve governmental services. To some extent of course the higher level of expenditures in merely reflects increases in prices and wage rates III. Central Problems for ADVANCING THE SECURITY BUILD-UP A <J " over-all measure of progress in the security program is the virtual doubling from the end of to the end of of total security expenditures for goods and services which reached an annual rate of billion dollars in the fourth quarter of Military expenditures during the past months have increased by the amount contemplated in the fiscal budget. We are still a long way however from achieving our basic security objectives of building up the military and economic strength of the free world as a whole. Major difficulties have been encountered for example in getting our military production program under way. These difficulties involve chiefly the machine tool and other bottle-necks and design engineering and production problems associated with the decision to produce exceedingly complex equipment of the most advanced design rather than to concentrate on large-scale production of types already in use The proposed build-up The security program now being submitted by the President calls for a further increase in total security expenditures for goods and services from the present annual rate of billion dollars to a rate of almost billion dollars by the end of Under present plans the maximum rate of expenditures under this program would be slightly higher and would probably be reached late in Besides a large further increase in expenditures for the military production programs which will supply United States forces and meet our North Atlantic Treaty commitments an increase is planned in the atomic energy and civil defense programs. Economic assistance to other free nations needed to help some of them carry out their mobilization programs and to help them strengthen their economies is expected to be continued at approximately the present reduced levels of expenditure. More than percent of total security expenditures in will be spent on the military establishment of this country and on military goods for our Allies Although the 20-billion-dollar increase in the annual rate of security expenditures expected during the next months is about equal to the increase achieved from the fourth quarter of to the fourth quarter of its character will be substantially different. ( See chart ) Nearly all of the projected increase is represented by expenditures on military hard goods and military construction while about three-fifths CHART THE SECURITY PROGRAM EXPENDITURES FOR GOODS AND SERVICES IN PRICES During the annual rate of security expenditures is expected to increase to a level about billion dollars above the fourth quarter of Most of the increase will be for military goods and construction BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * TOTAL SECURITY ^ EXPENDITURES OTHER SECURITY PROGRAMS ^ MILITARY GOODS AND CONSTRUCTION ! / 4th Qtr I960 4th Q1r 4th Qtr 2nd Qtr I95I I952 I953 * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES U INCLUDES MILITARY PERSONNEL COSTS AND OTHER SALARY EXPENDITURES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ATOMIC ENERGY PROGRAM STOCKPILING AND FOREIGN ECONOMIC I NONMILITARY ) AID ^ IHARO AND SOFT GOODS AND CONSTRUCTION FOR U.S. AND NATO FORCES SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE BUREAU OF THE BUDGET AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS of the increase during the past months occurred in these categories The military production program calls for a doubling of hard goods deliveries and military construction within a year with an increasing portion represented by aircraft and other relatively hard-to-produce types of military equipment. Equipping the military forces as now planned will require some further increase in deliveries of military equipment in and maintenance of a high rate of deliveries for a year or more. Deliveries of some items will begin to decline fairly soon as requirements are met while deliveries of other items will continue to increase through the period Achievement of this expansion would increase the proportion of the total national output taken for security purposes from nearly percent in the fourth quarter of to more than percent in the corresponding period of this year. For the year as a whole between and percent of total output would be devoted to security. Indicative of the concen- trated impact of the program more than half of the national security output of goods and services will come from the metalworking and construction industries though they account for only a little more than a quarter of the national output as a whole Plans for the security program in the longer run are necessarily flexible The size and composition of forces the extent of the build-up of war reserves and the rates of replacement of materiel all affect the longerrun cost of the program. As a rough guide however it has been assumed that the total maintenance cost of forces now planned plus the atomic energy program would be in the general range of to billion dollars annually until a firmer outlook for peace is established. In the perspective of the probable size of the economy of the middle 's a program of this general magnitude would not place us under an intolerable economic strain. Such a program would take roughly one-eighth of the total national output we could expect to have with reasonably full use of our resources. With success in meeting current objectives for capacity expansion most of the now serious materials problems would become relatively unimportant. The expected steel capacity of over million tons and an aluminum supply of over million tons would take care of sustained defense requirements and reasonably satisfy other needs associated with a maximum employment economy. In the case of copper and some alloy metals our needs would have to be met in part by further development of substitutes Speed of the build-up The question has frequently been raised whether economic policy decisions have interfered with the defense program by providing too much civilian production at the expense of munitions and military equipment. Some confusion has been introduced into this question by the failure to distinguish between ( a ) the intended size of the defense program and ( b ) the difficulties which arise in trying to carry out a program of given size on schedule. On the score of intended size the Council does not believe that the current defense program has been or should be determined primarily by consideration of how much is left over for civilian uses though the effect of the program on our ability to become economically stronger deserves important consideration. As we have many times said a security program even larger than that now under way if found to be necessary on other grounds would be well within the economic capacity of the country even though it would raise economic problems of substantial import It does not appear that the security program thus far undertaken has been slowed down by insufficient cutbacks in civilian use. It seems clear that for the most part materials and manpower have been available for military production when needed. It also appears that there have been certain bottlenecks and shortages which could not have been appreciably alleviated by earlier or more drastic civilian cutbacks. The mobiliza- tion officials have been wise in avoiding unnecessary dislocations by not reducing civilian utilization of productive resources before the defense program was ready to take up the slack Moreover it may have been entirely wise not to have carried the military program forward substantially faster by sacrificing the opportunity of constantly improving the quality of fighting equipment. The Council does not attempt to evaluate such issues of military strategy. We can only point out that if a faster military build-up becomes necessary on security grounds its accomplishment would be impossible without more extensive civilian cutbacks closely synchronized with the defense program In any event strenuous efforts will be required to achieve the objectives now set for Hard work is now under way to overcome the shortage of machine tools which will affect the aircraft production program for some time to come and to relieve the shortage of ferro-alloys in part through the development of substitutes. There is urgent need for firming up military production schedules and translating over-all requirements into bills of particulars for materials manpower and tools ALLOCATING SCARCE MATERIALS The availability of metals To carry out the security program as now planned while achieving present objectives for expansion of basic capacity and maintaining other activities on a basis consistent with an extended mobilization effort will require some major shifts in the utilization of resources. These shifts are imposed by the shortage of metals and involve mainly the durable goods sector of the economy which accounts for about one-quarter of total national output. In the nondurable goods and services sector the mobilization program will not require major resource adjustments. The impact on that sector is discussed at a later point in this Review mainly in terms of labor availability and inflationary pressures Military requirements for the major metals will increase through most of and at their peak will absorb roughly one-fifth of the steel supply one-third of the copper supply and about half the supply of aluminum It is probable however that with large increases in supplies these proportions will fall substantially in Thus the main materials impact and the main economic impact of the military production program probably will come during the next months The upper panel of chart indicates historical and prospective changes in the supplies of copper steel and aluminum available after deducting military and stockpile requirements for the output of investment goods consumer durable goods public and private construction and other nonmilitary uses. Comparison of with indicates a moderate reduction in the availability of steel and copper and very sharp reductions in the availability of aluminum owing to rapidly rising military requirements CHART METALS SUPPLY AND REQUIREMENTS FOR CIVILIAN USE In there will be moderately less steel and substantially less aluminum and copper available for civilian use. This1 will impose curtailments in nonmilitary construction producers durable equipment and metal-using consumer goods INDEX = INDEX I949s | I960 BILLIONS OF DOLLARS NONMILITARY METALS REQUIREMENTS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS PROJECTED CONSUMER DURABLE GOODS ( METAL-USING ) { i \ PRODUCERS * DURABLE EQUIPMENT | SOURCES : DEFENSE PRODUCTION ADMINISTRATION AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS These reductions would leave the steel supply available for nonmilitary uses some percent above the level and not much under the level of the last years. However military requirements will impinge much more severely on particular types of steel notably high-alloy steels Comparing with supplies of copper available for civilian users will be reduced by about to percent and of aluminum about percent ; the exact reductions depending in part on whether it is decided that stockpiling can be resumed and if so at what rate. Available supplies of copper will be reduced nearly to the level while aluminum supplies for civilian use will decline about one-third below the level. Part of these reductions however had already occurred by the fourth quarter of It must be emphasized that although these figures are based on the best current estimates of total supplies and military requirements any of a number of factors could alter them appreciably Beginning in continuing large increases in supplies are expected to result in a moderate increase in the availability of steel for nonmilitary uses and a substantial increase in aluminum. Some improvement in the copper position also appears possible. A major factor in determining how rapidly consumer durable goods and other types of restricted output can rise will be the extent to which steel and aluminum are substituted for copper For the near term the very tight aluminum supply will limit the latter type of substitution Major required adjustments There is no one formula for apportioning limited material supplies Even after military production objectives have been determined there is wide range for judgment in determining a rational pattern of metals use If the maintenance of short-term economic stability were to be given overriding priority materials allocations policy would attempt to maximize the availability of metals for consumer output at the expense of their use for investment. This policy would probably prolong the period of metals shortages and comprehensive direct controls. On the other hand the attempt to overcome basic shortages of materials power and transport at the earliest possible date would require drastic reductions in the use of metals for consumer output and for the construction of schools hospitals and other types of investment of high utility Although it is not possible to present in detail the adjustments which the reduced availability of materials will impose their general nature and implications may be indicated. The lower panel of chart indicates the changes that have occurred since and the change in prospect for in the dollar volume ( measured in terms of constant prices ) of the major nonmilitary metal-using activities. Chart compares the estimated distribution of steel uses in with the actual distribution in and The projected estimates in these charts are consistent with the CHART USES OF STEEL Less steel will be available for nonmilitary use in The reduction will mainly a f f e c t automobiles household appliances and some types of construction MILLIONS OF TONS ' MILLIONS OF TONS PROJECTED TOTAL USES OF STEEL S MISCELLANEOUS- ADDITIONS TO INVENTORY " EXPORT MILITARY CONSTRUCTION- * PRODUCERS * DURABLE EQUIPMENT EXCLUDING AUTOMOBILES CONSUMER DURABLE GOODS INCLUDING ALL_ AUTOMOBILES " " I960 SOURCE : DEFENSE PRODUCTION ADMINISTRATION materials supply picture as described above and witK present allocation policies These charts indicate that between the peak year of nonmilitary uses in metals and there was only a moderate reduction in nonmilitary uses of metals concentrated mainly in consumer durable goods and in residential construction. The decline in residential construction has saved copper but not an important amount of steel. Steel used in consumer durable goods including automobiles declined about percent while other major uses were maintained or expanded.. Steel used in producers ' durable equipment increased by about a third. This expanded use and the maintenance of total construction despite cuts in particular types of construction were in part associated with increasing investment in the major industrial expansion programs The much larger decline in the availability of metals in prospect for will force curtailments in all these metal-using activities. A reduction of more than percent in total output of consumer supplies housing automobiles and appliances from the level is indicated by the materials allocations for the first quarter of Some further reduction in these metal allocations is planned for the second quarter. This makes allowance for considerable conservation and change in types of goods bought since the percentage reduction in the permitted use of copper and aluminum is greater than the projected cut in consumer outlays. In view of the expected increase in programmed investment discussed in the next section the maximum reduction in expenditures on producers ' durable equipment may be not more than to percent. In addition it will be necessary to reduce total private and public nondefense construction ( other than residential ) about percent below the level and some types by much more even if copper is used sparingly. Steel used in nonmilitary construction will not decline by as much as the over-all dollar volume of such construction because of the shift toward industrial construction which uses relatively more steel. Sufficient steel supplies should be available to permit an increase in steel used for maintenance and repair. The much more restricted availability of copper and aluminum might even operate to prevent a full utilization of steel capacity in Major problems in materials allocation The allocation process moved ahead on schedule in the second half of to the stage of comprehensive quarterly allocation of steel copper and aluminum under the Controlled Materials Plan ; and additional materials components and equipment items were subjected to other forms of allocation or use restriction. The use of this machinery for the achievement of a highly selective pattern of materials use raises some problems The Controlled Materials Plan as originally instituted provided no way to insure that the producers of common-use products and components having gotten their allotments of materials ^ would supply defense con- tractors and subcontractors in preference to less essential users. Throughout the latter part of there was increasing difficulty in getting essential components and equipment for military production and high priority investment projects despite the fact that components and equipment manufacturers were producing at record rates. The National Production Authority is now attacking this problem primarily by spot expediting actions to move urgently needed component and equipment orders to the front of the producers ' production and delivery schedules. For some types of equipment where necessary and feasible this approach will eventually involve complete control over producers ' schedules This line of action can usefully supplement the basic operation of advance planning for production of equipment and components to meet the needs of scheduled military and industrial expansion programs so that allotments of materials can be geared to the future rather than the past Effective control of inventory accumulation is another problem. There is evidence that many producers ' inventories of scarce materials are substantially in excess of operating needs. The necessary control techniques for dealing with this problem are available and the problem is one of enforcement. The production agencies are taking action to locate and redistribute excess inventories. Continual screening of military requirements also is necessary to insure that inventories are kept to a minimum INCREASING PRODUCTION Production and inflation It is often taken for granted that increasing production is the natural economic remedy for the inflationary pressure which the defense program produces. The relation between production and inflation is however not a simple one The central task in halting inflation is to bring supply and demand into balance at the prevailing price level. Whether an increase of output actually will tend to bring demand and supply into balance at the current price level depends on a number of factors An increase of production in the form of highly specialized munitions and military equipment may widen the gap between the demand and supply of other goods. The reason for this possible result is that workers and businesses receive increases in income as a result of expanded munitions production. These increases in income normally result in a rise in consumer and business demand for civilian goods the supply of which has not been increased A very different case is one in which the increase reflects increased efficiency in the production of widely used civilian goods for example agricultural products which could result in a decline in the price per unit of output In this case the increased production may tend to narrow the gap between demand and supply because the supply is increased while private money incomes may not rise correspondingly Another case is one in which the increase in the production of goods ( other than specialized military goods ) is achieved by increased employment. This has the result of increasing both the market supply of goods available for civilian purchase and the incomes of consumers and businesses If not all of the added income is reflected in increased spending such an increase in production may be expected to have a net effect of narrowing the gap between demand and supply although by only a fraction of the amount by which production is increased. If however the additional production is achieved only by a substantial increase in unit cost for example through the payment of premium compensation to workers for overtime the income added in connection with the production might have a net inflationary effect One of the chief methods of increasing future production is investment in new productive facilities and in the modernization of existing facilities. If such investment is made in those industries where plant capacity and efficiency limit the increase of production and of productivity the effect after the new facilities come into use is to increase supply and narrow the gap between demand and supply. During the period when the investment is being made however materials and other resources are diverted from producing consumer goods into the production of capital goods which of course can not be consumed while income payments continue to be made to workers and other producers. An expansion of production that takes the form of increased investment thus would increase inflationary pressure during the period before the new facilities were brought into productive use The fact that some kinds of increases in production create inflationary pressures should not be interpreted as indicating that such increases must therefore be postponed or abandoned. Certain types of output must be expanded despite the fact that they add to inflationary pressures. Thus military production is undertaken for imperative reasons which do not permit its abandonment for the sake of lessening inflationary pressures Similarly the expansion of the industrial mobilization base may be so important that any immediate inflationary pressures which might be produced may have to be accepted. The inflationary impact of such programs nonetheless is a reason for subjecting them to controls which will guide the expansion of production into the most essential lines and for adopting other stabilization measures to limit demand. An expanding supply of consumer goods is likely to improve consumer acceptance of such restrictions as are needed. Clearly an expansion of total production if it is well balanced makes a major contribution toward the expansion of our economic strength Factors limiting increase of total production Given adequate demand for goods the problem of increasing production is essentially one of overcoming certain physical limiting factors. With respect to most nondurable goods and services actual output during the coming year undoubtedly will depend mainly on the intensity of demand In several of the soft goods industries the available labor force plant capacity and materials would permit increases of production. With respect to many consumer and producer durable goods however the availability of raw materials especially metals is the limiting factor determining possible increases in output. Expanding metals output is largely a problem of productive capacity including electric generating capacity. Limitations on the supply of manpower with a few special exceptions have not interfered with the growth of production and the prospect is that the supply of labor can be increased to meet the expanding need at least over the next months Increasing the supply of raw materials The most immediate restraint on production both in the United States and throughout the free world continues to be the limited supply of certain raw materials. Comparing with the free world output of many important raw materials showed large gains. ( See appendix table B-17. ) Increasing the free world supply of certain raw materials however continues to be a major problem Encouragement of private investment in raw materials production abroad requires reasonable protection of such investment and of fair profits realizable in dollars. Conversely countries that engage in needed expansion want assurance that neither shortages nor price inflation in the United States will undercut their own efforts to expand production. In some instances investments are needed in such ancillary facilities as a transportation system. For example the effective exploitation of Labrador and Quebec iron ore will depend largely on the early completion of the St Lawrence seaway project Pricing and related devices for encouraging production of essential metals and minerals deserve continued judicious use. First guaranteed floor prices in long-term procurement contracts are now being used and can be extended where necessary. Floor price guarantees help to increase domestic and foreign supplies of raw materials by eliminating the risk of a postemergency price decline to levels which would make additional production and investment unprofitable. Second where the costs of domestic or foreign marginal mines producing essential scarce minerals exceed United States price ceilings the use of premium prices or their equivalent would be desirable in cases where protection from abuses cart be assured. Premiums should be limited in time and amount and should apply only to the high-cost portion of output. The same policy is appropriate to encourage new development projects. Third a program to increase supplies of certain minerals and metals by adjusting price ceilings is appropriate where other methods less likely to impair price stabilization objectives are not effective. Recent ceiling price changes for lead and zinc represented an increase to domestic producers and should tend to increase domestic sup- plies. These price changes however have not yet resulted in significant improvements in imports. Fourth removal of the existing United States tariff on lead zinc and certain other metals would be desirable where this action would encourage imports or would ease the pressure on domestic prices Technological research and related efforts to conserve materials in short supply by simplifying designs using more plentiful substitutes or salvaging and re-using materials can help in increasing total production and in easing allocation and production problems. Specific suggestions have already been worked out in the construction industry for effecting substantial savings in the use of structural steel through the substitution of reinforced concrete and masonry or wood construction. Substantial savings of copper are planned in the electrical automotive and other industries by the substitution of aluminum as it becomes more plentiful Longer-range requirements for raw materials and the best methods of meeting them from sources in the United States and the free world generally have been under intensive study by the President 's Materials Policy Commission for the past year. The report of this Commission will soon be completed Enlarging the labor supply Availability of raw materials is the limiting factor in determining the possible increase of output in the durable goods sector of the economy The manpower needs for this sector involving the defense program constitute a priority which should be met. Defense and defense-related production will require about 2l/ $ million more workers in the fourth quarter of than in the fourth quarter of Some of these essential workers will be provided by cutbacks in the output of civilian durable goods and nondefense construction. Allowing also for some lengthening of working hours and a modest increase in productivity it seems that an increase in total civilian employment of about 15/3 million would be required to service the primary defense effort and to provide an adequate labor force for such increases in production in other sectors of the economy as might be expected in the light of probable increases in incomes and demand. The small possible addition of workers through further reducing unemployment is about counterbalanced by the probable withdrawal of manpower to enlarge the armed forces Judging from previous experience a net increase of about 1J/3 million in total civilian employment during is well within our capabilities An annual increase in the labor force of about million has been usual since the war even without such active recruitment as will occur at least in a few industries during the coming year Though there is no general manpower shortage nor any near-term prospect of one some localized labor shortages do exist. In November of the major labor market areas in the United States either had or were expected shortly to have labor shortages which threatened to impede essential activities. Another areas were listed as having a " balanced " labor supply ; in some of these the labor market will tighten as the pace of defense production is stepped up In addition to localized manpower shortages there are some urgent problems arising from scarcities of workers with particular skills such as those in the fields of engineering design and machinery operation which require considerable training to develop. The Government is stressing the importance of more adequate training programs and is assisting employers schools and labor to improve and expand such programs. When shortages of highly skilled metal workers threatened seriously to hamper machine tool production the industry was given priority in recruitment of labor through the Employment Service. Special consideration also was given to machine tool workers who were liable to call by Selective Service or as reserves by the Department of Defense. The Department of Labor and the Selective Service System are developing a joint policy which will provide more deferments for apprentices in skilled trades. In addition every effort should be made to expand the number of " on-the-job " trainees Full use should also be made of vocational education in public schools which contributes importantly to the supply of skilled and semi-skilled workers Preventable illnesses and accidents on and off the job can be reduced by strengthening public health medical care safety and " related programs Strengthening of the existing Federal-State vocational rehabilitation system could over the years return to the labor force hundreds of thousands of workers who are already trained and experienced In addition to specific labor shortages in industry there are increasing evidences of farm labor shortage. The steps being taken to meet this shortage include more extensive use of persons not normally in the labor force community participation in emergency situations fuller exchange of labor between farmers and between States better housing facilities and improved informational health and welfare services for migrant workers Part of the solution for manpower problems lies in placing facilities expansions and contracts in areas where there are ample labor supplies thus reducing the need for migration. To ensure that manpower considerations are given adequate attention in placing defense contracts the Department of Defense has developed a plan under which no such contract will be placed in a labor shortage area without prior consultation with the Employment Service But not all defense operations can be carried on in areas of adequate labor supply. The lack of housing and community facilities is the greatest obstacle to recruiting sufficient workers where it is necessary to bring them in from other localities. By mid-January some local areas had been classified as critical from the point of view of insufficient housing and community facilities and services to accommodate persons migrating to military installations and defense plants. The number of such areas is expected to increase substantially during Special assistance provided by the Defense Housing and Community Facilities and Services Act has been extended to some private housing units in these areas. Although the bulk of future need will continue to be met by private construction larger appropriations for publicly financed defense housing will be required for those types of housing and in those places where private enterprise can not be expected to meet the need. Additional aid to critical areas for essential community facilities and services should also be provided Guiding investment The necessary shifts in resource use outlined above will involve some further major changes in the pattern of private and public investment To meet war preparedness objectives and to work toward the substantial elimination of basic shortages by when so far as can now be judged military production will have passed its peak and be on the way toward a substantially lower maintenance level investment in Government-aided industrial expansion programs will have to increase further. As tentatively planned these programs will expand from a level of around billion dollars in to about l /z billion a year over the next years. ( See table ) In addition essential developmental investment including that for schools hospitals highways and natural resources will probably amount to roughly billion dollars in each of the next years Reduced availability of materials is expected to force a reduction comparing with of at least one-quarter in all other types of public and private investment. Though part of this decline in the rate of outlays had occurred by the end of full adjustment to such a pattern can not be accomplished all at once because of the necessity of completing a substantial volume of construction now under way Programmed expansion of productive capacity. The basic expansion programs are an important part of an economic strategy for a long period of partial mobilization. They contemplate in addition to meeting the top priority needs of the military the provision of an enlarged base of additional capacity not only as a reservoir of quick strength in the event of war but also as the long-range solution to the problem of adequate supply in all major sectors of the economy while maintaining a large security program The bulk of the investment in such programs is private though publiclyowned facilities constitute a major share of the program for expansion of munitions facilities and a quarter to a third of the electric power program The Federal Government has supported the private programs however with various forms of financial assistance in addition to giving them preference over other investment in the allocation of scarce materials The full industrial build-up program necessary for meeting mobilization objectives extends well beyond The progress made during the availability of materials and equipment and such advance scheduling of the programs as has been done indicate for and a continuance of very high rates of investment in these priority expansion programs as a group. The projected rates of outlay as shown for some major programs in table reflect further work on projects now under way and work on new projects for which in most instances fairly firm commitments have already been made. The actual rate of progress will depend in part on the availability of structural steel and other bottleneck items for construction and equipment These major expansion programs accounted for one-quarter of total private and public nonmilitary investment in ; in they may account for nearly one-third of the total. They will require in nearly half the copper and steel used in all nonmilitary investment TABLE Estimated plant and equipment expenditures in selected areas of programmed or Government-aided expansion [ Billions of dollars prices ] Program Total Electric power Petroleum Farm machinery _ Metalworking machinery _ Trucks and truck trailers Natural gas ._ _ ._ ._ _ __ __ * Iron and steel ( including byproduct coke ovens and iron ore mining facilities ) Railroad equipment * Aluminum _ Synthetic fibers * Taconite ( iron ore ) concentrates * Nitrogen ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * Indicates programs for which the Defense Production Administrator has announced objectives. Objectives have also been set recently for a number of other programs not shown in the table and involving for the most part relatively small investment. These include columbite and tantalite tungsten ore chromite cobalt molybdenum nickel sulfur lead magnesium chlorine hydrofluoric acid newsprint lubricating oil phenol phthalic anhydride metallurgical manganese ore zinc aniline high-purity oxygen and naphthalene Most of these " programs " are still only tentative proposals. Figures are in most cases not directly comparable with those in the first column of table partly on account of differences in industry classification and partly because not all projects are covered by tax amortization certificates Estimated average annual rate Includes both private and public power facilities Figures refer to value of proposed output of the type of equipment indicated and not to expansion of facilities for producing such equipment Less than million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Defense Production Administration Public investment. Many lines * of public investment outside the direct military area play an essential role in the defense build-up. These include among others the public electric power program minerals development highways and land water and forest conservation. Others are considered in the next section In view of the increased pressure on scarce materials in stemming from the build-up of the security program and defense-related industrial expansion many lines of public investment need to be curtailed still further But this curtailment will have to be highly selective. This can be achieved by a combination of materials allocation and careful Federal State and local budgeting. Some cut should be feasible in nonmilitary public construction as a whole The electric utilities private and public are planning to increase capacity by about million kilowatts or nearly percent during the next years Even with this program power availability is likely to remain a critical problem in certain regions where large load increases will occur such as the aluminum-producing Pacific Northwest and the areas where large new atomic energy plant requirements must be met. Looking farther ahead the increasing emphasis on the chemical electrometallurgical and other large power-using industries indicates a continuing rapid growth of power requirements. Power development by public agencies needs to play an important part in meeting them particularly where Federal multi-purpose river developments can provide large additions to power capacity along with other desirable results. Hydroelectric projects already begun should be completed rapidly. New projects serving defense and other essential requirements which should be undertaken are the St. Lawrence seaway and power project and the Niagara River redevelopment to furnish 1/2 to million kilowatts of capacity to users in the northeastern part of the country ; and also several projects in the Pacific Northwest Basic resource survey research and experimental programs as well as some actual land water forest range and mineral conservation and development projects need to be strengthened since these provide the underpinning for long-range production increases. For the immediate period ahead those activities less essential for defense will have to be postponed but such postponement can not long be continued without sacrifice to longer term security and production objectives Although the atomic energy program is now directed primarily toward the production of weapons the possibilities for future peacetime use of atomic energy and isotopes have not been forgotten. Several private utilities and other companies with the cooperation of the United States Atomic Energy Commission are investigating the technical and cost characteristics of the joint production of materials for weapons and electric power for general use. Fortunately almost all of the fissionable material being produced as well as a portion of the investment now being undertaken by the Atomic Energy Commission will be useful for peaceful purposes when the world situation no longer requires that they be kept available for defense The rate of maintenance of the highway system has for the past decade averaged far less than would be required to keep it in even reasonably adequate condition in the face of the phenomenally rapid growth of traffic Although some reduction in highway expenditures has to be made in the immediate future higher levels of construction and maintenance activity should be resumed as quickly as possible. The Federal highway aid program should be extended promptly to avoid any lapse when the present program expires no Restrictions on nonessential investment. The impact of materials restrictions on business investment has only recently been felt. But late in as the supply of metals and equipment tightened and as direct controls over construction were made effective the rate of investment in some less essential types of construction and equipment began a sharp decline. ( See charts and ) In with the national security programs sure to absorb resources at a greatly increased rate and the likelihood that the high priority industrial expansion programs will take at least as much as in it is evident that other types of investment must be brought well below levels Private housing construction for example will have to be cut probably by at least percent. In the commercial and nondefense-related industrial categories very few new construction starts are currently being approved and most of the current construction activity of those types represents merely the completion of projects already well under way. A continuance of this rigid restriction on new starts through would bring the volume of commercial construction by the end of the year down to perhaps half its current level which is in turn well below that of a year ago. Such a rigorous policy however is not contemplated. As projects under way are completed in it will be feasible and desirable to permit new start ? where most needed ( e. g. in areas of rapidly increasing employment ) while at the same time keeping the level of construction activity and the use of scarce materials below present levels in commercial nonpriority industrial and miscellaneous construction Business investment in machinery and other producers ' durable equipment is currently accounting for a much larger dollar outlay than all private construction combined and also absorbs larger amounts of scarce metals ( See charts and ) The rate of output of equipment is controlled by allotments of controlled materials to equipment producers ; but effective control to assure the direction of equipment to uses of greatest urgency requires further development Dispersal. One important problem related to achievement of security objectives is industrial dispersal. In previous Reviews the Council has recommended two general types of dispersal : first avoidance of overconcentration of industrial facilities within particular industrial and labor market areas and second within the framework of the whole economy a regional decentralization of industry which looks toward further development of cores of economic strength in the less developed large regions of the country. The President has already directed that applications for aid for industrial expansion as well as the allocation of critical materials for construction purposes be reviewed with an eye to dispersing essential defense activities within given labor market areas. More work needs to be done toward specifying precise standards for governing this kind of dispersal and seeing that it is balanced with an adequate dispersal of housing and III community facilities and services. Under this policy the principal instrument of dispersal must remain the location of new facilities. But over the course of a decade assuming a high level of investment in new plants possibly one-third of the present total value of industrial plant could be located according to dispersal standards Less headway has been made toward building up diversified and interrelated centers of industrial strength in various larger regions of the country such as the Far West and the Southeast. Here again the need is to establish workable standards to guide private firms and Government agencies in the selection of sites for new essential industrial operations Increasing agricultural production Increased agricultural production up to the limit of available acreage and with special increases in feed crops is contemplated in the Department of Agriculture 's goal for The recent high level of farm output about percent above the average has been a major restraint on inflation. Further gains are necessary to meet domestic consumption exports and storable reserves. Price support programs again will be used for this purpose The existing farm price support legislation for basic commodities including wheat corn and cotton was written during and It was intended to cushion producers against abnormal drops in prices which might result from production in excess of market demand. It was feared that large carry-overs would hang over the market and depress prices ; also that they would lead to excessive losses from price support operations and alienate public support for the farm program as a whole. Therefore the legislation provided for a reduction in price support levels when stocks were large in order to stimulate consumption and to hold down production The present situation is quite different from that envisaged in and The Secretary of Agriculture has asked farmers for maximum production of several of the basic commodities. Our reserves of wheat corn and cotton are all at lower levels than can be considered safe or desirable Yet under existing legislation if farmers succeed in increasing production sufficiently to build up reserves to safe or desirable levels they could be penalized by having their support prices reduced from percent to as low as percent of the effective parity. This possibility may act as a deterrent to maximum production of basic commodities by raising concern in the minds of many farmers lest the Government after enlisting them in an all-out production drive might leave them worse off as a result of their patriotism and hard work. Support prices for corn wheat cotton and dairy products at percent of parity have already been announced In addition wider and more effective use of fertilizer is necessary Expansion programs for nitrogen and other fertilizers should be expedited and adequate quantities of farm machinery provided. Newly irrigated land coming into production this year will contribute to the increase in output Over-all production objective for In the primary production objective is to boost the annual rate of output for defense by about billion dollars most of it in military hard goods items and military construction. About half of this should represent additional production ; about half would be diverted from civilian durable goods production and construction. ( See chart ) CHART GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT EXPENDITURES IN PRICES The increase in security expenditures during is expected to be larger than the hoped-for growth in total output BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * OBJECTIVE TOTAL PERSONAL * CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES " ~ GOVERNMENT PURCHASES GOODS AND SERVICES GROSS PRIVATE > DOMESTIC ^ INVESTMENT foTHER * J } NATIONAL INSECURITY " " " * 4th Qtr I960 * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES. FOREIGN INVESTMENT RELATIVELY VERY SMALL 4th Qtr 4th Qtr NOT SHOWN ON CHART SINCE AMOUNTS ARE SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS By the methods discussed above it should be feasible within the year to lift the annual rate of total output for defense and civilian purposes combined by at least percent or about to billion dollars. About twothirds of this increase or at least billion dollars should be a net gain in the area of durable goods including construction These production figures it should be emphasized are not a forecast. They only set forth desirable and feasible objectives. Enlargement of defense production and total production in depends primarily on the vigor and initiative of producers and workers. It depends upon the effectiveness and cohesion of the whole economic mobilization effort. It depends also on the success of the policies designed to remove roadblocks MINIMIZING BUSINESS DISLOCATION Minimizing local unemployment and geographical dislocations Although the national total of unemployment remained at a low level throughout a number of areas have serious unemployment problems Many of these areas concentrate on one or two major types of industrial activity ; for example textiles in Lawrence Massachusetts and coal mining in Scranton and Wilkes-Barre Pennsylvania. The defense production program has not had much impact on such areas. Without a substantial increase in demand for the products of these areas a continuance of the problems confronting them is likely. While in some instances war contracts can be let in these areas little surplus labor can be absorbed by this method. A number of new plants are being located in isolated communities where a labor force is practically nonexistent so that we can expect before very long some migration of the unemployed from areas of labor surplus to these new locations Steps are now being taken to compile a directory of existing unused facilities which could be used for defense production. In addition long-range estimates of manpower requirements and resources are in process of being developed. With such information at hand we can expect greater success in placing contracts in areas where the labor supply is available thus reducing unemployment and at the same time helping to avoid the geographic dislocation problems discussed above A special type of defense unemployment which has become acute in some metal-using centers has resulted from a discrepancy between expanding defense and contracting civilian work. Certain industrial areas such as Detroit have been hard hit by this development. Despite the efforts which the Government is making the unemployment problem in some of these areas will unfortunately continue in To alleviate this problem the Director of Defense Mobilization is appointing an interdepartmental committee of production procurement and manpower agencies to assist in dovetailing civilian industry cutbacks with defense expansion on an area and industry basis. In line with approved military requirements the Department of Defense has been trying to place more defense contracts in Detroit with some success in terms of the number of contracts but the dollar value of such contracts has shown some decline. Every effort should be made by the industries in this area to do as much of their own work as possible in Detroit. For example some of the automobile production now being carried on in tight labor areas might be drawn back into plants in labor surplus areas New defense plants procurement contracts and military installations are affecting larger regions of the country and should be related to the broader regional economic potentialities and problems if major geographic dislocations are to be avoided. Several Federal agencies are making good headway in the programming of natural resources development which is basic to economic growth in a number of larger river basins and other regions. The Council hopes that it is contributing to this end by sponsoring a series of regional economic studies which while not conceived originally as defense projects nor primarily focused on defense needs have given a good deal of attention to them since Korea. With the cooperation of the Joint Committee on the Economic Report studies relating to the South and New England have been completed. Another is now under way in the Southwest. Prepared independently by highly qualified economists and others who live in those regions these studies indicate specific ways in which the present defense program may affect underlying economic problems of the regions and look beyond the immediate program to the problems which will arise during and after the transition to the later maintenance phase of the defense effort Utilization of small business In view of the large growth in defense output during some dislocation of business and particularly of small concerns might have been expected. Actually business viewed as a whole showed little evidence of distress ; and not all of the distress that appeared resulted from the mobilization effort In lines of business where the limiting factor was materials supply the mildness of the over-all impact of the defense program in was due to a combination of factors. Stocks of needed materials and components were high at the beginning of the year. Many producers showed remarkable ingenuity in stretching their reduced allotments of critical materials by redesigning their products. Finally so long as it was feasible it was Government policy to allot sufficient materials to each industry even to those producing clearly nonessential goods to keep it going until defense orders began to take up the slack. Provision was made for exceptional allotments to individual producers in hardship cases But a mobilization effort necessarily creates serious problems for small business as a class. Small business firms are more vulnerable to material shortages than larger firms because their profitability is generally more severely affected by reductions in their operations their output more narrowly specialized and their financial position weaker. The industries in which a mobilization effort calls for major increases in output and capacity are in large part those in which small-scale production is the exception rather than the rule ; and in general the facilities of small firms are less easily adapted to defense production The increased stringency of materials supply in will intensify the need for many firms particularly smaller ones either to get into defense production or to redesign their products in such a way as to make much less use of scarce materials. It will no longer be possible on so extensive a scale to allot such materials to nonessential production in cases where the only justification is that it permits a firm to continue operations Quite aside from the need to alleviate distressed conditions caused by material cutbacks it is obviously in the national interest that there be a greater diffusion of defense production in our industrial structure. It is advantageous to spread arms production experience. Small plants have a production potential which should be preserved against the day when it would be needed to support total mobilization. Production bottlenecks may be eliminated by a more effective utilization of small manufacturing facilities. Moreover the mobilization program should not be permitted to impair competition Government assistance to small business particularly through the services of the Department of Commerce is an activity of long standing which is now being intensified. In addition a number of measures have more recently been taken by the Defense Department and the mobilization agencies to increase the participation of small business firms in the defense program and to lessen the impact of material shortages. Information is circulated on prime and subcontract opportunities. An industry distress program has been set up on a regional basis to identify those firms hardest hit by allocations assemble information on their capabilities for producing defense goods and bring them together with procurement officials and prime contractors. Users of controlled materials in very small quantities are permitted self-certification The Small Defense Plants Administration was recently created as an independent agency to aid in developing ways of using small business concerns most effectively in national defense and essential civilian production It has statutory authority to enter into prime contracts with Government procurement agencies and to arrange for the performance of such contracts by letting subcontracts to small business concerns. It should be noted however that no funds have been appropriated to finance this contracting function. SDPA also has the power to recommend to the Reconstruction Finance Corporation loans to enable small concerns to engage in defense and essential civilian production. A working arrangement has already been agreed upon to implement this operation Perhaps the most important responsibility of this new agency is that of determining jointly with the procurement agencies that it is in the interest of the national defense program to let a specific contract to a small business concern. Once this joint determination is made the contract must be placed with a small concern. If effective procedures are devised by SDPA and the procurement agencies this should be a concrete way of effectuating the frequently expressed policy of Congress that a fair proportion oi Gov * ernment procurement be placed with small business concerns SUPPLYING CONSUMER NEEDS Outlook for consumer goods With the security program now scheduled and reasonable increases in total production consumer supplies will be adequate to meet essential needs in Since there will be cutbacks in the output of metal-using durable goods any increased demand arising from a higher income total will be manifested mainly in increased production of nondurable goods and services The output of textiles food and many other products can be expanded without interfering with the defense program. Judging from peak rates of output in and production of textiles apparel shoes and furniture could be raised by over percent from recent levels and production of carpets could be doubled. The food outlook also is relatively good and CHART OUTPUT OF SELECTED CONSUMER DURABLE GOODS Metals allocations for the first quarter of indicate that production of passenger cars will be reduced to percent below the rate INDEX = * INDEX = * * ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION ^ LOWER ESTIMATE OF PASSENGER AUTOMOBILE OUTPUT BASED ON ALLOCATIONS FOR UNITS ; UPPER ESTIMATE ON PERMITTED PRODUCTION OF UNITS SOURCES : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM DEFENSE PRODUCTION ADMINISTRATION NATIONAL PRODUCTION AUTHORITY AND COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS should permit some rise in food consumption with the largest increases in the more expensive items such as meats and frozen fruits. The capacity for synthetic fibers is being increased which will further supplement the supply of cotton and wool in and In major metal-using consumer durables the outlook is quite different Production of passenger cars in the first quarter of will be between and million units or a little more than half the average quarterly rate in Allocations for steel and other metals for use in major household appliances such as ranges washers and refrigerators and for radio and television sets are also being reduced to percent or less of the rate in the base period which in most instances is the first half of However absorption of stocks of materials and substitutions will temporarily permit somewhat higher rates of production. ( See charts and ) The projected production levels for appliances and automobiles are not so low in relation to recent demand as the size of the cuts from suggests. Sales of passenger cars and major appliances declined from to the second half of by between and percent as shown in chart Nevertheless the supply of passenger cars is likely to be below the level of demand in while other durable goods will become more scarce as the present ample stocks are worked off It is not likely that output of automobiles can be increased much in the second and third quarters. It now appears likely that less than million cars will be produced in compared with million in and million in While this is below the number which would be desirable in order to retire over-age vehicles rapidly the continuance of even this rate for the next few years would maintain or somewhat increase the number of cars in use The cutbacks in production of metal-using consumer goods raises problems of maintaining adequate supplies of lower priced lines of merchandise Manufacturers at present are free to shift to higher priced lines so long as they stay within their metals allocations. As materials become scarcer a tendency may develop to concentrate on the high-profit margin items whjch in general are also the more costly. A shift in production toward a higher proportion of expensive goods not only adds to living costs but in most cases makes for a less efficient use of materials. Consequently the production and stabilization agencies are considering measures to be applied in the event that low priced goods tend to disappear from the market Housing Although million new houses have been produced since the end of World War II demand remains at a high level because of backlog requirements high living standards and a high rate of family formation. Credit restrictions introduced in which were relaxed by Congressional action in September plus a stringency of funds for Government-insured mortgages in the latter part of helped to reduce the number of starts CHART NEW HOUSING STARTS Housing starts in were about percent below but higher than in any other year on record. A cut of about percent is expected for MILLIONS OF UNITS I960 I95I17 ^ u REQUIREMENT TO MAINTAIN PRESENT HOUSING STANDARD ESTIMATED SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND HOUSING AND HOME FINANCE AGENCY of nonfarm housing from million in to about million units last year. ( See chart ) In a large net migration will be needed to meet the labor requirements of areas containing defense establishments or military installations New housing accommodations will be required for a large proportion of these workers and a Federal program for aiding private construction of about units is in operation. In addition sufficient defense housing can be provided only if the Government assists in financing necessary community facilities and actually builds houses in some areas. Besides the unusual strains on housing capacity arising from movements of defense workers there is a need for new housing to take care of the to new families which will be formed next year. Although part of these families can be housed in units vacated by families moving to defense areas it is estimated that for the economy as a whole to new nonfarm dwellings would be needed in merely to maintain present housing standards It is hoped that this number of units can be produced in The outlook for materials supplies indicates that substantial further economies in the use of scarce materials in housing construction will be required if this goal is to be reached Housing construction in must of necessity fall considerably short of the annual rate which would meet long-term needs. To replace structures which are below standards of health and decency and to house the growing population an average of nearly 11/2 million new nonfarm units a year would be required throughout the 's. A large number of these should be publicly-financed low-rent housing for low income families. In even with prospective cuts in total housing at least of these units should be built. This would be about the same as in and much less than the average annual rate contemplated by the authorizing legislation An inadequate supply of new housing is part of the price we must pay for national defense. But the economic and social costs of the housing deficit can be aggravated or mitigated depending upon the policies adopted Since addition to the housing supply during the next two years at least must be held down to between one-half and two-thirds of the actual need it is essential that the bulk of the supply be channeled into areas where it is needed most and that within these areas and elsewhere there be concentration upon reasonably priced housing coupled with severe limitation of luxury housing. In all housing construction there should be strenuous efforts to limit the utilization of critical materials such as copper in view of the fact that adequate housing can be provided with available substitutes. The proportion of low-cost housing to the total new housing supply should be appreciably raised above recent performance This is an obviously desirable requirement for a mobile and contented labor supply in a defense emergency. The World War II experience with appropriate adaptations provides such well tested techniques for bringing about these necessary adjustments that they should be speedily effectuated in the year ahead Essential public services Education. To meet the needs of the very large number of children who will be added to the school population in the next years some additional classrooms with adjunct facilities should be constructed In areas where school needs are due to increased Federal activities Congress has authorized aid to school construction. It is necessary to continue and extend the present program to cover all critical defense areas. No less urgent is the need for a large increase in the number of teachers trained for elementary and secondary schools. In some States it would be difficult to improve teaching and operating standards of education without adequate general Federal aid. At least a start in this direction should now be made To promote needed higher education and to correct the inequality of opportunity in the present draft procedure an appropriate Federal scholarship program appears even more urgent now than when it was previously recommended Health. By the Nation will need an estimated addition of physicians dentists and nurses beyond those now in sight. A program of Federal aid to medical education including nursing is urgently required if the increase in health personnel is to keep pace with the growth in population instead of continuing to fall behind it. Federal aid is required to help organize local public health services in those communities which do not have them. Shortages of scarce building materials have forced a slow-down in the rate of hospital construction despite vigorous conservation measures but hospital construction should be stepped up again as soon as extreme pressures of defense construction programs begin to subside Social security and welfare. The integrity and economic purposes of social security and welfare programs should not be cut away by inflationary rises in the cost of living. Even with an effective anti-inflation program some adjustments of social security benefits are necessary to preserve the intended effects of the programs. Looking further ahead other improvements are needed to provide protection to meet costs of medical care and loss of earnings due to illness ; these and other health problems will be studied by the President 's Commission on the Health Needs of the Nation HELPING TO STRENGTHEN OTHER FREE NATIONS It is our purpose in the interest of security to strengthen the individual and collective defenses of the nations of the free world to encourage production and the development of their resources and to facilitate their effective participation in the United Nations system for collective security Although considerable progress was made toward some of these objectives in the economic situation has not improved in all areas of the free world and in some it has deteriorated Under the Mutual Security Act of Congress appropriated for the fiscal year a total of billion dollars of new funds and reappropriated more than million dollars of unobligated funds remaining from the fiscal year for aid to foreign countries. As table shows over billion TABLE -Foreign aid appropriated under Mutual Security Act of [ Millions of dollars ] Total foreign aid Area Total Europe Near East and Africa Asia and Pacific American Republics Military aid * Economic aid a _ _ _ _ _ For purchase of finished military equipment technical military training and some items consumed directly by military forces > For purchases of tools raw materials equipment foodstuffs etc Includes million dollars for Spain not allocated between " military " and " economic " aid NOTE. Excludes reappropriated funds Detail will not necessairly add to totals because of rounding Source : Public Law 82nd Congress dollars of the newly appropriated funds were provided for Europe nearly billion dollars for military aid and slightly over billion dollars for economic aid. The Mutual Security Act provides for limited transfers of funds between military and economic aid for Europe as well as for limited transfers of funds between areas. It requires that a minimum of percent of the economic aid to all areas administered under the terms of the Economic Cooperation Act take the form of loans The purposes of the aid provided to Europe as stated in the Act are to help carry out the plans for defense of the North Atlantic area while at the same time maintaining the economic stability of the area. Despite many difficulties there is reason to believe that progress toward both objectives will be achieved. As a result of the re-examination of military goals for the defense of Europe and the screening of military requirements which has just been completed considerable progress has been made in reconciling defense requirements and economic and political capabilities. Beyond this attainment of th objectives in Europe requires the most efficient use of its production and foreign exchange resources Western European developments and their appraisal In Western Europe the economic expansion stimulated by the outbreak of war in Korea continued. Industrial production averaged percent higher in than in according to preliminary estimates as chart indicates. The increase in output varied considerably among countries ranging from percent in Germany and percent in Belgium to percent in the United Kingdom. Agricultural production in the current crop year appears to be averaging about the same as in the preceding crop year. The limiting effects of raw material scarcities on industrial output were not as restrictive as had been anticipated at the beginning of the year but all of Western Europe suffered from a shortage of coal nonferrous metals and steel-making materials. Western Europe 's coal production is running about percent less than before the war while its industrial production is over percent higher than its prewar level thus creating an unusually high demand for coal The Western European economy as a whole was operating near its currently practical capacity in In some instances where plant appeared available raw materials or labor were not ; and where labor seemed available there was a shortage of plant or materials. Strong efforts were being made to increase output and capacity further. Germany and Italy were the only countries with substantial pools of unemployed High consumer and business purchasing higher incomes and high prices of imported raw materials raised wholesale prices sharply after the Korean outbreak until the spring of These prices then fell somewhat as raw material prices receded but began to rise again in some countries in the fourth quarter. ( See chart ) The cost of living in most countries followed a similar pattern CHART INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION IN WESTERN EUROPE Production in surpassed I960 levels but by a diminishing margin in recent months INDEX = INDEX = I ^ DATA FOR PRELIMINARY NOTE : INCLUDES AUSTRIA BELGIUM DENMARK FRANCE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF GERMANY GREECE IRELAND ITALY NETHERLANDS NORWAY SWEDEN TURKEY AND UNITED KINGDOM SOURCE : ECONOMIC COOPERATION ADMINISTRATION The expansion of demand and production and the rise in prices of raw materials imported from non-European sources caused a serious deterioration in the Western European foreign trade position. Despite the improvement in the position of Belgium and Germany by an annual rate of approximately billion dollars the trade deficit of Western Europe as a whole rose by an annual rate of approximately billion dollars from the second half of to the first half of In the second half of it fell slightly but the trade position of the United Kingdom and France continued to worsen as shown in table From to the year ending June Western Europe 's total production of goods and services rose by an estimated percent. Although this rise brought production to a level percent above it did not permit a significant rise in per capita consumption above the level The reason is apparent from table which shows rough estimates of the changes in output and other sources of supply and the use made of them A large part of the rise in production since has been offset by the loss of income from foreign investments which had to be liquidated during World War II and by the higher prices of imports in relation to exports. The TABLE Foreign trade of Western Europe with rest of world [ Billions of dollars annual rates ] Trade and country Imports Exports First half Second half First half Second half Trade balance * Trade balance by country : Belgium-Luxembourg France Western Germany United Kingdom Other countries ( ) i Estimates based on incomplete data Imports and trade balances based on f. o. b. imports estimated by deducting percent from c. i. f. imports * Less than million dollars NOTE. Minus sign indicates imports or import surplus Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Organization for European Economic Cooperation remaining increase since in the goods and services available for domestic use has been devoted to a considerable increase of investment and to a rise of consumption approximately proportional to the rise in population TABLE Available resources in Western Europe [ prices and average exchange rates ] Calendar year Item Calendar year Year ended June i Billions of dollars Total resources : Available for home use : Gross national product Net imports of goods and services financed by : Income from overseas investments Grants borrowing or liquidation of reserves _ Adjustment for terms of trade Total resources available _ Total uses of resources _ _ Uses : Gross private domestic and public investment ._ Government consumption including defense Private consumption Dollars Per capita uses of resources : Gross private domestic and public investment Government consumption including defense Private consumption _ Total p e r capita uses _ ._ _ ._. i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE.- Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Organization for European Economic Cooperation and U. S. Economic Cooperation Administration Some of the new burdens which are causing external financial difficulties in Europe particularly in Britain and France must necessarily accompany the pursuit of the basic objectives of the free nations. The past year saw substantial progress in one of these objectives the strengthening of military defenses. In the expansion of Western Europe 's own military production and in our shipments of finished military equipment however the progress made has been less than was hoped for earlier this year and the objective of maintaining economic stability has not been achieved To some extent the present economic difficulties of the Western European countries are temporary. First they resulted partly from replenishment and accumulation of inventories which is not a continuing process. Second the decrease of imports by the United States which contributed to a reduction of the sterling area 's earnings will probably not continue much longer and now shows signs of being reversed. Third the terms of trade of the United Kingdom and several of the other large trading countries have recently begun to improve. Finally the speculative outflow of capital from the United Kingdom which has contributed to a 1.5-billion-dollar drain of British gold and dollar reserves during the past months may stop and perhaps be reversed as other temporary adverse factors disappear and as remedial measures become effective Fundamental problems nevertheless do exist. The most important are the substantial increases in Western European defense expenditures which lie immediately ahead the great difficulty some of these countries are having in restraining the inflationary pressures which are aggravating their balance of payments as well as their price problems and the difficulty in expanding coal production to adequate levels Military versus economic aid. To provide aid in a way which contributes most to attaining its purposes it should be recognized that the distinction between " military " and " economic " aid bears no close relationship to the distinction between the military and economic objectives of aid. A rigid distinction between " military " and " economic " aid according to what the aid funds are spent on or what goods are shipped from the United States may in fact impede the attainment of the objectives. To the extent that aid must be spent to provide military equipment and may not be spent on civilian goods it limits the choice as to where particular goods may be produced and thus may decrease efficiency in the use of total aid. The expenditure of aid funds on military goods produced in the United States may serve an economic purpose if it relieves the receiving country of some of the need for increasing its own military production and for curtailing production for civilian use. Conversely so-called " economic " aid which is spent on nonmilitary goods may serve defense purposes by making possible fuller use of the receiving country 's productive capacity or a greater diversion of its production from civilian goods and exports to military goods than would otherwise occur. Whether the result of the aid is to carry out military or economic objectives depends on the policies followed by the receiving country in the use of its total resources which should be based on advance agreement between ourselves and the receiving country as to specific goals and methods for achieving them United States import barriers. Under the mandatory amendments in Section of the Defense Production Act passed last summer imports of certain specified commodities have been prohibited. Although potential imports of these commodities are relatively unimportant from the point of view of the United States market they are an important potential source of dollars for many other countries. These restrictions deprive the producing countries of opportunities for more rapid progress toward selfsupport and the precedent discourages efforts to develop American markets for other products. At the same time they run counter to the very principles of liberalizing world trade which we have taken the leadership in pressing The economically underdeveloped countries In contrast to the more advanced countries of Western Europe expansion of military strength is a major problem in only a few of the economically underdeveloped countries. Our major concern in most of these countries is to help them overcome chronic poverty by supporting their economic development which must start from low levels and in some cases must reverse a process of deterioration. In some of them for example per capita food consumption has not regained even the low prewar levels. The United States has long been interested in the material progress of the peoples of these areas both because that progress is an end in itself and because it is one of the most essential elements in the development of stability and democracy. In the present state of world tension this interest has become an urgent concern The major problems differ greatly from country to country owing to differences in their geographical positions and political conditions which affect their vulnerability to aggression or subversion and to differences in their internal institutions and their basic economic potential. Our security objectives are served not only by the actual economic progress they make which is necessarily small year by year but also by a sense of current progress and hope for the future which our aid even in its early stages can help to generate and fulfill Although our military program including assistance to countries sharing in the common defense necessarily entails a heavy burden upon the productive and financial resources of our people the United States has supported sound programs for the economic development of underdeveloped countries and has made significant financial contributions for that purpose The net new funds made available to underdeveloped countries by the United States Government and by the International Bank which the United States actively supports have increased from the fiscal years to as table shows. The Congress in the Mutual Security Act increased the economic assistance available for these countries from appropriated funds to million dollars for the fiscal year United States assistance to underdeveloped countries in the form of grants helps bridge the gap which frequently exists between such a country 's borrowing capacity and the total investment assistance consistent with carrying out our policy objectives TABLE Net new funds made available to underdeveloped areas for economic assistance by United States Government and International Bank [ Fiscal years ; millions of dollars ] Item Total United States grants _. __ United States credits International Bank credits _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _._ .__ NOTE. Includes underdeveloped countries in the Near East and Africa ( except Turkey ) Asia and the Far East and Latin America. Also includes United States contribution to multilateral technical assistance programs and United Nations Belief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees. Excludes Philippine War Damage Claims of million million and million dollars in the fiscal years and respectively. Figures in table are net of cancellations Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development The Government has also encouraged the investment of private capital abroad by negotiating treaties relating to double taxation and other provisions affecting foreign investments. Credits for taxes paid abroad have been liberalized and the area of the authority to guarantee certain risks peculiar to foreign investment has been extended geographically. Provision also has been made to assist the export of capital goods needed in essential projects. In contrast to widely held expectations actual exports of many capital goods to the underdeveloped countries have increased since acceleration of the defense program. ( See appendix table B-45. ) Although the economic situation in several underdeveloped countries particularly in the Near and Middle East became worse in many such countries increased the production of a number of primary products which will help t'hem to finance further development and also increased the production of a number of industrial products and of electricity as table shows Many countries moreover made significant progress during the year in getting economic development plans under way. Substantial progress was made in both domestic and regional coordination of development plans by nations of Latin America and South and Southeast Asia. These nations also showed recognition of what they must do themselves and took a realistic view of the pace at which improvement could be expected TABLE Output of selected commodities in certain underdeveloped areas Commodity and area Cement : Far East : countries Latin America : countries Coal : Far East * countries Latin America : countriesCotton fabrics woven : India * Latin America : countries Electricity : Far East * countries Latin America : countries Rice * : Asia : total Rubber : Far East * countries Steel crude : India Latin America : countries Sugar raw : Far East : countries Tin ( metal content ) : Far East * countries Bolivia Africa * countries Unit Million metric tons do Million kwh do Thousand metric tons do do do Million metric tons Thousand metric tons do do do _ ..._ .do do _ do _ ( ) ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data Includes in and the area that now is Pakistan ; excludes it in and Crop years. Data from FAO " State of Food and Agriculture " * Not available NOTE. The output shown for each commodity represents the total of the region from all countries shown in the source Source : United Nations Monthly Bulletin of Statistics December ( except as noted ) Sharing of scarce commodities Besides extending financial aid to other free nations the United States is helping to secure equitable distribution of scarce commodities both by active participation in international arrangements and by its own domestic controls. In early the United States the United Kingdom and France took the lead in setting up an International Materials Conference to promote increased production and the conservation of scarce materials and to assure equitable distribution of free world supplies. Beginning with the third quarter this Conference recommended allocations for sulfur tungsten and molybdenum. The record for the third quarter indicates that United States exports of sulfur and molybdenum were approximately equal to the Conference 's recommendations. In the case of tungsten our actual imports considerably exceeded our recommended share but the excess will be taken into account in future allocations. Beginning with the fourth quarter allocations were also recommended for nickel cobalt copper and zinc. The Conference has also arranged for emergency allocations of newsprint ; a small amount of Canadian output originally scheduled for United States consumption was diverted to a number of countries faced with critical shortages. Five of the six remaining commodities covered by IMC were found to be in sufficiently ample supply to make allocations unnecessary and in the case of wool it was not possible to reach agreement between producers and consumers CHART WHOLESALE PRICES IN SELECTED COUNTRIES Wholesale prices have risen more in most foreign countries than in the United S t a t e s since June and in many a lull has ended I N D E X J U N E INDEX J U N E I960 * UNITED STATES I i I I I I i I I J J A S O N D J F M I960 M J J SOURCE : INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND A A S O N D This country has also taken unilateral action to facilitate essential exports of capital goods. In May of the Director of Defense Mobilization announced a policy of providing adequate exports of scarce supplies by priorities or by directives to producers whenever necessary and stated the types of foreign needs which would be given positive export assistance. Since then there has been an acceleration of priority assistance and a diversification of the methods used to help foreign countries meet their essential needs Since shortages of raw materials and capital goods are likely to continue through and for most commodities for several years our allocation devices should be maintained and in some cases extended and strengthened The United States should continue the provision of priority assistance for exports of capital goods to friendly countries World aspects of inflation and stabilization The period of price stability which began early in in the United States was followed by a slackening of price increases in most other countries and stability or actual declines of prices in some. Although the situation differs greatly from country to country there is in general a greater tendency toward inflation in most other countries than in the United States ( See appendix table B-25. ) While wholesale prices in the United States rose to a post-Korean peak of percent above June a rise of percent or more was experienced in of the European and of the non-European countries for which statistics are available. Generally speaking the abatement of pressures since the post-Korean peak in these countries has been far less than in the United States. In contrast to the United States where wholesale prices have risen hardly at all since their April-to-September decline wholesale prices in many other countries started to move up again after an earlier lull or have risen almost continuously since June as chart illustrates. Prices in some of the Western European countries have already risen at a pace that endangers support for necessary defense expansion. In November the wholesale price level in France for example was percent above June The world 's post-Korean price inflation is additional to a large price rise experienced from the end of the war to the Korean outbreak The major burden of restraining inflationary pressures in other countries must rest upon these countries themselves but the United States can do much to help. The most important contribution we can make to a solution of this serious problem apart from the alleviating effect of our aid is to control our own domestic inflationary pressures effectively. In the context of the world inflationary problem it is especially important for us to refrain from action which will have an inflationary effect on prices of internationally traded commodities those we export as well as those we import for it is chiefly through these commodities that inflationary pressures in the United States are communicated to other countries. In the case of some of the major raw materials we are contributing to a multi- ISO lateral solution of this problem through international allocations. The role of the Government in purchasing for the stockpile is also important Although the effect of actual stockpiling operations in the post-Korean rise of raw material prices was much less than was widely believed it is an important potential factor in the markets for the stockpiled commodities When it is necessary to accelerate purchases this should be done carefully to avoid violent alternations of heavy purchasing and complete withdrawal from the market FINANCING THE GOVERNMENT PROGRAM Savings through budget economies Intensive efforts have been made by the Congress and the Executive Branch to effect budget economies both inside and outside the national security program. Following the President 's directive of July all departments and agencies conducted a detailed review of Government programs " for the purpose of modifying them wherever practicable to lessen the demand upon services commodities raw materials manpower and facilities which are in competition with those needed for national defense. " Such programs as highway assistance and Federal aids for housing and community development outside critical defense areas have been restricted to expenditure levels substantially below those authorized in the basic legislation. General flood control projects and rural electrification and telephone loan authorizations have been similarly curtailed. Regular procurement of operating supplies and equipment has been held to minimum amounts and inventories in excess of the lowest practical working levels have been made available to the General Services Administration for appropriate disposition Intensive efforts should continue in this direction. However the nondefense areas do not contain the " fat " often attributed to them. Federal expenditures for all programs except national security veterans ' benefits and interest on the national debt will be about percent higher in the current fiscal year than in the fiscal year In comparison the index of wholesale commodity prices is nearly percent higher and the consumers ' price index almost percent higher. Despite a rapidly expanding population and a great increase in the total product of the economy Government programs which are directed toward servicing the general needs of the people and building up our natural resources have been held down Tax legislation of and Three major tax bills have been enacted since the Korean outbreak. The first was initiated almost immediately after the initial involvement in Korea with the agreement by the Administration and the Congress to convert the pending tax revision bill into a substantial revenue-raising measure. Legislative action was completed in sufficient time for higher income tax with- holding rates to become effective October The second revenue measure which was the Excess Profits Tax Act of was passed in the final week of the Eighty-first Congress and affected approximately half of profits. The latest measure was the Revenue Act of which became law in October. This Act adopted only about half the aggregate tax increase recommended by the President in January for individual income corporate profits and excise taxes In a full year of operation the post-Korean tax measures will yield an estimated additional billion dollars at income levels. This represents an increase of almost one-third in the revenue productiveness of the Federal tax system and is certainly a notable legislative achievement in view of the high tax rates already in effect in and the short time during which these successive measures were adopted. On the other hand they provided substantially less revenue than had been requested and substantially less than is needed to keep pace with expenditures The revenue legislation of and was a major part of the stabilization program operating to bring consumer and business demand into closer balance with available supplies of goods and services. Largely as a result of the higher tax rates the proportion of total personal income absorbed by Federal individual income taxes rose from percent ( seasonally adjusted ) in the second quarter of to about percent at the end of The proportion of total corporate profits absorbed by Federal-corporate income and profits taxes advanced from percent to almost percent during the same period Nature of the financing problem ahead Partly as a consequence of the higher tax rates and partly as a result of the inflation of prices and growth of incomes following the adoption of the expanded security program the fiscal year which ended June produced a surplus of billion dollars in the conventional budget accounts The surplus was more than twice this amount on a consolidated cash basis due to the excess of cash receipts over payments in the various trust accounts For the current fiscal year which began July budget expenditures are expected to total approximately billion dollars. The increase over last year 's total is virtually equal to the expansion in the major national security programs. ( See chart ) Net budget receipts are estimated at almost billion dollars. The indicated excess of expenditures over budget receipt is about billion dollars. A considerable portion of this deficit can be financed by the excess of cash receipts over expenditures in the trust funds On a consolidated cash basis the estimated fiscal year deficit is about billion dollars As a result of the expected further increase in national security expenditures the annual rate of total Federal expenditures will rise to between and billion dollars by June For the fiscal year under existing revenue legislation a budget deficit approaching twice the size of the CHART FEDERAL BUDGET EXPENDITURES The expansion of expenditures for the major security programs has approximated the increase in total budget expenditures since BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ' ' _ TOTAL BUDGET EXPENDITURES N < M AJ * SEC I R I T Y PROGRAM OT HE R PROGRAMS ! n PERCENT PERCENT MAJOR SECURITY EXPENDITURES AS PERCENT OF TOTAL BUDGET EXPENDITURES // * ^ mmm s * ' ^ _ nd HALF 1st HALF I960 I 1st HALF * X 2nd HALF CALENDAR YEARS J/ ESTIMATES BASED ON ANTICIPATED BUDGET EXPENDITURES SOURCES TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND BUREAU OF THE BUDGET 1st HALF ^ current year 's budget deficit is indicated. To pay for the projected volume of expenditures without reliance upon new borrowing from the public would thus require large additional revenue legislation and a heavier total tax load than has ever before been imposed in the United States A large element of uncertainty exists regarding the future development of expenditures under the defense program. Our present planning is based on a program which would build up strength to the required level and continue the maintenance and modernization of our defensive equipment at that level. This may require expenditures in the fiscal year at least as high as those proposed for fiscal Thereafter it is anticipated that expenditures will gradually decline to a substantially lower " maintenance " level Throughout the defense period the Council has emphasized that it is sound economic and fiscal policy to pay for the national security program through taxation. But in view of the decision of the Congress in not to take all of the tax action requested of it by the President it is virtually impossible through tax increases to prevent substantial deficits in the calendar year and in the fiscal year Thus the action of last year in effect constituted an abandonment of the pay-as-we-go policy at least for the time being. Lost ground can not be made up overnight Consequently we must now look ahead to the fiscal year and following years as well as to in considering appropriate tax legislation for the calendar year A considerable time span usually is required to accomplish necessary changes in the tax structure and to collect the taxes under them. Consideration must be given to the effect of the tax bite upon consumers and small and large business enterprises and upon general popular support. The speed of tax increases must allow for these factors without relinquishing the objective of restoring a balanced budget as rapidly as ^ feasible Each year the question of legislation must be reappraised with a view to determining what specific course of action in the light of current and prospective conditions would be most nearly in accord with the longerrun basic policy position. The chief tax policy questions which must be answered are whether additional taxes should be adopted in and if so whether the amount should be sufficiently large to achieve a balanced budget in the fiscal years and The Council continues to attach great importance to the principle of the balanced budget during periods of heavy expenditure and inflationary pressure such as characterize defense mobilization. The Council does not believe however that the principle of paying the cost of defense expenditures out of taxes during the mobilization period requires that sufficient taxes be proposed or adopted to balance the budget in the peak years and We believe that it is not imperative to do so in view of the longerrun budget outlook and that it would be unwise to attempt to do so in view of the size and speed of the tax increases that would now be required a result in part of the inadequacy of tax legislation last year Considering all factors involved the Council recommends that the immediate tax legislation be the completion of the program proposed by the President a year ago including such technical changes as would improve the equitableness and yield of the Federal revenue system The yield of the Revenue Act of is estimated at billion dollars at calendar year levels of income or only about half the amount specifically proposed by the President. In the case of the individual income and corporate taxes the increases approximated two-thirds of the amount proposed. A considerably smaller proportion of the amount proposed for excises was enacted. There are furthermore various revenue-losing features in the Act. As stated by the President on signing the bill " this legislation does little to close the loopholes in present tax laws and in some respects provides additional means by which wealthy individuals can escape paying their proper share of the national tax load through such devices as excessively liberal 'capital gains ' provisions family partnerships and excessive depletion allowances on oil and gas and certain mineral properties. " Misconception arises when there is a failure to distinguish between the real economic burden of the program which is measured by the diversion of resources and supplies from civilian uses and the financial burden of the program as indicated by the level of taxes. The method of financing the security program does not necessarily decrease or increase the real economic burden and consequently does not directly determine the size of the program that can be afforded. At any particular time however there are limits beyond which it would be unwise to raise the rates of a specific tax or of taxes in general The limit beyond which tax increases become harmful can not be determined by any figure or ratio which would be applicable to all situations The limit depends not only on the ratio of taxes to incomes at any one period of time but also on how rapidly taxes have been increasing in the recent past. It depends also on whether incomes in general are rising are remaining the same or are declining. Finally it depends to no small extent on the recognition by the taxpayer that the money is needed for imperative national purposes and that the burden is being distributed in a fair manner The Council recognizes that tax rates have risen rapidly during a short period of time and are so high that their effect on incentives must be carefully watched. Nevertheless we do not believe that the economic limit of taxation has been reached. As we indicated at midyear we feel that the tax objectives stated by the President earlier in the year are well within the ability of the taxpayer and the economy to support The alternative to relying upon the conventional tax sources for the additional revenue requirements would be to introduce a new broad-base tax. One new type of taxation which could raise substantial amounts of revenue is a general sales tax. Whether imposed in frank manner upon retail sales or disguised as a general manufacturers ' excise tax resort to it would be a portentous departure from national tax policy which should not be considered at this time Provided the national security programs follow the pattern now indicated rate increases in existing tax sources and the proposed improvement in the tax structure would be adequate at high levels of employment to yield a surplus in budgets designed to support the ordinary Government functions plus the cost of the expanded military establishment when it reaches maintenance levels With the additional revenue which might be obtained from carrying through the above suggestions the margin of excess of budget expenditures over receipts would be reduced to about billion dollars a year during the period of to years when budget expenditures will be at the peak level now contemplated. A considerable portion of this deficit however would not result in an addition to the debt held by the public but would be absorbed by the excess of some to billion dollars of cash receipts over disbursements in a number of trust accounts The effect of a Government deficit on inflationary pressures is dependent in large degree on the extent to which spending is restrained by methods other than taxation. Indirect and direct controls help to limit the rise of incomes. By giving some assurance of price stability these controls also increase the willingness of consumers to hold their spending to levels of current need. The tendency of business and consumers not to spend is strengthened also by cutting down the availability of consumers ' and producers ' durable goods through direct controls imposed on the use of scarce materials and on the operating rates of industries that consume such materials. In these various ways spending may be restrained savings increased and sources of funds developed as outlets for the Government securities which are issued to finance the deficit. Under conditions expected to prevail over the next year or two when consumer and business spending will be restrained by various controls the situation should be favorable for minimizing the inflationary impact of deficits of moderate size and duration State and local government fiscal policies The present defense economy finds State and local governments with important responsibilities not only for direct participation in defense activities but also for supporting the Federal programs and policies made necessary by the defense effort. These governments for instance have primary responsibility for civil defense and the many financial and operational problems which it entails. They must also provide special services or expand their normal governmental services in areas where there is a large population influx because of defense activities. The Federal Government under the terms of existing or proposed legislation will help to relieve the more serious instances of defense-imposed burdens It is of equal importance that State and local finances be conducted in such a manner that positive support will be given national policies and objectives. In the interest of reducing inflationary pressures any surpluses should be used to retire debt or build up reserves to ease future financial problems. Continued restraint in borrowing is of course essential. In connection with the Voluntary Credit Restraint Program in which the State and local governments are cooperating criteria have been developed for appraising the essentiality of State and local bond issues Cooperation along these general lines was of great value during World War II. There are many indications that State and local officials are no less aware of their responsibilities today MAINTAINING ECONOMIC STABILITY Outlook for inflationary pressures The relative price stability during the last months of reflected three conditions : first a series of direct and indirect controls which limited prices wages credit and the expansion of incomes ; second a voluntary disposition on the part of consumers to buy more cautiously and to save more ; and third a reduction in inventory buying by business and inventory liquidation in some lines of civilian goods. These three conditions interacted upon one another. The controls would not have been as effective in holding the price line in the face of rising incomes without the trend toward increased voluntary saving ; the increased saving would probably not have been so pronounced if the imposition of controls had not put a brake upon the inflationary spiral which succeeded the Chinese intervention and which induced speculative buying ; and the controls would not have been so effective nor consumer and business buying so cautious if it had not been for the large inventories accumulated in the previous period. The impact of rising security expenditures on economic stability in turns upon these three interacting conditions Within this year national security expenditures are again scheduled to rise by an annual rate of about billion dollars. More people will be drawn into the labor force some will shift to higher paying defense jobs and some will work longer hours at premium pay. In addition some wage adjustments will occur. While increased taxes can take a large bite out of these increases in income a substantial proportion perhaps two-thirds will be added to spendable funds. If the increase in total output during the year is at the rate of at least percent it is estimated that disposable income within the year would rise by about billion dollars The first issue to be considered is how much of this additional income will be saved and how much spent. If the recent high rate of consumer saving should continue the amount of additional buying would only moderately exceed the amount of additional civilian supplies that can be made available without hurting defense production. But if consumers or business should again intensify their buying and if the rate of saving should decline and the use of credit expand serious inflationary pressures would result The shift in the saving rate from an average of percent or less to around percent during the last three quarters of reflected some temporary factors. These included a reaction to previous buying sprees to higher prices and to credit tightening. But it is not unlikely that many American families who during World War II had their first opportunity to build up some reserves have become more " saving conscious. " Having satisfied urgent demands for many consumer durables by they may now be ready to replenish their liquid asset reserves and to attain a higher level of family and personal security. As shown in chart the increase in the volume of cash deposits and Government bonds has been less than the rise CHART CHANGES IN PERSONAL ASSETS AND PRICES individual holdings of liquid assets have increased substantially since the end of World War II but their purchasing power has decreased because of the large rise in consumers ' prices. I N D E X END OF = J N D E X E N D OF END OF YEAR vx-i O PRIVATE INSURANCE EQUITIES / CONSUMERS ' PRICES / J/ INCLUDES CURRENCY AND DEPOSITS SAVINGS AND LOAN SHARES AND U.S. GOVERNMENT SECURITIES OTHER THAN TERMINAL LEAVE BONDS _2/ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) in prices since the end of World War II while the private insurance equities have little more than kept pace with prices. Further the increase in personal debt has been greater than the increase in financial assets such as bonds stocks and deposits during the past several years. A reversal of this trend at some time was inevitable and it came last year with a significant increase in more liquid forms of savings and a less rapid rise in debt Nevertheless while there are grounds for anticipating a continued high saving rate it would be unwarranted to base economic policy on the expectancy that so high a rate as the recent rate or an even higher rate can be maintained. Even with the continuance and further improvement of the anti-inflationary measures which affected income and saving last year and with shortages of major durables there may be some tendency on the part of consumers to revert to a more normal rate of buying. Also business buying may become more active as a lower ratio of inventories to sales is established. Consumers and businesses are going to have ample funds for a rapid increase in buying The rate of business investment in plant and equipment is also an important factor bearing on the outlook for inflationary pressures. Such investment was carried on at an unprecedentedly high rate during and the plans of businessmen indicate further expansion at least in the early part of It seems probable that the major factor limiting the size of business investment will not be the desire of business concerns to expand but the availability of scarce materials and machine tools. Material shortages may force business investment in plant and equipment to contract somewhat by the latter part of Commercial and residential construction also is being reduced The outlook now is that there will be some increase in inflationary pressures but that it may be held to a moderate magnitude even with rapidly rising defense spending if the brakes upon inflation which were applied in are not relaxed. But any relaxation would increase the possibility of another inflationary upsurge which could be even more serious than that of mid-1950 or of a year ago because it would start from tighter conditions of supply in many sectors of the economy The reasonable success during in maintaining stability can not be attributed to any one cause. Tax increases credit measures price and wage controls and the various allocation policies interacted upon one another. Each link in the chain was essential An outstanding feature of was that stability was maintained despite the shift during the course of the year from a Government surplus to a large deficit. This does not mean that the inflationary pressures would not have been much greater if the deficit had not been reduced by the large taxi increases which took effect. But it does mean that in addition to the tax measures discussed in the preceding section a variety of other measures must be relied upon to continue their contribution toward over-all stability Relationship among stabilization measures However inflation may be defined there is no dissent from the view that the ultimate consequence which gives concern is the increase in prices and especially the increase in prices paid by consumers. Economic policy to forestall price increases must include first of all measures to restrain forces which cause higher prices. These measures which include tax and general credit measures are sometimes referred to as dealing with the fundamental causes of inflation rather than its symptoms. But as a practical matter the economic situation at times does not permit pushing such measures far enough to do the whole job alone In fact if such measures are pushed too far they may operate to frustrate their purpose. Tax policy and general credit policy as measures to stabilize prices illustrate this. Each is aimed at limiting some of the causes of price increases rather than at holding the line on prices when other conditions are pushing the market upward. But each has some partially offsetting effect in adding to the upward pressure. Higher taxes reduce the buying power of consumers and business. In this way they are deflationary But they also may heighten the demand for higher wages and for larger gross business profits which is an inflationary aspect. General credit policy as distinguished from selective credit controls is designed to dampen business investment generally and thereby to stabilize prices. But the increase in interest rates which is either the principal tool of general credit policy or is its normal consequence is an increase in the cost of capital and this involves an increase in costs of production and may tend to press prices upward. Moreover both tax and credit measures if pushed too far may so impede production as to be self-defeating Consequently in the current situation it is necessary to turn also to controls which will directly prevent the inflationary forces from producing their normal effect upon market prices. It is incorrect to say that these controls treat only the symptoms and not the fundamental causes of inflation. In practical effect they restrain the growth of inflationary forces besides helping to hold the price line against such forces. It is seriously misleading to think in terms of two distinct categories one of policies which will restrain forces leading to price increases and the other of policies which will hold down price increases despite the upward trend of the market Wage control is a good example of a policy which combines these objectives. Wage advances mean higher costs of production and higher costs of production are a powerful force in raising prices. Wage increases also expand consumer buying power which is equally potent in its effect upon market prices. But wage control while directed to restraining these forces which directly influence prices is also designed to break an inflationary spiral already under way by holding the line on wages which would normally rise in response to conditions of a tight labor market and a rising cost of living Price control policy although usually thought of as a measure to prevent price increases which would otherwise be caused by other forces also has the purpose of restraining the inflationary spiral itself. The interaction of prices is obvious. A rise in one price affects many others and the stabilization of any one price limits some of the force which is pressing upward the price of other goods. Price control also has the purpose of limiting the increase in incomes, which is the normal result of advancing price levels Credit policy During the first quarter of several measures to limit the inflationary expansion of private credit were added to those which had been undertaken in the second half of These included increases in the reserves required of member banks ; further steps to check the transfer of Government securities to Federal Reserve banks and thus to curtail a large source of new lending power for banks and other financial institutions ; the inauguration of the Voluntary Credit Restraint Program ; and the tightening of selective credit controls requirements During the last months of the year no new measures were initiated to tighten credit. In fact as a result of congressional action down payments were decreased and maximum maturity periods lengthened in connection with loans for consumer durables and for housing. In addition beginning at the end of September the Federal Reserve System added about million dollars to its holdings of Government obligations to relieve an acute tightness of credit while the Treasury was engaged in a considerable volume of new financing and refinancing. During October and November the Federal Reserve reduced its portfolio of Government securities to about the level which it held early in September It seems reasonable to conclude that credit policies both of a general and selective character contributed to the relative stability of the last months However credit policy should now be adjusted to differences between the situation in and that likely for the period ahead. Private credit expansion is likely to become a less important inflationary factor and the rising gap between money income and civilian goods a more important one. Business demand for loans to finance construction and inventory accumulation will probably be more greatly curbed by the allocation of materials than earlier in the defense period. It would be unwise however to rely unduly on this development and to relax present credit restraints. Credit for some nonbusiness purposes such as instalment and mortgage credit on houses may expand to compound the problem presented by rising incomes. The supply of private funds for mortgage loans may also increase as financing institutions which invest heavily in mortgages accumulate funds from higher personal saving and from repayments of existing loans. In this situation there may have to be greater reliance on selective credit controls In addition the situation with regard to Treasury financing will change The deficit in the fiscal year will be substantial. It will be sound policy for the Treasury to borrow new funds insofar as possible from nonbank sources to minimize the inflationary potential of the deficit. Greater limitations on the opportunities to make private loans because of allocations of materials restraints on the demand for credit and high levels of personal liquid saving may help to provide investors with funds for investment in Government securities to a considerable extent in long-term issues. It will be an important goal of economic policy to develop and maintain market conditions favorable to the flotation of the largest feasible quantity of longterm obligations Concern for debt management objectives does not require that general credit policy be withdrawn from the struggle against inflation. The tactics that are used to curtail the supply of lendable funds may merely have to be modified to suit new situations ; for example the instrument of reserve requirements may have to be relied upon more heavily than in the past. In order that credit policy may function more effectively during the next phase of mobilization the Council recommends that there should be restored to administrative authority a more flexible discretion in the formulation of selective credit regulations It is also suggested that the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System be given additional authority over reserve requirements. In the opinion of the Council higher rese'rve requirements may be a suitable means of curbing bank lending in certain specific situations. Increased reserve requirements can be used to offset bank lending power arising from Federal Reserve purchases of Government securities or from gold imports. One plan for increased authority over reserve requirements which has been previously recommended by the Council would permit certain Government securities to be carried as reserves. If banks were permitted to carry Government obligations in reserves there would be some inducement to hold these securities rather than to offer them on the market with the possible consequence of the creation of new lending power through Federal Reserve bank purchases Separate note by Mr. Clark upon monetary and credit policy No economic theory relating to the stabilization of the economy is more important than that of general monetary policy which many believe can of itself accomplish the stabilization purposes of the Employment Act of but the usefulness whereof in a strong inflationary movement has been challenged in former reports of the Council of Economic Advisers Early in the Douglas committee regretfully commented that " Our monetary history gives little indication as to how effectively we can expect appropriate and vigorous monetary policies to promote stability for we have never really tried them. " This is not quite accurate. Monetary policy was used vigorously in and the resulting " stabilization " was a disaster the farmers have not yet forgotten. It was used again in and of that episode the British expert Hawtrey has said " The dear money policy ac- complished its purpose in the end. It stopped speculation by stopping prosperity. " We are now able to study efforts to establish the stabilization value of monetary policy in our greater economy in which the institution of banking has been revolutionized by a great national debt which has multiplied the liquid assets in bank portfolios. The Council of Economic Advisers which unlike other Government agencies has the responsibility of considering all national economic policies and their effect upon each other must give attention to the collateral consequences when it studies our recent experience. In the light of the problems of a defense program which must be integrated the following anomalies created by monetary policy stand out It has enabled the banks to increase their earnings more than enough to match the heavy increase in their taxes in Nearly every other business and industry found net profits reduced as result of Government policies under the defense program An increase of one-third in the basic commercial interest rate of larger banks leading to general increases in other bank interest rates was hailed as a valuable contribution to economic stability. All other business men are criticized when they exploit a situation by raising their prices by a much smaller percentage When restraint must be imposed elsewhere upon the freedom of decision the Nation imposes positive control as in forcing young men into military service in limiting the production of General Motors and in fixing prices To limit the expanding activity of banks we are offering them larger profits upon the existing level of loans The cost of new private capital has been increased and an effort has been made to tighten credit for industry. Vital defense-related industries must expand and the Government will have to finance their expansion to the extent that private capital is inadequate The Government is spending large sums to assemble and distribute business information in order that businessmen may reduce to the minimum their uncertainties about the trend of the economy and may plan more confidently. Monetary policy is being based upon the principle that the financial world must be kept in great uncertainty about future interest rates and the availability of credit There is general agreement that every effort should be made to place the Government debt in long-term bonds in nonbank Tiands. The Treasury now finds no market for long-terms and its heavy financing has to be in the form of short-term securities eligible for bank portfolios When the size of Government expenditures is giving us deep concern the interest charge on the Government debt is increasing If these miscarriages were the unavoidable results of a monetary policy which is a successful instrument to stabilize the economy they might be accepted. I do not believe that monetary policy can be successfully used for that purpose in the kind of economy and institutions which we now have. In recent action that policy has had utterly perverse consequences The advance in short-term interest rates in August was followed by the greatest expansion of business loans in our history The increase in long-term rates in March coming after the price freeze in January had taken the steam out of boiling markets and when a seasonal contraction of business borrowing was due had no effect upon new business investment The more rigorous the use of monetary policy the more rapid was the increase in new investment in plant and equipment the very channel through which monetary policy if effective operates on its way to the final objective of dampening inflationary forces And to complete the topsy-turvy picture the more rapid the growth in money supply creating " more dollars chasing goods " the quieter became the consumers ' markets. ( Conclusion of separate note by Mr. Clark. ) Price control In the first stages of price control policy after the general freeze in January which all recognized could be only temporary it was necessary to concentrate upon a large variety of broad-gauged " interim " adjustments to remedy inequities and to bring the price structure into balance. This was because the great upward movement of prices before the freeze had not been uniform and had resulted in many advance runners and many laggards But this process was only to be the prelude to more enduring more enforceable " tailored " regulations i. e. regulations geared to the problems of individual industries and commodities This work was delayed considerably and complicated by the amendments to the Defense Production Act. The amendments weakened the powers of price control by preventing certain necessary actions and by requiring a number of adjustments all of which could only have the effect of raising ceiling prices. After the adjustments required under the law had been carried out the Office of Price Stabilization was able to push ahead in the autumn with tailored regulations hinged upon adjustments necessary to develop a sound and reasonable price structure The general policy now should be to hold the price line while work proceeds vigorously with the issuance of tailored regulations. However since the new amendments seriously interfere with the effective carrying out of this policy these amendments should be reviewed and the obstacles to sound price control eliminated. In addition the furtherance of this policy involves the following tasks Narrowing the gap between ceiling and market prices. After the general freeze halted the runaway spiral in prices price controls and the lull in many markets resulted in sharp drops in the prices of cotton wool fats and oils hides and other commodities. When prices fall below ceilings there are three alternatives : ( ) exempt commodities on a stand-by basis ; ( ) con- tinue current ceiling prices ; or ( ) make the ceilings more realistic by lowering them toward the market levels In general it is in the most volatile markets that a substantial gap exists between ceiling and market prices. At the time of the general freeze these commodities had advanced excessively spurred on by a high degree of speculation. To maintain these ceiling prices would be to permit the return of excessively high prices if speculative markets develop. Under these circumstances and because dangers of general inflation are still present it would appear desirable to bring ceilings down to levels much closer to existing market prices insofar as this is feasible while keeping ceiling prices " generally fair and equitable " as required by law. An effective barrier to any major advance in these wholesale areas would prevent undue pressure against retail prices when markets now weak begin to firm up again. OPS has already taken action of this sort in the cases of glycerin hides wool tallow soap detergents and carpets. Further action is under study with respect to other commodities Stabilization of .consumers3 prices. This is the most difficult task confronting the OPS. These prices directly affect the public and are closely connected with the effectiveness of wage stabilization. While part of the recent rise in the consumers ' price index reflects seasonal factors a major part results from the lack of adequate control over many items making up the cost of living. Of the items entering into the consumers ' price index about percent are exempt from price controls by law. These are primarily services. In the case of rents representing another percent only partial controls exist. Only slightly over one-half of the items in the consumers ' price index are completely under the control of the OPS With respect to food prices the program for controlling beef prices has been weakened by the abolition of slaughtering quotas. Progress has been made in developing dollars-and-cents ceilings for a number of food items Thus in addition to the beef ceilings there are dollars-and-cents wholesale ceilings for pork products lamb and veal. In the further development of simple enforceable regulations the OPS is now experimenting in three cities with community dollars-and-cents ceilings covering a wide variety of grocery items. However under existing legislation action to stabilize retail food prices can not be completely successful Development of pricing standards. With the completion of the " interim " pricing program the need for standards to guide price control operations becomes more acute. The kind of standards chosen determines the degree to which price control permits escalation of cost increases or requires absorption. The main formula used to straighten out the distortions and inequities caused by the general freeze was pre-Korea prices plus specified cost increases up to specified cut-off dates. For the future to use a cost-plus standard would mean continuous escalation of higher costs and permit a constantly rising price level In April the Director of Economic Stabilization took the first major step toward the development of permanent standards. He directed the OPS once the " interim " program was completed to grant general price increases to any industry only if its current earnings before taxes fell below percent of its return on net worth in the best years of the period The purpose of this directive was to prevent unnecessary price increases by requiring a reasonable amount of cost absorption and at the same time to assure industry of an adequate earnings base. If an increase became necessary under this standard it was not to exceed the amount necessary to assure this minimum rate of earnings As this standard applies only when industries seek price relief two factors have reduced the need for its application. First the generally high level of profits finds most industries earning well above the standard Second the " interim " program provided adjustments for industries which might otherwise have sought relief under this standard. However a few industries have applied for price relief and their cases are being considered under this standard The outcome of the current steel case will be a major factor in determining the future of effective price control. It can not be stated too strongly that while effective price control depends upon effective wage stabilization it also depends upon cost absorption where feasible instead of automatic escalation of cost increases into price increases The problem of standards is not confined to this issue alone. There has already been issued a relief standard to provide protection for exceptionally high-cost sellers. There is need for the development of a product standard to govern cases where relief may be in order for an individual product of an industry contrasted with all its products. Considerable preliminary work has been done in developing this standard Price control must also be concerned with preventing price ceilings from becoming an impediment to production in areas vital to defense or essential civilian production. In such situations what is needed is a coordination of production and price controls. Frequently the problem is not one of price but of materials or manpower or proper use of production controls But in some cases price is also a consideration. Price adjustments to encourage production have already been made in the cases of machine tools and lead and zinc Price control over the longer run. A firm price policy does not mean that price control should continue indefinitely in every sector of the economy and for every item. If the international situation does not worsen a rising production trend should make it feasible at a later date to reduce substantially and progressively the area of coverage of price control. The Council has never been impressed with the argument which seems to prove too much that no prices can be controlled unless all prices are controlled. After we get over the production hump for the long period ahead we must be prepared and ready to use selective price controls geared to strategic areas In that situation we should rely for general stabilization upon other antiinflation weapons. Except in an emergency period such as the present the benefits of general price controls are outweighed by their drawbacks Wage stabilization Wage policy is even more difficult than price policy because it involves the very livelihood of millions of families who have come to regard periodic wage increases as an index of their progress in an economic society which they believe to be strong enough to grant them that progress. Nonetheless price stabilization can not be maintained without wage stabilization The sound public appreciation that prices and wages must both be stabilized if either is to be stabilized has been blurred by the incorrect impression that prices and wages are exactly alike and should be treated exactly the same. Thus it is sometimes said that any wage increase must necessitate a price increase ; and that where the price line is held absolutely the wage line must be held absolutely. This is a superficial view. Under conditions of expanding markets and rising productivity which has been the long-range trend in the American economy a constant relationship between prices and wages would cause business profits to rise out of line with wage incomes and would not provide consumer purchasing power sufficient to support expanding markets. In a normal peacetime economy wages should rise relative to prices by lower prices or higher money wages when the general productivity of the economy enlarges. This is fully recognized by business This principle however is not entirely pertinent to a defense emergency when a large part of the expanding output is absorbed by the defense program and is consequently not available for purchase by consumers. If wage incomes rise as fast or faster than the total of expanding output while a large and growing part of this output is bought by the Government there will clearly be an inflationary redundancy of consumer buying power unless compensated for by sufficiently higher taxation and a higher rate of saving Yet entirely to deny productivity increases to wage earners would involve the greater difficulty of a growing disparity between wages and other forms of income which are likely in the long run to reflect the productivity and production trends of the economy as a whole and in the long run to move generally upward in a defense period. In addition the flat denial of productivity increases would remove an important or potentially valuable incentive factor Consequently the Council has maintained the position since the commencement of the defense emergency that productivity allowances should be included within the framework of a well-rounded wage stabilization program. However we have urged that these increases should be held to the likely productivity increases for the economy as a whole that is in the neighborhood of to percent instead of being allowed to reflect in particular cases a higher rate of productivity increase in particular industries For the latter course would tend to create a pattern of wage increases under wage stabilization which would necessitate price increases except among those industries or firms where the actual rate of productivity increase is highest Since even the moderate policy of productivity increases here portrayed would tend to augment the income stream more rapidly than the increase in civilian supplies such a policy should be accompanied by certain safeguards. One of these safeguards might be that consideration be given to regard these productivity increases as incentive payments and to tie them in with efforts on the part both of employers and workers to maximize actual productivity increases. Another safeguard would result if in accord with suggestions which the Council has made before more systematized efforts were made to divert necessary wage increases into forms of saving rather than into immediate payments for immediate spending purposes This we believe to be one of the most neglected areas in the program thus far For practical reasons the Council has favored cost-of-living adjustments These can be consistent with the stabilization program if sufficient efforts are made to hold the price line. The difficult necessity of a sufficiently flexible wage program to maintain equity incentives and industrial peace points up the urgency of a sufficiently strong tax credit and voluntary savings program to curtail excessive spending The Council views with approval the very substantial progress already made by the Wage Stabilization Board toward firming up elements in its wage stabilization program and urges speed in the work now under way to close the remaining gaps in wage policy. We have repeatedly stressed that wage stabilization requires a fairly stable and established wage policy enunciated generally and adhered to firmly. General policies must of course be administered and in applying them to particular cases the Board must properly be concerned with avoiding hardship and inequities. Yet we have never believed that a purely pragmatic adjustment of the wage policy to suit the exigencies of each hard case as it arises could result in effective wage stabilization. A bad wage policy is not better than no wage policy ; but a moderately good and firm wage policy is better in the long run than a highly uncertain wage policy would be even if the latter achieved more perfect results in a few specific cases. This is certainly true from the viewpoint of general public understanding and support an overwhelmingly important consideration under current conditions The problem of longer-range stability Increasing interest is being manifested in the outlook for the economy if and when international difficulties subside and the defense program is correspondingly reduced. Even when the defense program levels off at a relatively constant figure the great build-up now under way in productive facilities will leave us year by year with increasing resources seeking nondefense utilization. While the urgency of dealing with our immediate defense problems is so great as to demand concentrated attention it would be a lack of foresight not to give serious thought and study to more distant problems also. In some respects immediate policies can take account of these more distant problems without sacrificing immediate objectives In any event concern about the more distant future implanted in the minds of the producing community has an important bearing upon the vigor of their commitment toward the defense effort itself. It is therefore desirable to discuss certain aspects of this issue now In the first place it should be recognized that we are likely to be confronted with a new set of problems before the defense period is over. For example unless the international situation worsens there should be within a year or two an ample supply of steel and some other materials now in short supply. This will permit the modification of some of the materials controls But at that time with purchasing power so ample and a new backlog of demand for durables built up there may well develop a new phase of inflationary pressures from private and public spending which will require some containment. This is one of the reasons why there should be continuously available an ample and flexible assortment of economic tools to be adjusted quickly to changing situations. Particularly as we look forward to the progressive relaxation of the direct controls the tax structure and credit devices should be brought to a better state of readiness for dealing with new conditions. As restrictions upon materials are released some credit controls may be more needed a year hence than they are now We should also be prepared for another contingency. If at the time defense spending declines business investment and consumer spending were also to decline the result would be a period of slackness which although perhaps temporary might require changes in policies regarding taxation controls and long-range public programs While it is now desirable to be better prepared to meet changing economic problems both within and beyond the defense period the precise unfolding of economic events can not be forecast with enough precision to justify now the making of those blueprints for which some are calling. Instead we may draw assurance from the knowledge that the general techniques to be used when conditions change are fairly well-known and accepted. There is always a need for continuing and intense study of the specific ways in which private and public policies can be Applied to cope with changing economic conditions Another point of interest is the convex n of some parts of the business community that those programs of rapid expansion which are now needed to support the defense effort will result in considerable excess capacity when the defense effort levels off on a maintenance basis. Those voicing this concern should be mindful that if we should falter in the current effort we could lose all. Adjustments of course will have to be made. We can not expect all economic activities to continue at all times on an equally high level. However recent experience illustrates the capacity of our economic system for flexible adjustment to a decline in defense outlays Although World War II was unfortunately succeeded by the cold war the annual level of public outlays was reduced by more than billion dollars between and and sustained at this lower level until well into With only minor faltering these years evidenced new high levels of peacetime production and employment. A rising standard of living absorbed quite fully our expanded productive facilities in factory and field It is sometimes said that this new postwar experience of avoiding major dislocation for so long a time was due to the great backlog of demand built up during World War II. Undoubtedly this was an important factor But much of the rise in the standard of living contrasted with the years before the war was for instance in many services where obviously there was no such thing as a backlog. And it is highly probable although insufficient economic analysis has been devoted to this problem that the high demand for durables from until now has been due not mainly to backlogs but rather to the fact that people always have a wide range of unfilled desires if not pressing needs which they will try to satisfy as soon as the incomes and productive capacity of the Nation rise sufficiently. In addition a variety of Government programs and private action as well have contributed greater stability to incomes so that it may be easier to maintain relatively full employment. The current defense effort will be building up new backlogs for housing for other durables and for some types of industrial expansion which are now being deferred to make way for the expansion of the industrial mobilization base. There is no reason to accept the gloomy hypothesis that we would do a worse job of adjustment when defense spending declines than we did after World War II particularly since the reduction of defense outlays in the future would be far smaller in proportion to the Nation 's economy than the reductions which took place between and This generally favorable outlook does not mean that long-range problems are being ignored. As a matter of fact the current defense build-up represents a blending of factors which include consideration of the longerrange future. The size of the military program itself represents some calculated risks which weigh the desirability of maximum military strength against the desirability of avoiding excessive dislocations in the general economy. None of the basic expansion programs has gone beyond the capacity of a reasonably full employment economy to absorb output a few years hence even in the event of a much reduced defense program. This consideration as well as current shortages of materials has entered into the determination of how large these expansion programs should be One further point should be added. The better the current job is done the more assurance the economic community will have about the future Insofar as industrial dislocation is held to a minimum under the current program industry and labor will share the confidence that greater dislocations can be avoided in later years by the same application of prudent consistent and timely policies as the need arises Appendix A Statistical Tables Relating to the Nation 's Economic Budget CONTENTS A-l A-2 A-3 A-4 A The Nation 's Economic Budget calendar years and Consumer account calendar years and Business account calendar years and International account calendar years and Government account ( Federal State and local ) calendar years and A-6. Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing calendar years and A-7. Federal cash payments to the public by function calendar years and A-8. Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction calendar years and Page The Nation 's Economic Budget The Nation 's Economic Budget provides a comprehensive view of national economic activity by major economic groups : consumers business government and " international. " The receipts and expenditures of these groups and the net addition to or absorption of saving for the calendar year and the first and second halves of are shown in table A-l Column indicates the major flow of receipts or income. Receipts are divided into two categories : income from current production and receipts of transfers and interest. The total of incomes from current production ( shown in roman type and adjusted for the statistical discrepancy between total receipts and expenditures ) equals current output or the gross national product Expenditures for current output and government transfer payments are shown in column The gross national product comprises only the expenditures for current output. Government expenditures for goods and services ( i. e. expenditures for current output ) plus government transfer payments equal government cash payments Government cash transfers on the expenditures side in column are shown as receipts by consumers and by foreign countries and international institutions in column The sum of these transfer receipts is approximately equal to government transfer payments in the accompanying table Some discrepancy is due to the use of somewhat different bases for measurement of various components of receipts and payments. For example government interest payments are recorded on a cash basis ; interest receipts of consumers are recorded on a net accrual basis and include interest paid by government corporations. The difference resulting from the two methods of estimating is included in the adjustment item ( line ) Column shows the excess of receipts ( f ) or expenditures ( ) for the various accounts : personal net saving the government cash surplus or deficit the excess of international receipts or investment and the excess of gross investment over business receipts. The total excess of receipts in some accounts must equal the total excess of expenditures in others since national income and product are conceptually equal. Personal net saving for example which represents an excess of receipts must be matched by an excess of investment by business or by a government deficit or both. ( Also the adjustments made in column must be carried over into column in order to complete the balance between the positive and negative items. ) X While the summary table on the Nation 's Economic Budget gives a comprehensive view of recent economic changes additional detail on receipts and expenditures is needed for analytical purposes as is shown in the tables that follow. More complete statistics for recent years on national income and product and their components can be found in the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business July Data relating to the cash budget of the Federal Government are from the Budget of the United States TABLE A The Nation 's Economic Budget calendar years and [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] first half second half Excess Excess Excess of reof reof receipts ceipts ExExEx- ceipts Re- pendi- ( ) or Re- pendi- ( ) or Re- pendi- ( ) or ceipts tures ex- ceipts tures ex- ceipts tures expendipendipenditures tures tures Economic group CONSUMERS Disposable income arising from current production Government transfers and net interest payments Disposable personal income ! Personal consumption expenditures Personal saving ( -J- ) S ~ +'ib ~ ~ ~ ~ U ~ s ~ " +88'. ~ BUSINESS Retained receipts from current production Gross private domestic investment Excess of investment ( ) JQ INTERNATIONAL Cash loans abroad Net foreign investment_ Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) _ GOVERNMENT ( FEDERAL STATE AND LOCAL ) Tax payments or liabilities IS. Adjustment to cash basis Cash receipts from the public... Purchases of goods and services. _ Government transfer payments Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) payments ( ) or ADJUSTMENTS For receipts relating to gross national product _ ^ Other adjustments Gross national product i Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers These adjustments bring the estimates on the receipts side into agreement with those on the expenditures side of the accounts. They include the statistical discrepancy less " subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises. " The statistical discrepancy represents the difference between the two independent estimates of gross national product : income received from current output and expenditures for this output. " Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises " are included in national income but not in the gross national product " Other adjustments " are net and are the amount necessary for balancing the excess of receipts ( ) with the excess of expenditures ( ) They are required because some items of government cash payments are either not recorded in private receipts at all ( such as purchases of existing assets ) or they are recorded in a different time period from that in which payment is made. Government cash receipts also include some items not deducted from private incomes or deducted in a different period NOTE. Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer payments and receipts and other items not included in the gross national product are shown in italics Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce and on Federal cash receipts from and payments to the public estimated by the Bureau of the Budget and the Treasury Department. See also footnote TABLE A-2. Consumer account calendar years and [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts or expenditures Total i Equals : Total personal income Less * Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Less * Personal consumption expenditures __ Equals * Personal net saving ( ) g Total Plus : Net interest paid by government Dividend on National Service Life Insurance -_ ._ Other government transfers to individuals Personal income arising from current production of goods and services : Wage and salary receipts and other labor income Farm proprietors ' income ._ B usiness and professional income _. _ __ Dividends Private interest and rental income Business transfer payments _ First half Second half ' ADDENDUM Personal income arising from current production Less : Personal tax and nontax payments _ _ Equals * Disposable income arising from current production Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Includes adjustment for inventory valuation.3 For detail see appendix table B-4 NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See table A-l TABLE A-3. Business account calendar years and [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Receipts or investment Total First half Second half i Equals * Corporate undistributed profits Plus * Capital consumption allowances Corporate inventory valuation adjustment Equals : Retained business receipts from current production Less : Gross private domestic investment : New construction Residential ( nonfarm ) _-_ Other private construction Producers ' durable equipment Change in inventories Total o Corporate profits before tax Less * Corporate tax liability Dividend payments g Equals * Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Includes capital consumption allowances on noncorporate capital including residences * The adjustment measures the excess of the value of the change in the volume of nonfarm business inventories valued at average prices during the period over the change in the book value * For additional detail see appendix table B-5 NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See table A-l TABLE A-4. International account calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates ] Receipts or investment Total Receipts : U. S. Government cash long-term loans ( net ) _ _ Plus : Cash payments to International Monetary Fund and International Bank _ _ Equals : U. S. Government cash transfers on loans ( foreign receipts ) Investment : Surplus of exports of goods and services _ Less : Net unilateral transfers : fi Government _ _ _ Private Equals : Net foreign investment ( < ) First half Second half ( ) ( ) __ _. __ Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Includes only cash withdrawals under loan agreements. Does not include noncash transactions such as lend-lease and surplus property credits In the International Monetary Fund returned million dollars in cash to the U. S. Treasury in4exchange for United States notes Less than million dollars Net unilateral transfers are included with government or private expenditures for goods and services For example remittances ( gifts ) made by American citizens to relatives or charitable groups abroad are included with consumer expenditures. Government aid in the form of grants is included in government purchases of goods and services. Thus net unilateral transfers must be deducted from the export surplus to6avoid double counting Unilateral aid included in appendix table A-8 is on a Daily Treasury Statement basis and is gross NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See table A-l TABLE A-5. Government account ( Federal State and local ) calendar years and J [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Eeceipts or expenditures Total Receipts : Tax and nontax payments or liabilities : Federal State and local _ Total _ Other Government payments : Transfers to individuals Cash interest payments to public Loans to foreign governments and subscriptions to International Bank and International Monetary Fund ( net ) All other Expenditures : Purchases of goods and services : Federal State and local Cash receipts from the public Cash surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) Cash payments to the public Federal : Cash receipts Cash payments Second half Total Adjustment to cash basis * Total First half ADDENDUM Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) _ State and local : Cash receipts Cash payments Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) This table reconciles cash receipts and payments to the public with estimates of government receipts and expenditures included in the national income and product accounts. Cash receipts or payments represent the consolidated cash accounts of the Federal Government including the trust funds and Statelocal governments. All intragovernmental transactions are excluded. The receipts of government corporations and the Post Office are offset against expenditures and the net expenditure included as a cash payment. Grants-in-aid to State and local governments are included as a cash payment of the Federal Government and not included as either a receipt or payment of the States or localities Estimates based on incomplete data Personal and indirect business tax payments corporation tax liabilities ( including excess profits tax liabilities ) and contributions for social insurance Consists of deductions from government employees ' salaries for retirement funds government contributions to retirement funds National Service Life Insurance and U. S. Government Life Insurance funds and excess of personal and corporation tax liabilities over receipts. Cash receipts also include some items of miscellaneous receipts not included in tax and nontax payments such as receipts from sales of surplus property Does not agree with net interest paid by government ( appendix table A-2 ) which is on a net accrual basis and includes interest paid by government corporations See appendix table A-4 International account Includes all other cash payments less noncash payments for goods and services. Other cash payments include net payments by government corporations ( except capital formation ) net prepayments ( deliveries in advance of payments being subtracted ) and the excess of checks paid over checks issued. Noncash purchases of goods and services include deductions from government employees ' salaries for retirement funds and the government contribution to such funds NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See table A-l TABLE A-6. -Federal cash receiptsfrom the public other than borrowing calendar years 1'950 and [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Source Total i Direct taxes on individuals __ Direct taxes on corporations Employment taxes _ __ Excises and customs Deposits by States unemployment insurance Veterans ' life insurance premiums Other Less : Refunds of receipts Total Federal cash receipts from the public __ _ Second half __ _ First half i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See table A-l TABLE A Federal cash payments to the public by function. calendar years and [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Function Total i Military services International security and foreign relations Veterans ' services and benefits.. ___ ______ _ Social security welfare and health Agriculture and agricultural resources Interest _ Other Deduction from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports ___ Second halfi i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See table A-l Total Federal cash payments to the public First half TABLE A ~ Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction calendar years and [ Billions of dollars seasonally adjusted annual rates ] Cash payments Total * Direct cash payments for goods and services excluding military services : Payments to individuals for services rendered : Civilian wages and salaries ( excluding Post Office ) : Federal Grants- and loans-in-aid for performance of specified services net * _ _ First Second half halfi Payments to business for goods and services : Public works : Federal Grants-in-aid and loans for public works Other goods and services : Payments to foreign countries and international institutions for goods and services ._ _ _ Total Loans and transfer payments to individuals : Social insurance and public assistance : Federal employees ' retirement benefit payments Old-age and disability benefit payments Unemployment insurance benefit payments Grants-in-aid for public assistance Readjustment benefits pensions and other payments to veterans Loans to8 home owners net Interest ^ _ Other _ Total ( ) Total Loans investments subsidies and other transfers to business and agriculture : Farmers : Price support net ( including supply program ) International Wheat Agreement Other loans and direct subsidies to farmers _ Business : Home mortgage purchases fromfinancialinstitutions Loans net Direct subsidy payments Subsidy 8arising from the postal deficit Interest _- ( ) l ( ) " ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) CO Total Loans and transfer payments to foreign countries and international institutions : Unilateral transfers : Military aid Economic aid Loans Subscriptions to the International Bank and Monetary Fund ( net cash withdrawals ) ( ) ( ) Military services cash payments for goods and services ^ Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports. Total Total Federal cash payments to the public See footnotes on following page ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data Differs from the national-income concept of " government purchases of goods and services " by excluding in addition to military services farm price-support expenditures and unilateral aid to foreign countries. Grants to States and localities for public works here included as a Federal expenditure would be included in the national-income accounts as a State and local expenditure. There are other less significant differences between the two concepts Excludes payroll deductions for Federal employees ' retirement * Includes all grants-in-aid and loans to public bodies for purposes other than public works and public assistance. Includes in addition one-third of Federal expenditures for veterans ' tuition books and supplies * This figure is obtained as a residual by deducting all other expenditures from total cash payments to the public. Owing to the fact that data are incomplete for calendar year the residual is subject to a high margin of error Less than million dollars Includes cashing of terminal leave bonds retired pay of military personnel and National Service and Government Life Insurance refunds and benefits in addition to veterans ' pensions and readjustment benefits. Includes only one-third of payments for veterans ' tuition books and supplies Includes a small amount of interest on tax refunds in addition to interest on the public debt. Interest paid to business includes over million dollars of interest paid each year by the Federal Government to State and local governments. Interest in appendix table A-2 is net and is on an accrual rather than a cash basis ; it includes interest paid by State and local governments and by government corporations During the period shown represents in large part some of the transactions of the Federal Home Loan Banks Excludes retired pay and redemption of Armed Forces Leave Bonds which are included above as payments to veterans NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See table A-l Appendix B Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power CONTENTS National income or expenditure : Page B-l. Gross national product or expenditure B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices B-3. Gross national product or expenditure in prices B-4. Personal consumption expenditures B-5. Gross private domestic investment B-6. National income by distributive shares B-7. Personal income B-8. Relation of national income and personal income B-9. Disposition of personal income B-10. Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and prices Employment and wages : B Labor force employment and unemployment B-l Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments B-l Average weekly hours in selected industries B-l4. Average hourly earnings in selected industries B-15. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Production and business activity : B-l Indexes of industrial and agricultural production B-l7. Production of selected commodities in the free world B-l8. New construction activity B-l Business expenditures for new plant and equipment B-20. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade B-21. Sales stocks orders and receipts at department stores Prices : B-22. Consumers ' price index B-23. Wholesale price index B Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio B-25. Percentage increases in wholesale prices and cost of living in the United States and foreign countries since June Credit money supply and Federal finance : B-26. Consumer credit outstanding B-27. Loans and investments of all commercial banks B-28. Deposits and currency B-29. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations B-30. U. S. Government debt volume and kind of obligations B-31. Bond yields and interest rates selected years Corporate profits and finance : B-32. Profits before and after tax all private corporations B-33. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations B Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and B Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and B Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size class average and B Sources and uses of corporate funds International transactions : B-38. International transactions of the United States B United States exports and imports of goods and services by area B-40. U. S. Government grants other unilateral transfers and loans to foreign countries B-41. United States merchandise exports including reexports by area quarterly average and B Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class quarterly average and B United States general merchandise imports by area quarterly average and B-44. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and B-45. United States exports of selected capital goods to ERP countries and underdeveloped areas Summary : B-46. Changes in selected economic series since and and during page Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power TABLE B-l. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Government purchases of goods and services Gross Gross Personal private Net Federal national consump- domes- foreign State prod- tion ex- tic in- invest- Total pendiand Nauct vest-2 ment tures ment Total tional Other local security Period 1929..._ : First half Second half _ _ _ _ _ _ _ : First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ 1945._._ _ _ ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) a ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates O See appendix table B-4 for major components See appendix table B-5 for major components Net of Government sales which have been deducted from the national security expenditures For " national security " expenditures include the following : military services international security and foreign relations development and control of atomic energy promotion cf merchant marine promotion of defense production and economic stabilization and civil defense. ( See The Budget of the United States Government for the Fiscal Year Ending June for items included in each of these classifications. ) Prior to the expenditures are based on items formerly classified as " war " by the Bureau of the Budget and Treasury Department. For all years the expenditures exclude Government sales and have been adjusted to the concept of purchases of goods and services Not available Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Less than million dollars NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-2. Gross national product or expenditure in prices [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Period Government purchases of goods and services Gross private domestic investment Total gross Pronational New ducprodDur- Non- Servcon- ers ' uct Total able dur- ices Total struc- durable able goods goods tion equipment Net Gross forprieign Change invate in prodvestbusi- ment Total Fed- State uct and eral local ness inventories See Survey of Current Business January and the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business for explanation of conversion of estimates in current prices to those in prices Total gross national product less compensation of general government employees Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily ^ add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-3. Gross national product or expenditure in prices 1929-51l [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Period Total gross national product r2 m | > bo ) o EH ft r2 fc '> Government purchases of goods and services Gross private domestic investment e Si " wft fc o> fc PH >> P i o>-3 l B 0< <u_g rs T3 1-i Federal Net foreign S | ino vestS ment a r-J 'd a i o EH a O II P X g 'd $ * n.o ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half * : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter. __ Third quarter Fourth quarter * ~ " I. ~ These estimates represent a rough conversion of the Department of Commerce series in prices ( See appendix table B-2. ) This was done by major components using the implicit price indexes for the year as a base. Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the period of World War II and for the series on change in business inventories See appendix table B-l footnotes and Not available * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B-4. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods Period Nondurable goods Services Total exAutopendimotures Total biles Other Total Foodi Cloth- Other Total Hous- Other ing ings and parts * _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half _ Second half * : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * Includes alcoholic beverages Includes shoes and standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings * Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic'Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-5. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Net change in Nonfarm producers ' Farm equipment and construction business inventories Total plant and equipment Rasi- Other gross dential pripriconNonvate struc- vate farm condomesCon- tion strucafter Contic Total i Equip- struc- Total < Equip- struc- ( non2 Total revalu- Farm investment tion i s ment tion farm ) tions ation ment adjustment Period _ -'.8 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : 1st half 2dhalf__-._- : 1st half : 1st quarter.. 2d quarter. 3d quarter. 4th quarter : 1st quarter.. 2d quarter. 3d quater..4th quarter l ! Items for and earlier years are not comparable with those for later years nor with figures shown in appendix table B-18. Items for all years are not comparable with those shown in appendix table B-19 principally because the latter exclude certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense Total producers ' durable equipment less " farm machinery and equipment " and farmers ' purchases of " tractors " and " business motor vehicles. " These figures assume that farmers purchase and percent respectively of all tractors and motor vehicles used for productive purposes Industrial buildings public utilities gas- and oil-well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants and garages. Includes hotel construction prior to only * Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus " farm machinery and equipment " and farmers ' purchases of " tractors " and " business motor vehicles. " ( See footnote ) Includes construction of hotels tourist cabins motor courts and dormitories since only Includes religious educational social and recreational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential and all other private Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the National Income Supplement tojfche " Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-6. National income by distributive shares [ Billions of dollars ] Period Business and proCorporate profits fessional income and inventory and inventory valuation valuation adjustment adjustment In- RentTotal Comcome al inpenNet of na- sation InIn- In- farm come intional of emof ven- terest come ven- pro- perin- ployCor- tory tory prie- sons come ees of porate valuunin- valuTotal profits ation Total corpo- ation tors before adrated adtax justenter- justment prises ment sili i S4.9 ll o A -'.7 ( < ) Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter -ilo : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter National income is the total net income earned in production by individuals and businesses. The concept of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods and indirect business taxes Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income ( see appendix table B-7 ) and employer and employee contributions for social insurance ( see appendix table B-8 ) See appendix table B-32 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after tax Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; corporate profits and total national income for third quarter and all items for fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-7. Personal income [ Billions of dollars ) Total personal income Period Salaries wages and other labor income Proprietors ' and rental income Dividends and Transfer personal payments interest3 income Nonagricultural personal income Agricultural income _ _ _ _ ._ _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. _ : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter. _ _ Fourth quarter <L_ * U ' Differs from " compensation of employees " in appendix table B-6 in that it excludes employer and employee contributions to social insurance. Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor incomecompensation for injuries employer contributions to private pension and welfare funds pay of military reservists not on full-time active duty ( pay for full-time active duty included in military wages and salaries ) directors ' fees jury and witness fees compensation of prison inmates Government payments to enemy prisoners of war marriage fees to justices of the peace and merchant marine war-risk life and injury claims See appendix table B-6 for major components See appendix table B-32 for dividend payments * Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net rents agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Estimates'based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the ( Department of Commerce. For detail see the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Plus : Corporate National profits Contriincome and in- butions to ventory social valu- insuration ance adjustment Period Excess of wage accruals over disbursements Government transfer payments Net interest paid by government Dividends Busi- Equals : Perness sonal trans- income fer payments ' ) ) ) ) ) ) ) _._ _ _ _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter * ____ Fourth quarter2.. _ ) ) ( ( ' ) ) ) ) ) ) ) Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; corporate profits and total national income for third quarter and all items for fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-9. Disposition of personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Less : Personal Personal tax and income nontax payments Period _ _ _ _ _ _ __ * _ _ _ Net saving as percent of disposable personal income _ Less : Equals : Personal Equals : DisposconPersonal able net personal sumption saving expendiincome tures ? \ " I Seasonafly adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ .l_ Fourth quarter ._ Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. -The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-10. Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and prices Total disposable personal income ( billions of dollars ) Per capita disposable personal income ( dollars ) Period prices l Current prices Current prices prices * Population ( thousands ) _ _ ___ _ _ _ _ _ _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates First half Second half _1950 : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First half- -.Second half Oil Dollar estimates in current prices divided by an over-all price index for personal consumption expenditures. This price index was based on Department of Commerce data shifted from a base Provisional intercensal estimates of the population of continental United States including armed forces overseas taking into account the final census total population count. Annual data are as of July ; quarterly and semi-annual data as of middle of period Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE B Labor force employment and unemployment Total labor force ( including armed forces ) * Period Civilian labor force Armed forces i Total civilian labor force Employment Total Agri- Nonagricultural cultural Unemployment Unemployment as percent of total civilian labor force Thousands of persons years of age and over Monthly average : ( ' ( ) * ( ) ( ) _ _ __ _ * First half Second half __ _ ( ) * First half Second half __ ( ) * January February March _April May June July August September _ _ __ O ctober November ._ December * January February March April May June July August September October November December ,__ ________ _ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) i ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) i ( ) i Data for exclude about members of the armed forces who were outside the continental United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the census. This figure is deducted by the Census Bureau from its current estimates for comparability with data * Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation illness bad weather temporary lay-off and industrial disputes Not available NOTE. Labor force data are based on a survey made during the week which includes the 8th of the month Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Labor ( ) and Department of Commerce ( ) TABLE B Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments * [ Thousands of employees ] Total wage Manufacturing and Period salary work- Total ers Monthly average : * _ ._ : First half Second half. : First half. Second half * __ : January February March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May ..._ June July August September * October * November f.__ Government tion tract Serv- ( FedFiand Trades nance ice eral construc- public State tion utili and ties local ) Trans- Con- porta- Non- MinDur- dura- ing able ble goods goods ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked or received pay during the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors selfemployed persons domestic servants and personnel of the armed forces. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force reported by the Department of Commerce ( appendix table B-ll ) which include proprietors self-employed persons and domestic servants which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather or temporary lay-offs and which are based on an enumeration of population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments Data for the trade and service divisions beginning with are not comparable with data shown for earlier years because of the shift of the autom otive repair service industry from the trade to the service division s Not available Estimates based on incomplete data Data reflect work stoppages in bituminous coal mining NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-13. Average weekly hours in selected industries Retail trade ( except Hotels Bitumi Build- Class I Whole- eating ing Telenous ( yearcon- steam phone sale and Noncoal railtrade drink- round ) Total Durable durabl mining struc- roads tion goods goods ing places ) Manufacturing Period Monthly average : ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ( > ) ) ) ) ( ) C1 ) : First half Second half.. : First half Second half * _ : January February March. __ _ April May _ _ _ _ _ June July August September October November December : January February March April. May June Julv August September * _ _ October * November ) ) C1 ) ( ( ) ) ) ( ' ) ) '8 ( ' ) iO ( ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) S ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( l ) ' ) C1 ) ) ( ( O Not available Average for year not available because new series was started in April Beginning with June data relate to nonsupervisory employees only Not strictly comparable with previous data * Estimates based on incomplete data * Data reflect work stoppages or 3-day workweek NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly data are used Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual average for which has been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-14. Average hourly earnings in selected industries Retail trade ( except Hotels Bitumi- Build- Class I nous ing con- steam Tele- Whole- eating ( yearsale railcoal and Dura- Non- mining struc- roads phone trade drink- round ) i tion ble durable ing goods goods places ) Manufacturing Period Total Monthly average : $ _ : First half Second half... : First half Second half : January _ February March April May June July August September. October November December : January February March April May June July. August September October e November ( ) ( ) ( ) $ $ ( ) ( ) ( ) $ U.933 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ' ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) C22 ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) C2 ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips not included Not available a Not available. Series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June data relate to nonsupervisory employees < Not strictly comparable with previous data Preliminary average ; does not include any retroactive wage payments Estimates based on in complete data f Data reflect work stoppages or 3-day workweek NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly rated employees in railroads and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly data are used Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual average for which has been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-15. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries ) Retail trade ( except Hotels Bitumi Build- Class I nous ing con- steam Tele- Whole eating ( yearsale Dura- Nonrailand strucphone trade coal roads ble durable mining tion drink- round ) goods goods ing places ) Manufacturing Period Total Monthly average : $ _ ' _ : First half Second halL.. : First half. .._. Second half : January _. February March April May _ _ June July August __ September October November December ' January __ February March. .__ April _ May June July August September _ _ October November _ _ $ $ $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ * ? ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) <22 ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips not included Not available Not available. Series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June data relate to nonsupervisory employees * Not strictly comparable with previous data Preliminary average ; does not include any retroactive wage payments Estimates based on incomplete data Data reflect work stoppages or 3-day workweek NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly rated employees in railroads and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly data are used Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from bench mark levels thereby providing consistent series The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual average for which has been weighted by datajon man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE B-16. Indexes of industrial and agricultural production f = ] Industrial production Manufactures Period Total Minerals Total Durable Agricultural production Nondurable _ _ .-_ _ Adjusted for seasonal variation ' First half Second half : First half Second half : January February March April May June July August September October November December * January February March April May June July August September October.. November * December _ _ ._ _ _-_ ( ) ( ) _ _. ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) ' ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) For industrial production axerage of monthly indexes is used for year or half year Index of volume of farm production for human use Estimates based on incomplete data Because of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production only an annual index has been computed Sources : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of Agriculture TABLE B Production oj selected commodities in the free world Commodity Unit Aluminum Bread grains Coarse grains ^ Cobalt Copper Cotton Fats and oils T3 Free Rest Rest Free world United of free world United of free total States world total States world Thous. metric tons.. _ __ _ Million bushels Million bushels Thous. pounds Thous. metric tons.. Thous bales Thous. short tonsoil content Fertilizer ( nitroge- Thous. metric tonsnitrogen content. nous ) Iron ore Million metric tons Lead Thous. metric tons.. Lumber Million board feet Manganese ore Thous. metric tons._ Million poundsMeat carcass weight Thous. metric tons.. Newsprint Nickel _ Thous. metric tons. Petroleum ( crude ) Million barrels Rubber ( natural and synthetic ) Thous. long tons Thous. long tons Sulfur native Tin Thous. metric tons. Tungsten8 Metric tons Wood pulp ( mechanical and chemical ) Thous. metric tons.. Million poundsWool greasy basis Zinc Thous. metric tons.. | g JL ^ <x> -f22 Q & Estimates based on incomplete data Barley oats and corn Data are for crop year Data are for crop year Production represents metal content of mine production Bales of pounds net * Less than percent Synthetic rubber Source : Department of State United States Percentage change to * Quantity TABLE B-18. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Total new construction Period / 194g Total private Residential building ( nonfarm ) Nonresidential building ( nonfarm ) Other private Total public Military and naval Nonresidential building High- Other ways public " _ Public construction _ _ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half... : First half Second half.. * January February March April May June July August September October November December * January February March April May June July August September October November December Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural-gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product Includes public utility farm and other private construction not separately shown Includes residential sewer and water miscellaneous public service enterprises conservation and development and all other public construction not separately shown Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE B-19. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Millions of dollars ] Manufacturing and mining Transportation Total i Period Manufactur- Mining Railroad ing Total Other Electric and gas utilities Commercial and miscellaneous a ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ._ _._ ._- _ _ _ ( ) ( ) Annual rates not adjusted for seasonal variation : First half Second half : First half Second half * : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter _._ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter fl ' * Excludes agriculture and outlays charged to current account Commercial and miscellaneous include trade service finance and communication for all years shown Prior to miscellaneous also included transportation other than railroad and electric and gas utilities which are not available separately for these years Not available separately for years prior to Included in commercial and miscellaneous prior to Estimates for fourth quarter of and first quarter of are based on anticipated capital expenditures reported in late October and November NOTE. These figures do not agree with those shown in column of appendix table B-5 and included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce principally because the latter cover certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense. Figures for ( except manufacturing for ) are Federal Reserve Board estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other data Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade [ Adjusted for seasonal variation ] _ Millions of dollars " GO Ratio of inventories to sales Retail trade Inventories * Millions of dollars Ratio of inventories ^ to sales * OQ e * J8 Wholesale trade Inventories l Millions of dollars Ratio of inventories to sales Inventories l Period Manufacturing Inventories * Millions of dollars Ratio of inventories to sales Total manufacturing and trade : : First half... Second half : First half Second half * : January February. _ March April May June July August September. October November. December : January February.. March April May June July August September October * November Book value end of period Monthly average shown for year and half-year and total for month For annual and semiannual periods ratio of average end-of-month inventories to average monthly sales ; for monthly data ratio of end-of-month inventories to sales for month * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of " change in business inventories " included in the gross national product since they cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B Sales stocks orders and receipts at department stores Reported data ( millions of dollars ) Period Sales ( total for month ) Monthly average : Stocks ( end of month ) Derived data ( millions of dollars ) Outstanding orders ( end of month ) Receipts ( total for month ) ( ) New orders ( total for month ) Ratio Stocks to sales ( ) Outstanding orders to sales Outstanding orders to ^ stocks ( ) ( ) ( ) : First half Second half : First half Second half : January February Afarch April May June July August September October November December _ : January _ February March April May June __ July August September October... _ _ _ November Not adjusted for seasonal variation Not available Averages based on data through November NOTE. These figures are not estimates for all department stores in the United States. Figures for sales stocks and outstanding orders are based on actual reports from the stores. Receipts of goods are derived from the reported figures on sales and stocks. New orders are derived from estimates of receipts and reported figures on outstanding orders Semiannual and annual data on receipts and new orders can not be derived directly from the monthly averages of sales stocks and outstanding orders Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B-22. Consumers ' price index For moderate-income families in large cities [ ] All items Period Monthly average : Food Apparel Rent Fuel elecHousetricity furnishand reings frigeration Miscellaneous : First half Second half * : January February March April May June July August September October November December ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ^ ( ) ._ _ ._ ._ _ _ __ ' First half Second half : January February March April May June July August September October November December .-_ _ _._ i Averages based on data through November except for food Not available Source : Department of Labor ( ) TABLE B-23 Wholesale price index [ = ] Other than farm products and foods Farm products All commodities A I i d g w bO t ) o & ! a ~ f is I i ! 2ft I S'g s * s * rS * | a p > s H s o EH w Period Monthly average : X m If OS A OS O to O i _ First half Second half First half Second half * January February Tvlarch April Mav July August September October November December JLZ&-8- _ ' January February _ _ March April _ _ May June July August September October. November December * / * * ? * Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers Source : Department of Labor ( except as noted ) TABLE B Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers ^ and parity ratio ^ [ = ] Prices received Period Monthly average : Prices paid ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) Parity ratio * : First half Second half : First half Second half : January February 15.March April May June July August September October November December : January February March April May June July August September October November December Ratio of prices received to prices paid ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) Includes subsidy payments between October and June Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE B-25. Percentage increases in wholesale prices and cost of living in the United States and foreign countries since June Cost of living Wholesale prices Percentage increase June to latest date Country _ Western European countries ; Austria Belgium Denmark Franco Germany ( Federal Republic ) _ _ Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden _ Switzerland _ ._ Turkey United Kingdom November July September October September August October ) ) i Latest date December Latin America : Argentina Brazil Chile.. Costa Rica Cuba _ Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Mexico Nicaragua Paraguay Peru Venezuela __ Percentage increase June to latest date August September October September September October August August October United States Africa and Near East : Algeria Egypt _ Iran Iraq Israel _ Lebanon Morocco Tunisia Union of South Africa Latest date October October November November October September September November September November September September September October October October October September October November August November November August June June September ) September October October October October October October October June-Aug. quarter October September October October September August October September September April October September September June October December October August * August June June September Pacific and Far East : Australia India Indochina __ Japan New Zealand Philippines _ _ Thailand August November September October September October September JO Third quarter September August September Third quarter September August Other : Canada Finland October October October September Not available Covers basic materials only May to latest quarter Retail food prices only NOTE. -The components of the indexes are not always the same for each country Source : International Monetary Fund TABLE B-26. Consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit Total consumer credit End of period Total Automobile sale credit Other i Charge accounts Other consumer credit 99& ' January February _ March April ._- May June _ July August _ September October November December : January February March April May June JulyAugust September October November December ._ _ .__ __ Includes other sale credit and loans including repair and modernization loans insured by Federal Housing Administration Includes loans by pawnbrokers service credit and single-payment loans under $ made by commercial banks. The single-payment loan item was revised in November to exclude loans over $ See Federal Reserve Bulletin for November pp. Estimates based on incomplete data ; December by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) ; TABLE B-27. Loans and investments of all commercial banks ] [ Billions of dollars ] Total loans and investments End of period June June _ June June June June Commercial and industrial loans Total U. S. Government obligations Other securities : January February March April May June. July August September October November December _ _ _ _ _ : January February March _ April. May June _ _ _ _ _ _ July August _ September _ _ _ _ _ October November _ December ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total s Investments Loans Excludes mutual savings banks June and December figures are for call dates. Other monthly data are for the last Wednesday of the month Data are shown net. Includes commercial and industrial loans agricultural loans loans on securities real estate loans loans to banks and " other loans " some of which represent consumer credit Beginning with data are shown gross i. e. before deduction of valuation reserves instead of net as for previous years. Prior to June and for months other than June and December data are estimated on the basis of reported data for all insured commercial banks and for weekly reporting member banks June data are used because complete end-of-year data are not available prior to for U. S. Government obligations and other securities Not available Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-28. Deposits and currency [ Millions of dollars ] Total deposits and currency End of period * U.S Government deposits Total excluding U. S. Government deposits fprivately-held money supply ) * Total Currency outside banks Demand deposits adjusted Time deposits fl : January February March April > ' _ May June July August September October November December * January February March __ April May June July __.August September October _ _ November December ' * June and December figures are for call dates. Other monthly data are for the last Wednesday of the month i Includes U. Government deposits at Federal Reserve banks and commercial and savings banks and beginning with 193S includes U. S. Treasurer 's time deposits open account Includes deposits and currency held by State and local governments < Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U. S. Government less cash items in process of collection * Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System but excludes interbank deposits Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE B-29. Estimated ownership of Federal obligations l [ Billions of dollars par values ] Gross public debt and guaranteed issues * End of period Total Held by U.S Government investment accounts Held by others State Total held by and local governothers ments Commercial banks Nonbank private Federal corporaIndiReserve tions and viduals banks associa4 tions * 'January February March April May June July AugustSeptember October November December : January February March ._ April _- May June July August September October __ November77 December United States savings bonds series A-D E and F. are included at current redemption values Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and Territories and possessions < Includes commercial banks trust cpmpanies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and possessions ; excludes securities held in trust departments s Includes insurance companies mutual savings banks savings and loan associations nonprofit institutions corporate pension trust funds dealers and brokers and foreign accounts in this country. Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund in special non-interest-bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts ^ Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE B-30.- U. S. Government debt volume and kind of obligations [ Billions of dollars ] i Interest-bearing public debt Gross Marketable public public issues debt and guaranteed issues i Short- Treasury term issues bonds End of period Nonmarketable public issues United States savings bonds Nonnterestbearing Treas- Special debt ury issues ; ax and savings notes Fully guaranteed securities _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ '47.7 ( ) _ ( ) ( * ) _ __ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) 1943__ _ __ _ _ : January February March April May June July August September October November December _ _ _ __ : January February ._ March April _May _ _ _ June_ July August -__ _ -__ September October _ November. __ _. December | Total includes Postal Savings bonds prewar bonds adjusted service bonds depositary bonds Armed Forces leave bonds and Treasury investment bonds not shown separately. Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury Includes Treasury bills certificates of indebtedness and Treasury notes Issued to U. S. Government investment accounts ; these accounts also held billion dollars of public marketable and nonmarketable issues on December * Less than million dollars Source : Treasury Department TABLE B-31. Bond yields and interest rates selected years [ Percent per annum ] Average of rates Prime Federal charged Corporate by banks commer- Bankers ' Reserve acceptAaa cial on short- paper bank ances Taxable bonds term discount bonds ( Moody 's ) loans rate days years selected months and over cities U. S. Government security yields Period 3-month Treasury bills i Average : ( ) month issues ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter L27 : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ _ ? Rate on new issues within period Includes certificates of indebtedness and selected note and bond issues Treasury bills were first issued in December * < Not available before August s Bonds-in this classification were first issued in March Not available on same basis f From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing or callable in year or less NOTE. Yields and rates computed for New York City except for average of rates charged on short-term oans Sources : Treasury Department Moody 's Investors Service and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE B Profits before and after tax all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits after tax Corporate profits before tax _ _ _ [ Ff8.1 Period Corporate tax liability Total Dividend payments Undistributed profits m T2.4 [ '6.1 [ L6'1 Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First half Second half : First half Second half : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter i Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes a Minus million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment. See appendix Table B-6 for profits before tax and inventory valuation adjustment. The figures beginning with are based on the revised series of national income and product of the Department of Commerce. For detail see the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-33. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations [ Millions of dollars ] Nondurable goods industries ( corporations ) Durable goods industries ( corporations ) l Period Sales Profits Sales Before taxes After taxes Before taxes After taxes ] J947 Profits _ Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal variation I960- First half Second half First half ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter * Second quarter Third quarter i See Federal Reserve Bulletin June and subsequent issues for similar data for the following industry groups : primary metals and products machinery automobiles and equipment foods and kindred products chemicals and allied products and petroleum refining * Certain Federal income tax accruals for the first months of and required by subsequent increases in Federal income tax rates and charged by many companies against third quarter profits have been redistributed to the first and second quarters. Available information does not permit a similar redistribution of accruals charged against fourth quarter profits to cover liability for excess profits taxes. Estimates for third quarter based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Compiled by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and based on published reports of various industrial corporations TABLE B-34. Relation of profits before and ajter taxes to stockholders ' equity private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and Percentage ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity Industry group average Total First Second Third First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Before Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles __ Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures. _ _ Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) After Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Food .Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel andfinishedtextiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products _ _ Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) __ __ Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group average and Profits in cents per dollar of sales Industry group average Total First Second Third First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Before Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations _ Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products _ Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products _ _ Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products __ Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) _ Electrical machinery _ Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Food Tobacco manufacturers Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products __ _ Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) After Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Food Tobacco manufactures-.- ._ Textile mill products Apparel andfinishedtextiles Lumber and wood products ._ Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products _ Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) _ _ _-_ Source : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size class average and Assets class ( thousands of dollars ) average First Second Third First Second Third Total quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Ratio of profits before Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All sizes to to _ to to _ and over _ _ Profits before Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales to to to and over All sizes to Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All sizes to to to to __ and over Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All sizes to to to _ to and over_ Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE B-37. Sources and uses of corporate funds [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Uses : Plant an d equipment outlays Inventories ( change in book value ) Change in customer receivables Cash and U. S. Government securities Other current assets __ Sources : Internal : Retained profits and depletion allowances _._ Depreciation allowances ,_ Total external sources Total sources _ _ ( ) _ -i _._ Total internal sources External : Change in trade debt -_ Change in Federal income tax liability Other current liabilities. _ Change in bank loans Change in mortgages Net new issues _ Total uses Discrepancy ( sources less uses ) _ * Excludes banks and insurance companies Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers * Less than million dollars Source : Department of Commerce estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data ( except as noted ) TABLE B-38. International transactions of the United States [ Millions of dollars ] Type of transaction First Fourth Total i quarter Second Third quarter quarter quarter Exports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods __ __ __ Total exports _ _ Total goods Services _ _ __ Income on investments Imports of goods and_ser vices : Recorded goods Other goods ' Total goods Services Income on investments _. Surplus of exports of goods_and services : Recorded goods Other goods Total imports 'l ! Total goods Services Income on investments _ C3 ) Total surplus of exports Means of financing surplus of exports of goods and services : Liquidation of gold and dollar assets by foreign countries Dollar disbursements ( net ) by : International Monetary Fund International Bank U. S. Government sources ( net ) : " Grants and other unilateral transfers _ Long- and short-term loans _ U. S. private sources ( net ) : Remittances. -Long- and short-term capital Total means of financing Errors and omissions Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Includes goods sold to or bought from other countries that have not been shipped from or into the United States customs area and other adjustments Less than $ For detail see appendix table B-40 s Excludes purchases or sales of obligations issued by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B--39. United States exports and imports of goods and services by area [ Billions of dollars annual rates ] Area Exports of goods and services : ERP countries _ _ _ ERP dependencies Europe except ERP countriesCanada and Newfoundland Latin-4 American republics Other Total exports Imports of goods and services : ERP countries ERP dependencies Europe except ERP countriesCanada and Newfoundland- __ Latin-American republics Other First Second Third Fourth Total i quarter quarter quarter quarter * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Exports of goods and services to sterling area Imports of goods and services from sterling area Export5 surplus with sterling area Total imports Export surplus of goods and services : ERP countries ERP dependencies Europe except ERP countriesCanada and Newfoundland Latin-American republics Other * .__ Total export surplus ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ADDENDUM Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Includes income on investments Not available Includes international institutions In and ] includes " special category " exports sold for cash but excludes all transactions under the Mutual Defense Assistance Program NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-40. U. S. Government grants other unilateral transfers and loans to foreign countries [ Millions of dollars ] Type of aid Unilateral payments : Military-aid programs : Mutual Defense Assistance Program Greek-Turkish aid Chinese aid EGA programs : European Recovery Program Other Army Civilian Supply Program * Technical Cooperation Administration Philippine Rehabilitation Act Interim aid and Post-UNRRA International Refugee Organization and other United Nations relief organizations Other First Third Fourth Total i quarter Second quarter quarter quarter ' ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total unilateral payments. Less : Unilateral receipts ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Equals : Net unilateral jpayments Long-term loans and investments : United Kingdom loan European Recovery Program. Export-Import Bank loans Surplus property credits including ship sales ._ Raw-material credits to occupied areas United Nations building loan Other Total long-term loans and Investments Less : Repayments Equals : Net long-term loans and investments Short-term loans ( net ) Total net unilateral payments loans and investments ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available * Less than $ Includes disbursements in Germany administered by EGA from funds appropriated under the Army Civilian Supply Program Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-41. United States merchandise exports including reexports by area quarterly average and Period Other Total exports in- Canada J Western Hemicluding reexports sphere ERP countries Other Europe Asia * Australia and Africa Oceania Millions of dollars Quarterly average : ' ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( fi ) : First quarter Second quarter _ _ Third quarter Fourth quarter 3_ : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter 3_ <3,850 ( ) ( ) ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : I9608 : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter _ Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter _ Includes Newfoundland and Labrador Turkey is included with countries participating in the European Recovery Program and excluded from Asia. Exports to Germany are included with those of ERP countries and in the postwar period relate almost wholly to exports to the western zones Data by area exclude while total exports include " special category " exports. For this reason exports by area will not add to total exports in these periods * Estimates based upon incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers s Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise including reexports shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in to goods destined to United States Armed Forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding. See also footnote Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-42. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class, quarterly average and [ = ] Total domestic exports Period Crude materials ManuCrude factured foodstuffs ! foodstuffs * Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : _ ' First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter ._ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ._ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) __ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Unit value indexes Quarterly average : : First quarter __ Second quarter _ Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ._ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Export indexes of crude and manufactured foodstuffs particularly those of unit value in are influenced by sales of large quantities of food products at prices considerably below market quotations. Such exports include sales from Government-owned surplus and shipments on which subsidies were paid by the Department of Agriculture Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including change in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade. The indexes for to are based on data which include goods destined to the United States Armed Forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-43. United States general merchandise imports by area quarterly average and Total general imports Period Other Canada Western Hemisphere ERP countries Other Asia Europe Australia and Africa Oceania Millions of dollars Quarterly average : ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter s I4 ) <.4 ) ) ( ) S3 ( 4> ( ) ( ) ( ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : _ : First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Includes Newfoundland and Labrador Turkey is included with countries participating in the European Recovery Program and excluded from Asia. Imports from Germany are included with those of ERP countries and in the postwar period relate almost wholly to imports from the three western zones Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise received in theTUmted States customs area from foreign countries. General imports include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising channels plus entries into bonded customs warehouses Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports foi sumption by economic class quarterly average and [ = ] Total imports for consumption Period Crude materials Crude foodstuffs ManufacFinished tured food- Semimanu- manufacfactures stuffs tures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter __ _ Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) Unit value indexes Quarterly average : i -_ _ _ _ ( ) : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) a ( ) J ( ) * Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advise rs Not available NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including changes in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE B-45. United States exports of selected capital goods to ERP countries and underdeveloped areas [ Millions of dollars ] Goods and area First half Steel mill products : ERP countries Latin American republics Asia _ Africa _ _ Second halfi First half _ _ Electrical machinery and apparatus : ERP countries _ Latin3 American republics Asia _ _ _ Africa _ Second half Engine turbines and parts including locomotives : ERP countries * -Latin American republics Asia Africa _ _ Construction excavating and conveying machinery : ERP countries Latin American republics Asia ___ _ _ Africa. _ Mining well and pumping machinery : ERP countries 2__ Latin American republics Asia _ Africa. _ _ Machine tools : ERP countries _ Latin American republics Asia Africa _ _ ___ ( * ) Other metal working machinery : ERP countries Latin American republics Asia Africa.. Agricultural machinery and implements : ERP countries a Latin American republics Asia Africa C4 ) __ ._ Miscellaneous machinery excluding aircraft and transportation equipment : ERP countries _ Latin2 American republics Asia Africa __._ Tractors parts and accessories : * ERP countries Latin American republics Asia Africa Trucks busses and2 chasses ( new ) : * ERP countries Latin American republics Asia _ _ _ Africa _ * Estimates based on data through September Turkey is included in ERP countries and excluded from Asia Includes " special category " commodities in first half of but excludes them thereafter < Less than $ Source : Department of Commerce TABLE B-46. Changes in selected economic series since and and during Percentage change ' = Source : Appendix table No Second half to first half to second half Economic series Total First half B-l... Gross national product Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Government purchases of goods and services B-3... Gross national product in prices Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Government purchases of goods and services _ B-6... National income Compensation of employees B-9___ Personal income Disposable personal income. _Personal net saving ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ._. _ _ _ _ B-16.. Industrial production Durable manufactures Nondurable manufactures _ _ _ Minerals Agricultural production ( ) ' ( ) C3 ) B-18-. New construction Private _ __ Residential ( nonfarm ) Nonresidential _ _ Other private Public .__ B-19-. Business expenditures for plant and equipment-- _ _ Manufacturing B-20.. Inventories end of period Manufacturing ___ Wholesale trade Retail trade 3C2 B-10-. Per capita disposable personal income : Current prices prices B-ll.. Labor force including armed forces Civilian labor force Employment Agricultural _ Nonagricultural Unemployment B-15.. Average gross weekly earnings : M anuf actur ing Durable goods Nondurable goods. _ Building construction Sales Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail trade _ ._ ._ _ ._ ._ _ _ _ _ B-22.. Consumers ' price index : All items Food Apparel _ _ _ Rent Housefurnishings _ ._ _ _ __ ___ B-23.. Wholesale price index : All commodities Farm products Foods Other than farm products and foods See footnotes at end of table ( ) TABLE B-46. Changes in selected economic series since and and during Continued Source : Appendix table No Percentage change l = Economic series Total First half Second half to first half to second half a B-24_. Prices received by farmers Prices paid by farmers ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) B-26-. Consumer credit outstanding end of periodInstalment credit B-27.. Loans and investments of all commercial banks end of period Loans _ _ Investments in U. S. Government securities B-30.. Gross public debt and guaranteed issues end of period __ _. B-32.. Corporate profits : Profits before tax Profits after tax Dividend payments Undistributed profits a B-41.. Merchandise exports including reexports <346 <502 M95 B-43-. General merchandise imports * Changes are computed from data as reported and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from the indexes shown here Estimates based on incomplete data Not available average = Index to the Annual Economic Review Including references to charts and text tables in the Annual Economic Review and the Economic Report of the President ( For additional tabular material see Appendixes A and B ) Agriculture : Pagt Production Labor Chart Civilian labor force Prices Price supports Allocations of scarce materials ( see also Materials ) : Policy and procedures International Aluminum. ( See Materials. ) Atomic energy Automobile production and employment ( see also Durable goods ) Banks. ( See Credit. ) Capacity expansion : Chart New plant and equipment outlays in selected durable manufacturing industries Chart New plant and equipment outlays in selected nondurable manufacturing industries Programs Chart Growth in basic capacity and production Table Expansion of capacity or output of selected industries Table Progress on facilities projects aided by tax amortization Table Estimated plant and equipment expenditures in selected areas of programmed or Government-aided expansion Longer-run problem Civilian economic strength maintenance Chart Building our strength : gross national product in prices Components control of distribution Conservation. ( See Natural resource development ; Materials. ) Construction ( see also Capacity expansion ; Housing ) : Developments in Chart Economic indicators : changes from to Chart Business investment Chart Construction Curtailment Chart Metals supply and requirements for civilian use Public Table New public construction expenditures for major development programs Consumption expenditures Chart Gains in living standards Chart Personal income spending and saving Chart Personal consumption expenditures for durable goods Page Consumer goods outlook Chart Output of selected consumer durable goods Consumers ' prices Table Changes in consumers ' ] prices Chart Consumers ' prices Chart Changes in personal assets and prices Controlled Materials Plan Copper. ( See Materials. ) Corporate finance Chart Sources and uses of corporate funds Corporate profits Chart Economic indicators : changes from to Chart Corporate profits Credit : Developments in Chart Bank loans and investments Chart Money supply Table Factors changing the volume of the privately-held money supply Policy Debt public. ( See Government finance. ) Defense. ( See Security. ) Defense Housing and Community Facilities and Services Act Defense Production Act amendments Deficits. ( See Government finance. ) Dislocations of business Dispersal local and regional Ill Durable goods : Production in Chart Production Consumers ' Chart Gains in living standards Chart Production of consumer durable goods contrasted with first half of Chart Personal consumption expenditures for durable goods Chart Output of selected consumer durable goods Producers ' Chart Business investment Capacity expansion Chart New plant and equipment outlays in selected durable manufacturing industries Major required adjustments Economy Government. ( See Government finance. ) Education Electric power Chart Growth in basic capacity and production Employment ( see also Manpower ; Unemployment ) Europe Western Chart Industrial production in Western Europe Table Foreign trade of Western Europe with rest of world Table Available resources in Western Europe Expansion programmed. ( See Capacity expansion. ) Page Exports U. S. in Chart Exports and imports of goods and services Table United States exports and imports of goods and services Export surplus financing in Farm. ( See Agriculture. ) Federal Reserve policy Finance. ( See Corporate finance ; Government finance. ) Fiscal policy. ( See Government finance. ) Foreign aid Table Foreign aid appropriated under Mutual Security Act of Table Net new funds made available to underdeveloped areas for economic assistance by United States Government and International Bank. Foreign investment private Government finance : Federal developments in Table Summary of Federal fiscal operations National security programs ( see also Security ) Public debt operations Chart The public debt. Consolidated cash accounts Table Government cash receipts from and payments to the public Table Federal cash payments to the public by function Table Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction Chart Federal cash receipts from and payments to the public. Nonmilitary construction programs Table New public construction expenditures for major development programs Federal programs financing Budget economies Recent tax legislation Nature of financing problem ahead Chart Federal budget expenditures Longer-run budget outlook Pay-as-we-go tax policy Sources of additional revenues Effects of temporary deficits State and local government finance Hard goods. ( See Durable goods. ) Health Highways Hours working Housing Ill Chart Metals supply and requirements for civilan use Chart New housing starts Defense housing Import barriers U. S Imports U. S Chart Exports and imports of goods and services Table United States exports and imports of goods and services Table United States imports of selected metals Page Income personal Chart Gains in living standards Chart Economic indicators : changes from to Chart Personal income spending and saving Chart Per capita disposable income Distribution Outlook Industrial production developments in Chart Production Inflationary pressures ( see also Stabilization ) : and production The problem abroad Chart Wholesale prices in selected countries Outlook International allocation of materials International economic purposes of the United States International transactions of the United States ( see also Exports ; Imports ; Foreign aid ) Inventories : Developments in Chart Business investment Chart Sources and uses of corporate funds Scarce materials and stabilization Investment ( see also Capacity expansion ; Construction ; Inventories ) : Developments in Chart Business investment Chart New plant and equipment outlays in selected durable manufacturing industries Chart New plant and equipment outlays in selected nondurable manufacturing industries Chart Construction Chart Sources and uses of corporate funds Investment abroad private Public investment Table New public construction expenditures for major development programs Government policies Restrictions on nonessential investment Ill Labor force shortages supply. ( See Manpower ; Unemployment. ) Lower priced lines of merchandise Manpower ( see also Dislocations of business ; Unemployment ) : Labor force developments in Chart Economic indicators : changes from to Chart Civilian labor force Manpower problems outlook policies Materials scarce ( see also Allocations ; Capacity expansion ) Table United States imports of selected metals Chart Metals supply and requirements for civilian use Chart Uses of steel Metals. ( See Materials. ) Migrant labor Minerals ( see also Materials ) : Production in Page Money supply Chart Money supply Table Factors changing the volume of the privately-held money supply. Mutual Security Act of Table Foreign aid appropriated under Mutual Security Act of Natural resource development Nondurable goods : Production in Chart Gains in living standards Chart Production Capacity expansion Chart New plant and equipment outlays in selected nondurable manufacturing industries. _ _ Output. ( See Production ) Planning. ( See Programming ) Plant and equipment. ( See Capacity expansion ; Investment. ) President 's Materials Policy Commission Price controls Price incentives for minerals production Price supports farm Prices developments in Chart Economic indicators : changes from to Wholesale Chart Wholesale prices Table Changes in wholesale prices Chart Wholesale prices of industrial products Consumers ' Table Changes in consumers ' prices Chart Consumers ' prices Chart Changes in personal assets and prices Prices in other countries Chart Wholesale prices in selected countries Pricing standards Procurement and small business Production ( see also Agriculture ) : Developments in Chart Economic indicators : changes from to Chart Production Problems and policy of increasing production and inflation Factors limiting increase Objective for Chart Building our strength : gross national product in prices. Chart Growth in basic capacity and production Chart Gross national product ; expenditures in prices Productivity : and inflation and expansion of production and wage stabilization Profits. ( See Corporate profits. ) Programming Public investment Table New public construction expenditures for major development programs Page Public participation in security program Regional considerations and problems Research surveys and development projects related to resources Saving personal : Developments in Chart Personal income spending and saving Table Liquid and total personal saving Outlook Chart Changes in personal assets and prices t $ $ Security national programs : Statement of economic purpose related thereto Developments in Program now proposed Chart National security expenditures for goods and services in prices Chart The security program : expenditures for goods and services in prices Chart Federal budget expenditures Speed of the build-up Services output in Small business Social security and welfare programs Soft goods. ( See Nondurable goods. ) Stabilization ( see also Inflationary pressures ) World aspects Relation of various stabilization policies Longer-range problem State and local government finance Steel. ( See Materials. ) Steel prices and wages Stockpiling Strikes Tariffs U. S Tax amortization 'Table Progress on facilities projects aided by tax amortization Taxation. ( See Government finance. ) Technological research on conservation of scarce materials Underdeveloped countries ( see also Foreign aid ; Foreign investment ) Table Net new funds made available to underdeveloped areas for economic assistance by United States Government and International Bank. Table Output of selected commodities in certain underdeveloped areas. Unemployment : Developments in Chart Civilian labor force Defense unemployment Vocational programs Voluntary Credit Restraint Program Wage negotiations in Wage stabilization Wages developments in Chart Average earnings in manufacturing industries Work stoppages U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : 19S2