The Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS January THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress January Together with a report THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY by the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE Washington D. C v January The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SIRS : I am presenting herewith my Economic Report to the Congress as required under the Employment Act of In preparing this report I have had the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers members of the Cabinet and heads of independent agencies Together with this report I am transmitting a report the Annual Economic Review : January prepared for me by the Council of Economic Advisers in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully tpL III Contents T H E ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Sources of our economic strength High points in the economic situation Guides to economic policy Legislative recommendations T H E ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW : JANUARY by the Council of Economic Advisers ) ( a report to the President To the Congress of the United States : T HE people of the United States have just enjoyed another year of bountiful prosperity. This has enabled us further to strengthen our economy at home and further to supplement the recovery of freedomloving peoples elsewhere who seek lasting peace The resourcefulness of American business the skill of our labor force and the productivity of our agriculture have lifted our standards of living beyond any prewar expectation. We have achieved these blessings through the happy combination of our free institutions our system of private enterprise upon which we primarily rely for economic results our vigorous Government and the mutual respect and trust that we all hold for one another. My pledge to all elements in our economic system is that their Government will continue to steer a course guided by full recognition of these values. Toward this end I ask of all the cooperation and confidence upon which our way of life depends Let us all remember that our unparalleled prosperity has not been maintained by chance and that we can lose it if we leave the future to chance Courageous and positive action has contributed to our progress and some of the most serious difficulties still confronting us exist because our thought and action have not been sufficiently clear and vigorous As we work together in to combat the remaining dangers of postwar inflation we should bear always in mind that our purpose is at the same time to build strong bulwarks against deflation and depression and thus to consolidate our past gains and move forward to new levels of sustained prosperity for all This third annual Economic Report under the Employment Act of affords not only the President but also the Congress and the whole country still another occasion to look to our current economic position to draw courage from our progress and to benefit by our mistakes. Now is the time to formulate and execute a practical program of immediate and long-range economic measures pointed toward stability and growth Sources of Our Economic Strength T HE year just ended has tested the strength of our economy and challenged our ability and willingness to act to protect our prosperity When opened the inflation which had attained threatening proportions in the preceding months was continuing unchecked. Prices were rising everywhere. They brought higher but uneasy profits to business firms They squeezed the family budget of workers who in turn sought to press wages upward as the cost of living advanced. The rising spiral created more and more maladjustment among prices wages and other incomes Early in a sharp break in grain prices spread concern throughout the economy. Commodity speculation fed by a world demand of unprecedented magnitude and intensified by our own short corn crop had carried the prices of wheat and corn to levels which could not be sustained. The market structure collapsed of its own weight. On February the price of cash wheat was percent or cents a bushel lower than it had been a month earlier But this break did not set off a train of consequences similar to those which following World War I had turned the boom into a deflation of unusual depth and rapidity in In the decline of the speculative grain market did not bring unemployment cutbacks in production general unloading of inventories or abandonment of plans for capital investment Our economy showed strength sufficient to withstand shock of a kind which had ended earlier inflations with collapse The reasons for this were not just that we were luckier in than we had been in Affirmative national policies and greater caution in the business community combined with other developments to make the economy more shock-resistant. The farm price support program guaranteed that the collapse of grain prices would not go far enough to impoverish the farmers to curtail the farmers ' demand for the products of industry or to bring about a chain reaction of price breaks in other markets. As the price drop was localized it did not cause cancellation of the buying and investment plans of businessmen and consumers Nor was the farm price support policy the only source of our strength Our whole financial and banking structure was stronger and more resilient than in the early twenties. Our businessmen having become better informed were more prudent. Our working groups were better supplied with current income and accumulated savings. Our social security and related policies added to the feeling of stability. The Government had so employed a large budget surplus as to prevent the inflation from becoming as hectic as it otherwise would have been ; and such policies served to moderate the extent of the reaction. This combination of private and Government action helped us to avoid serious trouble last year although it was not effective enough to terminate the inflationary trend which was soon augmented by the defense program and by the reduction in taxes. Nor did we develop an adequate protective program against hurtful deflation in the future. We must now look to an improved combination of basic private action and supplementary government action to develop still better remedies and safeguards Our escape from the danger of a general recession in the spring of does not mean that no further dangers will appear or that we can wait until they descend upon us in full force before taking wise preventive measures. We have been granted a breathing spell but we have not been granted lasting prosperity without further effort and vigilance. So long as the rising course of incomes and activity continues there will be in operation many of the forces which have been responsible for the longsustained advance of prices. There are a few sectors of our economy where dangerous inflationary forces continue to be predominant. For example the shortages of steel and electric power and the steadily mounting costs of public utility services add further to the higher costs of production which up to now have been rather readily passed on to the consuming public The recent appearance of wider areas in the economy where supply conditions have improved where the pressure of demand has been reduced and where price inflation has been halted or reversed should be looked upon as a desirable development to be welcomed rather than feared. It marks the beginning of the process by which a more stable condition can be reached after a long period of rising prices. But these adjustments have not proceeded far enough to justify a cessation of concern about inflation. Besides a sharp and uneven adjustment of prices downward may cause dislocations quite as serious as the sharp and uneven movement of prices upward Since both factors may be at work in different parts of the economy at the same time or in rapid sequence we need to have available a range of governmental measures which can be applied as brake or as accelerator according to the need While the prosperity of the postwar years has been great it has rested in considerable part on somewhat temporary factors which were the aftermath of war. In we are entering a period of harder tests. The momentum of war-created demand and war-created purchasing power has waned and we must now rely more fully on currently generated purchasing power to absorb a full output of goods and services. We must be more than ever on the alert to make sure that withdrawal or lessening of temporary demand factors is not accompanied by a reduction of productive activity and the mounting unemployment to which this would lead I believe that prosperity can be continued and that with proper action the prospective volume of business investment consumer spending and governmental transactions should promote ample employment opportunities for the coming year. But many adjustments in price and income relations need to be made and these must flow mainly from the wise action of the leaders in our enterprise economy. These leaders should draw sustaining confidence from the fact that it is the policy of the Government under the Employment Act of to use all its resources to avoid depression and to maintain continuous prosperity These favorable prospects will not be realized automatically. The strength of our economy the strength of our great Nation depends upon our capacity and willingness to adopt the salutary policies which are required by changing circumstances and to put them into effect In this Economic Report drawing upon the more * detailed information and analysis furnished to me by the Annual Economic Review of the Council of Economic Advisers ( transmitted to the Congress herewith ) I shall first cover the high points in the current and prospective economic situation and then propose both policy guides and a program to deal with the situation as I evaluate it High Points in the Economic Situation Employment in ranged from to nearly million civilian workers and averaged more than million. This included over a million workers who were added to the labor force. Unemployment remained at the low level of around million Production for the economy as a whole was between and percent higher than in With bumper crops agricultural output increased about percent. Industrial output increased percent while employment in the service businesses rose percent and in government percent Prices ceased the broad upward movement which had persisted with few interruptions ever since the removal of price controls. The trends of prices became more irregular and more selective. Metals and metal products building materials fuel and lighting materials and most durable goods moved upward while some other groups weakened with farm products leading the decline. Lower food prices brought the consumer price index down a little in the late months of the year although other components of the index continued to rise throughout most of the year This halt in the upward march of prices has been a welcome sign in the battle against inflation. I hope that it proves more enduring than similar pauses during the past two years. But the sharply divergent movements of prices both up and down confront us with urgent problems of adjustment to sustain maximum employment and production throughout the economy Wages went up during but there was considerable disparity in the increases obtained by workers in different lines. While some groups managed to keep ahead of rising living costs others fell behind Work stoppages in were at about the same level as in In most industries settlements were obtained without prolonged negotiations or strikes. Nevertheless considerable loss of production resulted directly and indirectly from strikes especially in coal mining and in east coast and west coast shipping and trucking Profits in again surpassed all previous records and were rising throughout the year. Corporate profits after taxes amounted to about billion dollars contrasted with a record level of about billion dollars in With sales booming the ratio of profits to sales was again maintained at around percent after taxes. As I pointed out a year ago such profits are in excess of the levels needed to furnish incentives and equity funds for industrial expansion and to promote sustained economic health although some businesses have not thrived nearly so well as others The supply of money and credit which increased enormously during the war continued to expand thereafter. During however partly as a result of restrictive actions adopted by governmental authorities and voluntary restraints observed by banks and partly because of a decline in the demand for short-term capital the expansion of bank credit was substantially slowed. A large Government surplus used to retire bank-held debt together with the slackened growth of credit resulted in a slight decrease in the amount of privately held bank deposits and currency While bank loan expansion was less in than in this was in good part offset by increased lending by other financial institutions Credit expansion has been an important element in the process of inflation. In the first months of it was offset by the large Treasury surplus. When that surplus disappeared the Government did not have authority to take other action which would effectively restrain inflationary expansion of bank credit and at the same time assure the maintenance of an orderly market for the vast public debt Consumer income in increased per capita about in proportion to the increase in consumer prices which meant that consumers had no appreciable gain in real incomes despite an increase of to percent in total national output. Income from most major sources was greater than in But in the latter half of income from farming fell relative to the normal seasonal pattern and that from other unincorporated business and from rents ceased to rise while that from dividend payments increased sharply. Income distribution is less unequal than it was in prewar years but this improvement has probably been halted as a result of inflation and of changes in income taxes in Consumption expenditure went up less than income in While personal saving increased this was not reflected in the rate at which people accumulated liquid assets currency and bank deposits insurance policies and securities. A larger proportion of saving was invested in housing unincorporated businesses and farms Business investment continued at a high level throughout Plant and equipment outlays by businesses other than farms totaled about billion dollars slightly above the level reached in the latter half of although with higher costs the physical volume of such investment was not quite maintained. Expansion to catch up with postwar demands appeared to be nearing completion in some lines but substantial further increases in capacity are planned in a number of industries chemicals petroleum metals utilities and transportation. Even where expansion goals have been met modernization to reduce costs and improve products should continue to require substantial investment though at a rate of growth lower than that of the past two years Inventories of nonfarm businesses likewise continued to increase in value throughout the year the increase amounting to about billion dollars Of this amount billion was accounted for by price increases. Restocking after wartime shortages appears to have been virtually completed except for metals and some building materials Corporate financing of investment in plant and equipment inventories and customer credit required billion dollars in billion less than in but that part of new investment which went into plant and equipment increased. Of the total percent was internally financed. For the part externally financed bonds were a more important source and bank loans and stock issues less important sources than in While stock market financing has been less important during the postwar years than in the late 's this has been offset by greater retained earnings so that equity-debt ratios are generally more favorable now than in the last two decades The housing supply was increased by well over a million residential units during But since last May the number of new housing starts has been falling off rapidly. This does not mean that the housing shortage has been overcome. Rather it means as I have pointed out in previous reports that the construction industry has been pricing itself out of the market for all but expensive homes. A continued decline in home building would constitute a threat not only to the improvement of living standards for millions of low-income families who are still inadequately housed but also to the maintenance of maximum employment over the years The housing shortage is one that calls for prompt and bold action by Government and by industry action by Government that will produce low-rent public housing slum clearance and rural housing for families of low incomes ; action by industry to reduce costs so that decent homes can be built at prices that wage earners with moderate incomes can afford The major portion of the housing job must be done by private industry Here the bottleneck is cost. At this time of national stock-taking I urge all elements of the building industry substantially to lower costs so that housing production may reach new record levels. The present decline in housing starts points up the danger that inflated building costs can bring down upon the industry. If housing costs are lowered and the consumer gets better value builders will be able to continue to build in volume and the building industry need not fear a continued downward trend Municipalities can perform a major role in reducing costs by modernizing their obsolete building codes which add to costs unnecessarily The surplus of exports of goods and services in was substantially less than in being billion dollars compared with billion. This reflected in part an increase in imports a necessary development for placing our international transactions on a sustainable basis. It reflected even more a decrease in exports because foreign purchasers lacked dollars with which to buy from us and because of increased supplies of needed goods produced abroad. The impact of this decline has been selective. Foreign countries have continued to buy products which they consider essential like wheat petroleum agricultural and industrial machinery and chemicals Other items have been cut very drastically As shipments under the European Recovery Program continue to expand some increase in the level of exports can be anticipated. For certain products especially those for which the domestic market is tight countries are being authorized to use European Recovery Program funds for purchases outside the United States. This will not reduce total export demand since the sellers of such goods will generally spend here the dollars they receive However the expansion of exports under this program will it is hoped be offset in part by further increases in imports Government fiscal transactions were again a strong anti-inflationary factor in the early part of due to the excess of receipts over expenditures But this factor declined substantially during the year. Federal receipts from the public exceeded cash payments by about billion dollars in the calendar year Measured after adjustment for seasonal factors the excess ran at an annual rate of billion dollars in the first half of and only at a rate of billion dollars in the second half. One of the main supports of an anti-inflation policy is a large Treasury surplus. As a result of the tax reduction of last year and the necessary increase in Government expenditures this powerful weapon is not now available. Tax receipts it is true have been rising but this has been largely due to the inflationary rise in incomes profits and pay rolls. This inflationary rise in turn was aggravated by the effects of the tax reduction. Rising expenditures of State and local governments are expected to add to deficits in and these deficits increase the general inflationary pressure In the Nation 's Economic Budget retained earnings of business and business investments showed the largest percentage increase from to Among the other components consumer incomes and expenditures increased less government payments rose only moderately and net foreign investment declined substantially. Expectations of continued inflation have added to the incentives for business investment while the price rise has acted as a brake on the demand of consumers with relatively fixed incomes. The proportion of consumer expenditures in the total national product has never been lower in any peacetime year for which statistics are available This is not an immediate problem so long as the sum of government expenditures business expenditures and net foreign investment is still rising. It could become a critical problem as these other factors begin to turn down or even to assume a declining relative importance in a constantly growing total economy. This situation calls for a vigorous anti-inflation program now while at the same time we must pursue those policies of adjustment and expansion which will be needed to promote balanced economic growth over the years Guides to Economic Policy S WE turn from consideration of the facts of our economic situation to a program of action there are several broad principles which I believe should guide us. These principles should help us to keep clearly in mind where we want to go and how certain roads rather than others are the surest and quickest way of getting there First. We should remember that the goal we seek is the greatest prosperity for the whole country and not the special gain of any particular group That is why the Employment Act of calls upon the President to present an economic program aimed at continuous " maximum employment production and purchasing power. " I firmly believe that this goal is attainable Maximum employment for means that nearly million additional job opportunities should be provided for the growing labor force. Maximum production means that our increased labor force and modernized plant should strive for a to percent increase in total output. Maximum purchasing power means that the sum total of market demand by government business and consumers domestic and foreign should be proportionate to our productive capacity. It must not be more or we shall suffer inflation It must not be less or we shall suffer unemployment and under-utilization of our resources Second. We should think and work with a reasonably long look ahead not keeping cur eyes just on the problems of the moment. Our immediate tasks must be placed in the perspective of our long-range national objectives While we must deal promptly with the problem of inflation we must not unduly hold back undertakings that are needed to preserve and develop our employment opportunities and our productivity in later years Policies needed to develop our resources and to prevent depression in the long run must be reconciled with policies needed to curb inflation in the short run We must pursue affirmative programs for housing and health for education and resource development. Yet the fight against inflation prevents us from undertaking these long-range programs with the speed and on a scale that would otherwise be desirable. In the recommendations made in this Economic Report and in the Budget which will be transmitted to the Congress in a few days I have sought to reconcile these objectives in a way that strikes the safest balance Third. In order to have a yardstick for appraising strength and weaknesses in our economy and the adequacy of Government programs we need concrete objectives for economic growth and particularly standards for a better balance between production and consumption income and investment and prices profits and wages which will be conducive to sustained economic progress. In the Annual Economic Review of the Council of A Economic Advisers transmitted herewith there is a detailed treatment of our growth possibilities over the next few years. This shows how our employment our output and our standards of living can rise if we encourage and place major reliance upon our free enterprise system conserve and develop our natural and human resources retain our faith in responsible Government and do not relax our efforts This study by the Council of Economic Advisers shows that action is now needed on the long range programs which I set forth in the concluding section of this Economic Report Fourth We are dedicated to the principle that economic stability and economic justice are compatible ends. The fact that our total purchasing power is now at record levels can not blind us to the equally important fact that the incomes of many people have not risen apace with the cost of living and that they have become the victims of inflation. A prosperity that is too uneven in the distribution of its fruits can not last Fifth. We must fulfill the requirements of our essential programs national defense international reconstruction and domestic improvements and welfare even if doing so may require the temporary exercise of selective controls in our economy. We want the greatest amount of economic freedom that is consistent with the security and welfare of the people ; but we do not want to sacrifice that security and welfare because of narrow and selfish concepts as to the acceptable limits of government action. If we could have the amount of national defense that we need make the contribution to international reconstruction to which we are committed and at the same time maintain and expand our standards of living now and in the future without any kind of selective controls over the economy that would be most highly desirable. And it is possible that we may not in fact be ferced to use such controls. But we would rather have these relatively unpleasant restrictions on our freedom of action for a while than imperil our security or allow our human and material resources to deteriorate Sixth. The vigorous commitment by the Government to an anti-inflation policy should not obscure the fact that the Government is equally committed to an anti-depression policy. In fact curbing inflation is the first step toward preventing depression. And in times like the present when the economic situation has mixed elements the Government needs both antiinflationary weapons and anti-deflationary weapons so that it will be ready for either contingency. It may even be necessary to employ both types of measures concurrently in some combination for some prices or incomes could rise too rapidly while others could be falling dangerously. The same dictates of prudent policy which call for higher taxes in a period of inflation would call for tax adjustments designed to counteract any serious recessionary movement Legislative Recommendations With these principles as a guide I turn now to the recommendations which I am presenting to a new Congress invested by the American people with enormous responsibility for their welfare and security. We are pledged to prompt action when needed. We must not wait to act only in the eleventh hour of crisis. Moderate measures taken in time can save us from drastic action later on POLICIES TO COMBAT INFLATION AND TO PROMOTE PRODUCTION IN CERTAIN INDUSTRIES Fiscal policy It is essential to sound fiscal policy to have a budget surplus now. This is our most effective weapon against inflation. It will enable us to reduce our debt now ; it would be much more difficult to do so in less prosperous times I recommend legislation to increase the Government revenue from taxation by billion dollars a year. The principal source of additional revenue should be additional taxes upon corporate profits which can be applied without unduly interfering with prospects for continued business expansion and with assurance that profits after taxes and dividends will be sufficient for investments and contingencies Another source of additional revenue should be the tax upon estates and gifts. The already small yield from this tax was reduced by one-third by the Revenue Act of Careful study should also be directed to the increase of rates of individual income taxes in the upper and middle brackets. Some additional excise taxes may be desirable but some excise taxes particularly on oleomargarine should be repealed I also recommend an increase in social security contributions under existing and extended social insurance programs. This would exert an anti-inflation effect in addition to that of the billion dollar increase in taxes which I have recommended above The national tax policy should be flexible and should be promptly adjusted to the changing needs of business and consumers in the course of evolving economic events Increased taxation is only one of the means by which we can accumulate a budget surplus. The other is a careful limitation of Federal expenditures It is essential that our fiscal policy under present circumstances contemplate not only a surplus of revenues over expenditures but also a surplus achieved at the lowest level of expenditures which is consistent with our needs The implications of this policy requirement will be discussed at length in my Budget Message Debt management The public debt will continue to be managed in a manner that will make a maximum contribution to the stability of the economy. An important factor in this program will continue to be the maintenance of stability in the Government bond market Such stability in the Government bond market has been a most significant element in the smooth reconversion from a wartime economy to a civilian peacetime economy. It contributes to the underlying strength of the financial structure of the country. It engenders business confidence. It has made it easier for business and industry to obtain the capital funds necessary for their reconversion and expansion projects The stability of the Government bond market was maintained throughout by the joint effort of the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve System. Despite the necessity for market support at times during the year there was only moderate increase in the total Government security holdings of the System as a result of the support program. There were occasions however when the bond price support policy proved its value in stabilizing the market and the need for continuance of the policy was demonstrated Only during the last few years have we had experience in dealing with the problems of managing a public debt of the size the country now bears The policy of supporting the price of long-term Government bonds at the 2/4 percent yield level has been eminently successful Through its vigorous promotion of savings bond sales during the year the Treasury has placed a large volume of bonds in the hands of individuals who have thereby aided in the battle against inflation by adding to their savings. The most gratifying aspect of this situation is that the amount of Series E bonds outstanding was brought to the new high level of billion dollars and that this was accomplished with the cooperation of the banks of the country thousands of business firms and their employees and an army of patriotic volunteer workers Credit policy On previous occasions I have recommended that adequate means be provided in order that monetary authorities may at all times be in a position to carry out their traditional function of exerting effective restraint upon excessive credit expansion in an inflationary period and conversely of easing credit conditions in a time of deflationary pressures. The temporary authority to increase reserve requirements of member banks of the Federal Reserve System granted by the Congress last August will expire on June The expiration of this authority without further action of the Congress would automatically release a substantial volume of bank reserves irre- II spective of credit needs at the time. The Congress should promptly provide continuing authority to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to require banks to hold supplemental reserves up to the limits requested last August percent against demand deposits and percent against time deposits. This authority to the Board of Governors should not be confined to member banks of the Federal Reserve System but should be applicable to all banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Authority for the regulation of consumer installment credit which likewise expires under present law on June should be continued in order to exert a stabilizing influence on the economy Promotion of supply and production There are shortages of supply in certain critical areas which are so serious as to impede maximum production in an expanding economy and to limit programs related to national security I recommend immediate legislation to deal with this problem of capacity and supply. It should impose upon the Government the specific responsibility and provide the funds to make careful surveys of future supply needs and productive capacity. It should further require that these specific studies be correlated with the general requirements of an economy operating at maximum employment production and purchasing power. To the extent that facts reveal the need it should provide additional authority to deal more effectively with inadequacy of capacity and supply Allocation powers In my Economic Report of last year I stressed the need for the supplementation of voluntary action with mandatory controls over key materials in short supply. The need for mandatory controls still exists. I propose the temporary extension of the law under which voluntary agreements are now permitted. However there is grave danger that the problems of acute shortage can not be adequately met by voluntary agreements. I therefore recommend that the use of mandatory allocation powers be authorized so that they may be employed on a selective basis without delay where they prove to be needed I also recommend that the Congress continue the priorities and allocation authority in the field of railroad transportation Selective price and related wage controls I recommend that selective price control authority should promptly be made available to the Government. My reasons for this have repeatedly been set before the Congress and the country. I have not earlier and do not now propose general or over-all price control of the wartime variety But we are still in a situation where the prices of certain critical materials or commodities of vital industrial or consumer importance are moving upward for the third consecutive year or longer. Sharp rises in the prices of essential products may be harmful to the economy even when the general price level is fairly stable. Further we can not be certain that another upsurge of general inflation will not reappear this year under the composite pressures which are at work throughout the economy Legislation to authorize selective price control should encourage voluntary adjustments without the actual imposition of price control. It is in this spirit that I would administer the authority. But I am firmly convinced that such voluntary efforts which have been tried with partial but insufficient results since the middle of can not meet the problem unless the Government possesses the authority to act firmly. With such authority available however its actual application might not be required. It should be supplemented with a provision permitting the Government to order the withholding of price advances for a reasonable period while public inquiry into their justification is being made In my message to the special session of the Congress in July I said : " Where the Government imposes a price ceiling wage adjustments which can be absorbed within the price ceiling should not be interfered with by the Government. The Government should have the authority however to limit wage adjustments which would force a break in a price ceiling except where wage adjustments are essential to remedy hardship to correct inequities or to prevent an actual lowering of living standards. " I then stated my belief which I still firmly hold that wage increases based upon productivity and designed to provide a rising standard of living embody the American way. The facts show some current situations where non-inflationary wage increases can be granted by employers without price increases. I firmly believe that the normal processes of collective bargaining will result in sound wage adjustments without the actual application of any governmental authority related to wages if business and Government make genuine efforts to hold down excessive prices and profits and to reduce the cost of living Rent control The present housing shortage makes it necessary to continue rent control for at least two years and to strengthen its enforcement. I recommend that this be done Even if the most optimistic interpretation is placed upon the slight reduction in the cost of living in recent months it would be unwise to lift living costs again by rent increases even larger than the moderate ones taking place under the present system of control. Such a course would inflict further hardship upon the families who have already been the prime victims of inflation and would make it harder to exercise moderation in wage demands Export controls In view of the large volume of exports required to carry out our program of aiding economic reconstruction abroad it is essential that those exports be controlled both to minimize their adverse impact on the domes- tic economy and to make them most fully conformable to our foreign policies. I therefore recommend that the existing powers of control over exports be extended and that the machinery for enforcement be strengthened Commodity exchanges Excessive speculation in grains cotton and other agricultural commodities results in wide and harmful fluctuations in prices. The experience in the fall of and in the winter and spring of demonstrated the need for more effective governmental supervision over speculative trading on the commodity exchanges. I recommend that the Congress grant more specific and more adequate authority to prevent excessive speculation or the manipulation of prices POLICIES TO PROTECT THE VICTIMS OF INFLATION While we are fighting further inflation we should recognize that severe hardship has already been imposed on those whose incomes have lagged far behind the increase in the cost of living. Whatever is feasible to alleviate this hardship should be accomplished without delay. I recommend specifically : That the benefits under the old-age and survivors insurance be substantially increased in order to bring them in line with the increase in the cost of living ; That the coverage of the Fair Labor Standards Act be broadened and the minimum wage increased from the present cents an hour a figure determined in to at least cents an hour. It should be permissible to provide higher minima by tripartite action of employers unions and the Government on an industry basis ; That the public assistance program for relief be improved to meet the basic human needs of the less fortunate The housing program which I recommend will make a start toward providing decent housing for those whose low incomes confine them to slums in these days of grossly inflated housing prices POLICIES TO PROMOTE BALANCED ECONOMIC GROWTH While alleviating the hardships of inflation and overcoming maladjustments which threaten our future prosperity we must continue to develop our resources for healthy growth. We should press forward at once with some programs of high priority needed now to conserve and increase the strength of our Nation. In addition we should be prepared with fully formulated plans for others. We can not accept the dangerous idea that inflation 's end will automatically bring about a period of stable prosperity The continuing need for prudence in Government expenditures must not be translated into false economy Natural resources The Federal Government has an important role in the development of our natural resources which is essential to the achievement of programs to relieve shortages which threaten economic development. These shortages include many of our most essential minerals and metals our energy resources especially electric power and oil and some chemicals and fertilizers Present shortages of electric power in many areas are not temporary ; our long-range needs require enormous expansion of existing capacity. It is essential that public power programs be expanded this year even where this requires use of scarce materials for construction of dams and generators Such expansion should include the construction of transmission lines where needed. A start on the St. Lawrence River waterway and power project should be made immediately. The programs in the important river basins should be examined and prompt action taken where needed to provide improved coordinated development plans Agriculture With certain abnormal postwar demands for farm products diminishing problems of adjustment to longer-range conditions are becoming more pressing. We need to fit a prosperous and equitably treated agriculture consistently into an economy seeking to operate continuously at maximum levels of employment production and purchasing power We must make sure that our long-range price-support legislation moves toward the goal of farm living standards comparable to those of the rest of the population. We need farm production even more abundant than we have yet attained to supply the industrial and consumer needs of a full employment economy. But at the same time we need measures to encourage shifts in the composition of farm output realistically adjusted to our domestic and export needs. We should supplement such measures with others including the provision of adequate storage facilities the improvement of distribution and adequate credit facilities Even with farm production and national income at their present high levels many families lack adequate diets. We should assure maintenance in the future of a level of consumption consistent with real food needs. This will help to stabilize domestic markets for farm products To stabilize foreign markets consultations are already under way toward preparing a new International Wheat Agreement I urge the Congress to reexamine existing and proposed farm legislation in the light of all these objectives International economic relations The European Recovery Program is designed to further world recovery and reconstruction. It must be continued. Its success will facilitate a return to reasonable freedom of world trade. The proposed Charter of the International Trade Organization which was signed by nations last year lays the foundation for this return The present inadequate authority for the conclusion of reciprocal trade agreements expires June I urge that immediate action be taken to restore the Trade Agreements Act to full effectiveness and to extend it for three years Housing The steady decline in new housing starts since last May adds fresh evidence of the need for housing legislation. I again recommend immediate passage of the unenacted portions of the comprehensive housing bill ; and the need has now become so great that its meager quota of units of low-rent housing over years should be increased to provide for units within years If we are to achieve levels of housing production adequate to our needs construction materials in the necessary volume must be available continuously and in balanced proportions. If it proves necessary I shall not hesitate to use the allocation authority which I have requested to channel such materials into home building Urban redevelopment and community facilities The comprehensive housing bill includes substantial Federal aid to the States and localities to enable them to make more rapid progress in clearing slums and in assembling land for balanced redevelopment. Such action can be taken now without adding significantly to inflationary pressures and it is an essential basis for future progress While the Annual Economic Review of the Council of Economic Advisers this year does not deal at length with programs such as education health and social security which are directed toward the improvement of our human resources my Economic Report last January stressed the intimate connection between the conservation and improvement of these resources and the prosperity and productivity of our economy. The Council this year firmly reiterates this principle Because the programs flowing from this analysis have not yet been authorized I submit the following recommendations Education The crisis facing education must be met and the basis for the continued improvement of our system of education made firm. Only with Federal resources can we meet adequately the increased cost imposed by expanding enrollments and the general rise in expenditures for maintenance and operation. I recommend that a Federal program for aid to elementary and secondary education be initiated. We should make plans whereby the opportunities for higher education would be expanded through cooperation between the Federal Government and public agencies and private institutions including a system of general scholarships and fellowships And a study should be initiated to determine authoritatively our national needs for educational facilities and the most feasible methods of providing them Health The high percentage of rejections under the military recruitment programs has provided striking evidence of the unsatisfactory state of the Nation 's health. National health insurance is the only workable way to assure that all individuals have access to the medical care they need. I recommend the enactment of such a program this year. Federal grants in support of hospital construction are an indispensable support to such a program. We also need to augment the number of doctors dentists and nurses in order to overcome the present serious national shortage of medical personnel Old age disability and unemployment insurance Millions of workers are excluded from the benefits of our old age and unemployment insurance systems. Such exclusion denies to individuals protection to which they are entitled by every consideration of equity. I urge that the coverage of these systems be widened this year and the benefits made more adequate Few of our workers enjoy systematic protection against loss of income through temporary or permanent disability. We should inaugurate a system of insurance against such loss I have included in this Economic Report only those legislative recommendations which have large significance for maintaining maximum employment production and purchasing power and which require the immediate attention of the Congress. There are a number of other important projects on which we should make further progress this year. Our conservation practices in many areas require improvement including the regulation of timber cutting the protection of public range lands and the development of our tidelands oil resources. We should press forward with our programs of basic research and exploration. We should seek continually to encourage the bargaining of labor and management along lines most consistent with national progress and stability This is a period in which our ability to master our affairs in our own way will be rigorously tested. Abundant resources and rapidly advancing technology are both a blessing and a responsibility. Our strength lies however Jess in these resources themselves than in our will to use them effectively This task requires adapting our private and Government institutions to changing circumstances We are committed to working out our economic problems in a way that combines economic and social progress with democratic self-responsibility. This is the spirit in which the Employment Act of was conceived and in which we shall attempt to live up to its high purpose THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT BY THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington D. C January The PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits a report the Annual Economic Review : January in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully Chairman Vice Chairman fW Til Contents I. ECONOMIC TRENDS DURING The course of employment and production Employment Production Prices wages and profits Prices Wages and labor relations Profits Money and credit The flow of goods and purchasing power Consumer income spending and saving Business investment and finance International transactions Government transactions Summary : The Nation 's Economic Budget II. GOALS AND MEANS OF APPROACHING THEM IN Basic economic objectives Maximum employment Maximum production Maximum purchasing power Needed adjustments Fiscal policy Credit policy Voluntary adjustments in prices and wages Treatment of critical shortages and capacity expansion Selective controls Rent control Farm price supports III BASIC OBJECTIVES FOR BALANCED ECONOMIC GROWTH Production objectives Mining and manufacturing production Agricultural production Energy production Investment objectives Needed investment in manufacturing Needed investment in electric utilities Needed investment in mining facilities Railroad investment Page III. BASIC OBJECTIVES FOR BALANCED ECONOMIC GROWTH Con Investment objectives Continued Highways Agricultural investment Forest investment Commercial construction Objectives for consumption and living standards Balancing production and consumption Promoting economic growth Research and information Financing business expansion Promoting competition Agricultural growth Conserving and developing the Nation 's resources Water resources and power Land resources Forests ' Petroleum and other minerals The need for program review Housing Human resources International economic relations From inflation to stability Fundamental strength of the economy Vulnerability of the economy Preventive measures Page APPENDIXES A. The Nation 's Economic Budget B. The Distribution of Family Income Before and After Federal Income Tax G. Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power VI I. Economic Trends During THE COURSE OF EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION Employment IGH levels of employment were characteristic of Job opportunities were ample not only for the large labor force with which we started the year but also for more than a million additions during the year. This large expansion consisted in part of veterans who completed their education and also in part of a relatively large number of women seeking work because of the pressure of high living costs on family budgets Total civilian employment established a record annual level of million fluctuating seasonally between a winter low of million in January and February to a summer high of million in July. Continuing a long-term trend average agricultural employment declined slightly Total unemployment hovered in the vicinity of million being somewhat higher during the first half of the year and somewhat lower during the fall months but increasing a bit during the closing weeks of the year. ( See appendix table C-7. ) While the firm demand for labor was felt in almost all major lines of activity there was considerable variation in particular areas and industries ( See appendix table G ) Although jobs in manufacturing increased by about half a million a number of consumers ' goods industries such as textiles electrical appliances and shoes showed some lay-offs and reduced the hours of some of their workers. Consequently while average weekly hours remained essentially unchanged in most major industrial groups a number of revisions downward and few upward meant that the average hours of work per employed person for the economy as a whole were just below the level of ( See appendix table G-l ) Nonetheless due to the rise in number of workers the total hours of work performed were greater in than in H Production With record numbers employed at only slightly reduced weekly hours the economy produced percent more goods and utilities in than in This was about in line with the goal set in the January Economic Report. All major categories showed noticeable increases except transportation which was close to its level. Highest gains were made by the electric and gas utilities where output rose percent and CHART LABOR FORCE High level employment continued throughout MILLIONS OF PERSONS * MILLIONS OF PERSONS * TOTAL LABOR FORCE UNEMPLOYMENT ARMED FORCES CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT MILLIONS OF PERSONS ' * MILLIONS OF PERSONS * UNEMPLOYMENT ( magnified scale ) N O J F M A M J J A S O N O O F M A M J J A S O N O * YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE by the construction industry where the volume of new construction was percent higher. ( See appendix table C-l2. ) Total agricultural output increased percent thanks to bumper crops But total supplies of food currently available to the consumer were somewhat smaller than in The large crops of corn and other feeds will be reflected in food supplies only as an expanding volume of livestock products begins to come to market this summer and fall Industrial production ( manufacturing and mining ) in was percent higher than in the previous year. ( See appendix table C-l3. ) After reaching a postwar peak in the early part of the year it dropped CHART CHANGES IN PRODUCTION OF GOODS AND UTILITIES * Total output of goods and utilities in was about percent above the level. Increases ranged from one-half of one percent in transportation to percent in construction PERCENTAGE INCREASE TOTAL GOODS AND UTILITIES * TRANSPORTATION MANUFACTURES MINERALS AGRICULTURE ELECTRIC AND GAS UTILITIES CONSTRUCTION " EXCLUDES TRADE FINANCE GOVERNMI ) SERVICE INDUSTRIES SOURCE : BASED ON DATA IN APPENDIX TABLE C during the spring and summer but by fall was back to its peak levels. In November iron and steel production reached a new all-time high about percent above its wartime top. Most other major industries registered gains for the year with a lower physical output only in the leather alcoholic beverages tobacco and rubber industries For services ( trade finance and Government ) quantitative measurement of output is difficult. Roughly measured by the volume of employment the year 's total activity in trade increased by about percent in finance and service by percent and in government by percent With the output of goods up percent and with employment in services up somewhat less it appears that the total output of goods and services together increased between and percent in PRICES WAGES AND PROFITS Prices The pattern of price changes during was far more uneven than at any time since the end of price control. In the months between mid-1946 and December prices rose steadily except for one brief pause in the second quarter of but the rate of advance slowed down during the latter part of the period In the field of wholesale prices a sharp break in farm prices occurred in the first quarter of while industrial prices on the average remained relatively steady. Then under the impact of the stepped-up defense program the authorization of the European Recovery Program tax reductions and numerous wage increases prices began a new upward surge which reached its peak in August. Thereafter due to bountiful crops farm and wholesale food prices declined while the industrial price index has reflected declines in textiles hides and leather lumber and chemicals largely offset by continued increases in the prices of metals and metal products. ( See appendix table C-21. ) By the end of the year the average of wholesale prices was just below the level of December and percent below August Measured by the same periods wholesale prices of farm products declined and percent and wholesale food prices and percent. On the other hand industrial prices by the end of the year averaged more than percent above December and were practically unchanged from August with important divergent trends among groups of commodities. Hides and leather products textile products and chemicals and allied products were lower than in December ; while fuel and lighting materials metals and metal products housefurnishings and building materials were substantially higher The continuance of inflationary pressures was particularly significant in metals and metal products. The prices of lead and zinc showed striking increases lead rising more than percent and zinc more than percent during High investment and automobile demand plus the growing impact of the defense program stockpiling and foreign aid maintained pressure on available supply. This was true even though many types of consumers ' durable and light equipment were in increasingly easy supply. The supply-demand relationship of the basic metals and many metal products is still unsatisfactory CHART WHOLESALE PRICES Wholesale price trends were more divergent in than during the previous years. Farm food and many other prices ended the year below their levels of a year ago ; many others ended the year considerably higher PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE FARM PRODUCTS \ A. / V.-- ( PERCENTAGE CHANGES DECREASES INCREASES ALL ITEMS OEC'47 TO DEC.'48 FARM PRODUCTS FOODS E : OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR Consumers ' prices as a whole declined during the first quarter of recovered and rose to an all-time peak in August and since then have shown a slight reduction. By November they were percent higher than in December and more than percent lower than in August ( See appendix table C-20. ) Preliminary reports for December indicate that there were some further slight declines in consumer prices. As in the case of wholesale prices there have been divergent trends with food moving downward and other groups moving upward since late summer. Further retail food prices have not fully reflected the decline in wholesale food costs nor have declines in the wholesale prices of textile products been accompanied by a significant similar movement in regular retail clothing prices In part this has undoubtedly been due to the customary lag between a fall in material costs and a fall in retail prices of consumer products ; but in part also to the pricing policy which business follows under the influence of a high national income There are a number of factors explaining the uneven pattern of price trends in In the case of farm products the improvement in crops has altered materially the supply-demand relationships at least for the current crop year. We have not yet however witnessed any major improvement in the supply of livestock products even though prices of these products have declined from their peaks In many fields there has been a disappearance of the war-created backlog demand and a major improvement in the supply position notably in most consumer goods. There has been some drop in inventory buying The availability of a much greater variety of products has resulted in increasing competition for the consumers ' dollar. The markets for materials have however beeen more sensitive in responding to this changed situation than the wholesale and retail markets for finished products although at the year 's end retail clearance sales have become very widespread Viewing the range of wholesale and retail price developments since August in terms of inflationary pressures caution seems necessary on several grounds. First of all it is too early to derive assurance from the slight downward movement in the cost of living. Twice before since the end of the war in the second quarter of and the first quarter of wholesale and retail prices behaved in approximately the same manner as described above. Yet on each of these previous occasions there emerged new factors which generated a fresh wave of price increases Caution is required also in appraising the significance of the divergent trends in recent price developments. The differences in the direction of price movements reflect in part changes in the relationship between supply and demand but they also reflect the fact that different parts of the economy do not respond with equal sensitivity to changes in this relationship. Price responsiveness to the shifting of demand leaves unanswered the question whether the falling off in demand at one place in the market is a healthy CHART CONSUMERS ' PRICES After reaching a new all-time peak in August and September consumers ' prices turned downward mainly because of a decline in food prices. Other retail prices continued strong PERCENT Of ( * AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE too PERCENTAGE INCREASES ALL ITEMS IE'46 TO OEC'46 FOOD APPAREL RENT ALSO INCLUDES HOUSCFURNISHINGS. fUCL,,ELeCTRIClTY ICE ANO MISCELLANEOUS GOODS AND SERVICES NOT SHOWN ON CHART SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR * L E S S THAN ONE-HALF OF ONE PERCENT reaction to the satisfaction of accumulated needs or an unhealthy reaction to a growing discrepancy between continuing need and declining ability to buy. In short we are moving into a period where much more highly selective efforts will be needed to achieve workable price relationships for the maintenance of economic stability. Analysis shedding light upon this paramount problem is developed in other sections of this report Wages and labor relations When opened most union workers and sizeable groups of nonunion workers had received two postwar wage increases and some had received three or more. But these increases in many instances had been more than offset by rising living costs during the previous years The price drop in the commodity markets early in changed the wage outlook. A widespread hope was raised that food prices might be reduced and that there would not be further increases in industrial prices. Under these circumstances the major electrical companies maintained a strong stand against wage increases. The United States Steel Corporation rejected proposals for a substantial increase and moderately reduced the prices of finished steel products following previous price increases. A number of major automobile companies opposed wage increases and negotiations in some other branches of industry were suspended Very quickly however the uncertainty engendered by the price break in the commodity markets was overcome. Price declines in these markets had not spread and in fact these markets had partially recovered. The announcement of an expanded defense program in late March added new impetus to inflationary forces. Tax reduction created the expectation of added billions of dollars in the spending stream. Living costs resumed their rise and it appeared that the passing on of wage increases in higher prices leading to even higher profits would continue to be feasible. With profit prospects good so long as strikes could be avoided the stage was set by late May for further wage increases Since then the contracts that have come up for renewal and renegotiation have in most cases been peaceably settled. The increases have varied widely from industry to industry. Although they have ranged from only a negligible increase to as much as cents an hour a large proportion have been in the neighborhood of cents which represented an average increase of about percent. Generally such settlements have tended to reflect the rise in the cost of living during the life of the prior contract. It is estimated that the annual rate of wage and salary payments by the end of the year was to billion dollars above the level that would have prevailed without the rate increases. About one-half of this amount was actually realized by workers during the year. In addition to the increases in wages there was some enlargement of fringe benefits such as health and welfare funds paid holidays and paid vacations After adjusting for price increases there was no significant change in the average weekly earnings of workers in manufacturing industries during the year. ( See appendix tables C-9 and C-20. ) This does not mean however that no workers were either better off or worse off at the end of the year Some have suffered declines in their real earnings while others have succeeded in keeping ahead of rising living costs. But those who negotiated wage increases early have seen much of their gains subsequently dissipated by increases in the cost of living. Prices in manufacturing industry increased in general more than the increase in costs including wages during the year In some cases wage increases forced prices up. In other instances they served as an excuse for raising prices unnecessarily thus resulting in even wider profit margins The instances where wage settlements were reached only after prolonged negotiations and strikes were somewhat fewer in than in Yet they were of some significance. In the March-May period several major strikes ( affecting coal mining meat packing and one large automobile company ) together with numerous smaller strikes caused considerable loss of time. Since June the month-by-month losses directly caused by strikes have not been more than about one-third of one percent of estimated available working time. A few major stoppages have had sizeable indirect effects including those in east and west coast shipping and in trucking in New York While most work stoppages involved wage issues there were a number that stemmed from other considerations. The strike of west coast longshoremen for example was at least made more difficult of solution because of the hiring-hall and Communist-affidavit issues. Some other stoppages arose from grievances not associated with wage questions Profits The achievement of new peak records in production and sales coupled with higher prices for manufactured goods led to a new peak record in the dollar volume of profits ( see chart ) Corporate profits before taxes rose from billion dollars in to an estimated billion in ; after taxes corporate profits rose from about billion dollars in to an estimated billion in In the third quarter of corporate profits were at the rate of billion dollars before taxes and billion after taxes. The net income of unincorporated business and the professions rose from billion dollars to billion and net farm income allowing for the large increase in farmers ' stocks of corn and other crops rose from almost billion dollars to about billion Corporate profits after taxes in represented over percent on sales and about percent on net worth compared with about percent on sales and about percent on net worth in Since the return on sales applied to a higher price level than in net dollar margins per unit of goods sold have increased. Thus during two years of peak and growing production there has been little change in over-all profit ratios and an enlarging physical volume of sales has resulted in enlarged profits rather than in lower profits er unit of goods sold in an expanding market. ( See chart page and appendix tables O-3 and C-28 through C-33 for data on profits. ) There has been much discussion as to whether the volume of reported profits overstates the actual position of business. This point was recognized in the January Economic Report which said : " In appraising profit trends allowance should be made for the fact that business like every other group finds that the purchasing power of money has declined considerably To maintain the same physical volume of inventories requires large additional amounts of capital funds. Furthermore replacement costs have risen substantially while profits are usually calculated by basing depreciation allowances on original costs rather than replacement costs. Although a portion of the large profits earned during merely compensated for changes in prices profits on the whole were above the levels necessary to furnish incentives and funds for the expansion of business and to promote the sustained health of the economy. " How applicable is that judgment one year later ? A review of the profit situation shows that corporate profits after taxes in were percent higher than in On the other hand the total corporate requirements for new capital funds were percent lower in than in because of a considerable decline in the requirements for new working capital ( See appendix table C-34. ) The rate of investment in plant and equipment was only slightly higher in than in the second half of while there was an increase in corporate allowances for depreciation. In particular the need of corporations for additional funds to maintain the same physical volume of inventories amounted at an annual rate to only billion dollars in the fourth quarter of compared witfi billion dollars for as a whole and billion dollars for In the light of these developments the conclusion reached last year is still valid The foregoing comment should not mask the fact that widely varying profit situations and trends exist and that any proposed policies on the part of business labor and government should take account of these variations. The over-all ratios of profits to sales and net worth have declined somewhat for a number of the nondurable goods industries while the metal industries have shown increases. And the smallest manufacturing corporations with assets of $ or less are reporting average profit ratios well below their levels while the largest manufacturing corporations with assets above $ are running well ahead. The intermediate groups are showing profit ratios somewhat below their levels MONEY AND CREDIT The very large wartime expansion of the public debt led to a great enlargement of the money supply and of the buying power of the people The inflationary result of this situation was aggravated after the end of the war by the increase of bank credit which reached dangerous proportions in the last half of For the year as a whole however there was no further net increase in the money supply. During the first half privately held deposits and currency outside the banks fell by more than billion dollars largely because of the sizable Treasury surplus in the first quarter. In the second half of the year the money supply again expanded but much less than in the same period of A gold inflow of billion dollars in added to the money supply about equally in both the first and second half years. The expansion of bank loans proceeded throughout the year but at a lower rate than in T A B L E Monetary expansion [ Billions of dollars ] Change from Type of monetary expansion Jan. to June Privately held deposits and currency outside banks Loans : All banks Insured commercial banks Commercial and industrial loans__ Agricultural loans_ _--Real-estate loans Consumer installment credit Commercial3 bank holdings of U. S. Government securities _ _- July to Dec. Jan. to June t1 : ! July to Dec. * Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers. * Estimates by Treasury Department Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) The major part of this slackening as the above table shows occurred in loans to commercial and industrial concerns. With slower rises in prices wages and material costs and with inventory shortages fairly well made up less additional working capital was required than in previous years. Bank real estate loans also slowed up markedly. The important factor here was not a lower demand for mortgage credit but a greater reluctance of banks to lend on an inflated housing market. Also many banks were reaching the maximum amount of real estate loans they wished to carry as a matter of policy or were legally permitted to carry The demand for long-term funds continued strong throughout the year and though the rate of expansion of long-term bank loans declined this was in good part offset by increased lending of other financial institutions notably insurance companies The increase of credit has been an important factor in the growth of inflationary conditions during the postwar period. The large Treasury surplus had considerable anti-inflationary effect but was not in itself a sufficient means of stemming the growth of bank credit. The other principal line of attack was action by the Federal Reserve Board to decrease the II availability of reserves and to increase interest rates. However while continuing the basic aim of maintaining a stable and orderly market for Government securities the Board could increase short-term interest rates only to a very limited extent and under existing authority its influence over bank reserve requirements was also severely limited. Part II will treat the problem of restricting bank credit as a deterrent to further inflation ( Statistics on money banking and credit may be found in appendix tables C-23 through C-27. ) T H E FLOW OF GOODS AND PURCHASING POWER Consumer income spending and saving Consumer income and expenditures are the largest and most stable element in the Nation 's Economic Budget but the relation between income and expenditures has undergone marked changes in recent years. During the CHART CONSUMER INCOME AND SPENDING Consumption expenditures increased less than personal income during BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * BILLIONS OF DOLLARS * DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME ( PERSONAL INCOME LESS TAXES ) DISPOSABLE INCOME I I AWNBAL RATES SEASONALLY SOURCE : ADJUSTED DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE period of wartime shortages and restrictions consumers spent an unusually low portion and saved an unusually high portion of their rapidly increasing incomes. Large backlog demands were built up for all kinds of durable goods. After people set about earnestly to raise their levels of consumption and especially sought houses and furnishings electric appliances and automobiles. Despite the high level of incomes many consumers drew on wartime savings ; others borrowed. The saved portion of personal income shrank rapidly Price and rationing controls were removed before the goods and services became available to meet this pent-up demand and prices soared. In dollars the increase in consumption expenditures since prewar has accounted for two-thirds of the increase in total gross national expenditure although consumption expenditures have gone up much less percentagewise than private domestic investment During there were indications that some of the extraordinary consumer demands were tapering off. Consumption expenditure ceased to go up faster than disposable personal income. The rapid rate of increase in consumer credit was slowed. A larger portion of personal income appeared to be going into investment in housing and farms and other unincorporated businesses. And the portion going into personal bank balances securities and other liquid assets appeared to have ceased declining Consumer income. Aggregate personal income increased continuously throughout For the year as a whole it amounted to more than billion dollars before taxes ; in it was billion. Disposable personal income ( income after taxes ) amounted to billion dollars ; in it was billion. Adjusted for changes in consumer prices however disposable personal income per capita was substantially the same for both years The increase in personal incomes from to was roughly proportionate among major sources : wages and salaries proprietors ' and rental income dividends and interest. But in the latter half of net farm income fell off relative to the normal seasonal pattern while rental income of persons and business and professional income ceased to rise. Dividend payments on the other hand increased at an accelerated rate. An appreciable decrease occurred during the year in transfer payments to individuals chiefly veterans ' benefits. ( Data relating to personal income are shown in appendix tables G-4 G-5 and G-6. ) Income distribution. As compared to prewar there has been an improvement in the real purchasing power of families in all income ranges. While the dollar increases are larger in the higher income groups percentagewise the lower-income groups have enjoyed the larger gains. ( See table and chart ) TABLE Average money income after taxes received by each fifth of the Nation 's ran \ ed by size of income families [ Dollars of purchasing power ] Money income after t a x ( dollars ) Family units ranked from lowest to highest income * $ Lowest fifth_ Second fifthThird fifth Fourth fifthHighest fifth. Percentage change to $ i Includes single-person families * Liability for Federal personal income tax Source : See appendix B The Federal personal income tax has reduced somewhat the concentration of income ( see table ) In for example the lowest three-fifths of families received percent of total money income before tax compared to percent after tax while the share of the upper one-fifth was reduced by taxes from percent to The income-equalizing effect of the tax strucCHART CHANGES IN AVERAGE FAMILY INCOME Real income of all groups increased from to and income disparities were reduced FAMILIES * ranked from lowest to highest income LOWEST FIFTH $ MONEY INCOME DOLLARS $ $ $ $ T T SECOND FIFTH INCOME AFTER PERSONAL TAXES * v INCOME BEFORE PERSONAL TAXES THIRD FIFTH FOURTH FIFTH HIGHEST FIFTH * INCLUDES SINGLE INDIVIDUALS SOURCE : SEE APPENDIX B JJ ' PERSONAL TAXES j ture was somewhat greater in than in although perhaps less than would be expected considering that the tax in absorbed over percent of personal money income compared with less than percent in But the considerable increase since before the war in real income of families at the low end of the scale has probably come about chiefly from the decrease in unemployment and the increase in number of multi-earner families rather than from the equalizing effect of more-progressive taxation Inflation however has probably checked this favorable trend in income distribution. Such data as are available indicate a slight increase in concentration from to TABLE Percent of money income before and after taxes received by each fifth of Nation 's families ranked by size of income Cumulative percent of total money income Family units ranked from lowest to highest income ] Before t a x Lowest fifth Lowest two-fifths Lowest three-fifths Lowest four-fifths All family units After tax a Includes single-person families Liability for Federal personal income tax Source : See appendix B We have as yet no information on the distribution of incomes either before or after tax but the effects of the Revenue Act of are relatively more favorable to upper than to lower income groups. The provision allowing married persons to split their incomes for tax purposes is especially advantageous to those in upper tax brackets. While many persons at the lower end of the income scale have been exempted from paying any tax and rates were reduced all along the line the percentage increase in income after tax is greatest for upper-bracket married persons Consumption expenditures. Aggregate outlays for personal consumption continued to increase during though not so rapidly as during For the year as a whole they amounted to about billion dollars ; in the preceding year they were billion. They represented a slightly smaller share of gross national product than in percent compared with percent. Thus we have moved farther away from the prewar ratio between consumption and other expenditures ( about percent in ) Total consumption in real terms has been rising since the war as shown by unit sales of durables and by production of nondurable goods. Food consumption has declined slightly. The pattern of consumer expenditures continues to differ markedly from that before the war. Expenditures for durable and nondurable goods have increased much more than for services Outstanding is the purchase of automobiles expenditure for which continues to increase faster than for almost any other major type of purchase The increase in other durable goods expenditure appears to have tapered off In the case of nondurable goods the higher level of food outlays is the chief factor in the great increase since prewar ; higher clothing expenditures is second in importance. Spending for both these items however has gone up less than proportionately to total consumer expenditure during The less-than-average increase since before the war in spending for services reflects the relatively low level of rents and of outlays for household operation in which utilities and domestic service are the largest items During expenditures for services increased about as rapidly as for durable goods Saving and consumer credit. The percentage of disposable income not spent for consumption was higher in than in contrary to the trend ever since the war. This additional personal saving however is predominantly in the form of investment in family dwellings farms ( and farm inventories ) and other unincorporated businesses. The rate of individuals ' net saving in liquid form bank deposits savings and loan associations insurance policies and government and corporate securities less net personal borrowing continued to decrease at least through the first half of This was in accordance with the trend reported in the January and midyear reports for Preliminary data on net liquid saving in the third quarter of the year suggest that this downward trend may have been checked but show no substantial reversal of the trend. There appeared to be an increased flow of funds into personal checking accounts and United States savings bonds and a smaller flow into corporate securities than had occurred earlier in the year. The high level of liquid saving in the third quarter probably came in part from many consumers not spending the money they received as a result of the reduction of income taxes Few recent data are available on the relative volumes of gross saving and dissaving by individuals. The most recent figures on consumer credit show a slower rate of expansion of installment credit last fall than in the fall of The use of consumer credit greatly cut down during the war expanded rapidly after wartime controls were removed and when durable goods became available. While the current volume of consumer credit billion dollars at the end of is substantially larger than anything we have known before nevertheless in comparison with present income and volume of retail sales it is lower than in many prewar years. For example the amount of consumer credit outstanding at the end of was nearly percent of consumption expenditures during the year ; in it was only about percent. ( See appendix table C-23. ) Nonetheless the great expansion in consumer credit after the war unquestionably added appreciably to inflationary pressure in the economy and it was for this reason that Regulation W restricting its use was reinstated last September. It is not yet possible to determine to what extent this reimposition of control was responsible for the recen * slowing of the increase in volume of consumer credit. However Regulation W probably has tended to restrict additional instalment credit for certain purposes including the purchase of automobiles and some other durable goods Outlook for consumption and saving. The limited and imperfect data on consumer income expenditure and saving give an incomplete picture They indicate that many consumers have been spending less freely especially during the latter part of This appears to reflect three developments : ( ) a substantial fulfillment of backlog demands for many goods that consumers had not been able to get during the war ; ( ) a limitation of consumption by those for whom investment in homes and in private businesses has become a more urgent use of funds ; and ( ) the using up of past savings and feasible credit resources by people who have been unable to make ends meet during inflation. All three elements are implied but without adequate basis for appraising their relative importance Such a picture reinforces the concern expressed in previous reports that we are still far from obtaining the amount and distribution of consumer income in relation to the other component parts of the economy which seem essential for balanced economic growth Business investment and finance The high investment outlays of business during the past two years have contributed an unusually large portion of the total flow of spending. This has been a natural aftermath of the wartime deferral of most lines of facilities expansion and improvement accompanied by acute depletion of inventories. To undertake this investment business emerged from the war with large accumulated reserves of liquid assets elaborate postwar plans and a relatively reduced burden of debt charges In many fields including nearly all nondurable goods lines the expansion of capacity to catch up with postwar markets the replenishment of inventories and the reduction of order backlogs to reasonably normal proportions has now been accomplished ; further investment will take largely the form of cost-cutting improvements and new products. In a few important industries expansion of facilities and inventories has still not overtaken obvious current needs Plant and equipment outlays. Total nonfarm business outlays on new plant and equipment rose rapidly after the war to reach an annual rate of billion dollars in the latter half of Thereafter they increased only slightly with a seasonal dip in the first quarter of last year. The continued rise has been due entirely to rising construction costs and equipment prices ; the physical volume of such investment has not quite maintained its late peak. ( See appendix table G-15. ) A recent sample survey by Government agencies indicates that dollar outlays on plant and equipment in the first quarter of are expected to run about percent below those of the fourth quarter of which is roughly in line with normal seasonal behavior. Compared with the first quarter of last year planned outlays for the first quarter of this year are up about percent which is substantially less than the increase in costs in the interval Plant and equipment outlays during and since the war have greatly expanded productive capacity in many industries. A survey by a private agency indicates that manufacturing industry as a whole has increased its capacity by more than one half since and by perhaps as much as a quarter since the end of To keep pace with a normal growth trend in total demand as will be indicated in Part III the recent over-all rate of increase in manufacturing capacity would not need to be maintained indefinitely. However in connection with two prominent areas of current shortage it should be noted that electric utility generating capacity has increased only about percent since and percent in the past three years and steel furnace capacity about percent since and about 5/2 percent in the past three years While there is some indication of prospective softening of investment in various manufacturing lines plans for expansion and modernization are still strong in chemicals petroleum and metals. In some major nonmanufacturing lines also particularly utilities and transportation the program of expansion and improvement is still active and the outlook is for continued high expenditure. It is quite possible that investment in utilities and transportation may rise still further to the extent that increases in the supply of steel and essential equipment items are not absorbed by other private or public investment programs The fact that many expansion goals have been met should not portend therefore an abrupt slackening of investment. Higher materials and labor costs and a sharpening of competitive pressure have provided powerful incentives for modernization programs designed to cut costs. Many businessmen feel that they must devote all available funds to improvements of this type in order to preserve their competitive position Business investment has entered a phase in which added investment will be largely determined by the effort to reduce costs and to improve product rather than by the purpose to expand capacity. Recent surveys in the metal-working and other industries indicate that equipment is being replaced only when the replacement will pay off in or years or in many cases an even shorter time. Considerably longer pay-off periods would be consistent with reasonable investment incentives Business inventories. Of the billion dollar increase in value of nonfarm business inventories during billion was attributable to price rises. Adjusting for these rises the physical increase during the year was only billion dollars which was registered largely in the first quarter In the second half total nonfarm inventories increased only billion dollars after allowance for price rises and normal seasonal variation. ( See appendix tables C-16 G-17 and C-18 for additional inventory data. ) In the summer and fall some accumulation of nondurable products inventories in the hands of both manufacturers and distributors reflected failure of sales to meet earlier expectations. Inventory policies were cautious and adjustments were initiated fairly promptly. Present inventories could become burdensome in a period of falling sales The dollar value of durable-goods inventories rose rather steadily through the year. Restocking after wartime shortages appears now to have been virtually completed except for metals and some building materials Over-all ratios of inventories to sales remained roughly constant in and there appears to be no basis for substantial further increases. Any general slackening of sales would produce temporary involuntary accumulation followed by sloughing off of excess inventories. This occurred in some sectors of business in early and again in but has not appeared on a general scale since the war Corporate financing. Total corporate expenditure on plant and equipment and for expansion of inventories and customer receivables was billion dollars in or billion dollars less than in A rise in plant and equipment expenditures was more than offset by the decline in funds used to extend credit to customers and to finance additional investment in inventories. ( See chart on page and appendix table C-34. ) The major part of capital funds in as in came from internal sources chiefly undistributed profits and depreciation allowances. Internal sources provided percent of corporate funds in compared with percent in the previous year. The rise in the importance of internal financing in was due to a higher level of corporate profits and a less-thanequivalent increase in dividends. Corporate profits after taxes totaled about billion dollars percent more than in During the past year corporations paid out percent of their profits in dividends compared with percent in In external financing security issues played a more important and bank loans a less important role than in In the first half of for the first time since the war outstanding business bank loans declined slightly ; and in the second half of the year though such loans showed a seasonal increase the increase was much smaller than in the corresponding period of The bulk of the new security issues were bonds ; stock issues were responsible for only about percent of the total volume compared with percent in One reason for the higher percentage of bond financing in was that public utility financing occupied a relatively more important position in the total volume of security issues. Companies in this industry usually raise a high proportion of their capital through bonds. Another important factor in the high proportion of debt financing in the whole postwar period and especially in recent months has been its low cost relative to financing by stock issues. The spread between bond and stock yields was considerable during the whole period and has further increased in recent months. Another general factor which has favored debt financing is the tax advantage ; interest payments are deductible expenses in computing taxable income The small amount of common stock issued in recent years compared with the late 's has given rise to concern in some quarters that there is a serious general shortage of equity capital. While it is true that outside equity capital is difficult to obtain on terms as favorable as those available for loan capital it does not appear that so long as profits remain large there will be any general lack of sufficient total equity capital for desirable levels of business investment. Although detailed figures for the 's are not available preliminary investigations show that a markedly smaller percentage of business capital needs has been financed by debt in the postwar period than was the case in the 's Housing. The volume of residential construction accelerated rapidly after the war. ( See appendix table C-14. ) From a low of about in the number of permanent nonfarm units started in new structures rose to an estimated in Adding to this the units provided by conversions and remodeling it appears that well over a million completed residential units were added to the housing supply in The provision of adequate plumbing heating and other facilities and of major repairs further increased the availability of dwellings meeting a reasonable standard of comfort In the latter half of however there appeared a pronounced decline in new housing starts. ( See chart on page ) This does not mean that the housing shortage is no longer acute. Instead as previous reports clearly foresaw it reflected the approaching saturation of the housing market related to the demands of families who can buy or rent expensive quarters and the inability of the industry thus far to produce housing in quantity for the bulk of the population whose incomes are moderate or low. It now takes the average home owner about one-third more of his working time to earn the money to pay for a comparable house # than it took before World War I and about one-fifth more than in Neither food nor clothing nor any of the other necessities of life has risen comparably to the cost of building houses over the past two or three decades From the strictly economic viewpoint we can not be complacent about the rapid decline in housing starts on the ground that the manpower and other resources thereby released are being absorbed by the other demands of the economy ; for some of these other demands are temporary in character and within a few years will need to be supplanted by a much larger volume of residential construction than can be supported at anywhere near present costs. In fact if the rate of decline in house building continues its ramifying effects could cause substantial unemployment and general deterioration in business conditions even before the temporary factors in postwar demand are reduced The need for a comprehensive housing program in its fundamental aspects is treated in Part III International transactions The only major component of the Nation 's Economic Budget which did not increase between and was net foreign investment ; it declined from billion dollars to approximately billion. Net foreign investment represents the portion of our excess of exports over imports of goods and services that is financed by loans and investments and by net liquidation of foreign dollar assets and gold. It does not include the portion financed by grants gifts and other unilateral transfers made by the United States Government and by private citizens. Part of the drastic decline in net foreign investment has resulted merely from a shift in the form of foreign aid from loans to grants the increase in which is reflected in the Government-goods-and-services component of the Nation 's Economic Budget Decline in the export surplus. To appraise the effect of international transactions upon the domestic economy it is necessary to examine the total export surplus which takes into account government grants and private gifts as well as net foreign investment. The total export surplus fell from billion dollars in to billion in a decline of billion. This decline began in mid-1947 after the export surplus had reached an annual rate of billion and continued through the autumn of when it was only billion The billion dollar decline in the export surplus was primarily the result of a billion dollar reduction in the liquidation of gold and dollar assets by foreign countries made necessary by the rapid depletion of these assets in Aid extended by the United States Government also was less than in Although the European Recovery Program got under way during aid extended under early postwar programs was virtually exhausted early in the year. These changes are shown in table and details of the balance of international payments and the foreign aid program are shown in appendix tables G-35 and C-36 CHART EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES The export surplus fell during most of as exports dropped and imports rose BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES * \ ^ s : ; .VV-V .vv.-.. ' ; ; : us f * * Dependence of the export surplus on government aid increased as other means of financing decreased EXPORT SURPLUS ^ $ ^ y ^ EA ^ SOF ^ ^ ^ V U S GOVERNMENT AID i ) ) * # * \ I I INCLUDES INCOME ON INVESTMENT ESTIMATE BASED ON INCOMPLETE DATA SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE r t t Z I O * * TABLE Financing the surplus of goods and services supplied to foreign countries [ Billions of dollars ] Means of financing Period average Annual rates : : First quarter Second quarterThird quarter Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter Surplus of exports of goods and services l Liquidation Government of foreign Other means gold and financing aid ( net ) * dollar assets of ( net ) * ( net ) Includes income on investments Includes grants and loans but excludes subscriptions to the International Bank and International Monetary Fund. For detail see appendix table C-36 Includes net sales of gold to the United States and net change in foreign dollar assets ( bank balance claims on the United States Government and long-term investments ) Excludes liquidation of assets held by the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund * Includes private gifts and remittances movement of United States private capital net dollar disbursements by the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund and errors and omissions * Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce The large deficits which other countries were incurring in their transactions with the Unitied States forced upon them trade policies designed to curtail their dollar purchases and to increase their dollar exports. These efforts were supported in many countries by internal policies and developments. In western Europe for example industrial production in the first nine months of was about percent higher than in the corresponding period of while agricultural production which suffered so greatly from unfavorable weather in was also much higher. These increases permitted larger exports and smaller imports in trade with the United States. At the same time some though not all of the western European countries appear through their domestic monetary and fiscal policies to have reduced inflationary pressures or brought them under control. This contributed to the improvement in production most dramatically in the case of western Germany where industrial production rose very rapidly following the monetary reform of June Recovery progress may be expected to continue in the coming year although at a more gradual pace provided that foreign countries do not suffer from serious interruptions of production and do not have to divert too large a proportion of their resources to meeting the requirements of national defense The decline in our export surplus took the form of a reduction between and of billion dollars in exports of goods and services and a rise of billion in imports as the following table shows TABLE United States exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of dollars ] Period average Annual rates : : First quarter Second quarterThird quarter ._ Fourth quarter. : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. _2 Fourth quarter Exports of goods and services * Imports of goods and services * Surplus of exports of goods and services * Includes income on investments 2Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce Merchandise trade. Merchandise exports fell percent in dollar volume and more than percent in quantity from to Between the second quarter of when this decline began and the third quarter of the decline in quantity amounted to percent. The fall in dollar volume has affected our shipments to all major areas of the world although it has been sharpest in the case of eastern Europe as a result of the tightening of export controls in March of last year. Despite the initiation of the European Recovery Program our exports to the participating countries have been a slightly lower proportion of total exports in recent months than they were both before the Program began and before the war The commodity impact of the fall in exports has been quite general although uneven. Foreign countries are restricting their purchases selectively. Our exports of a few important products such as wheat petroleum and its products agricultural machinery certain types of industrial machinery and chemicals have been well maintained or have actually risen while exports of coal dairy products and animal fats textiles and textile manufactures and rubber products have been cut very drastically Exports of steel mill products have also fallen sharply in part because of more restrictive export controls imposed to alleviate the drain on the American economy. ( Additional information relating to merchandise exports is given in appendix tables C-19 C-37 C-38 and C-39. ) The reduction of the export surplus was also furthered by a rise of percent in the dollar volume of imports between and reflecting higher quantities and higher average prices in similar proportions. Even though the physical quantity of goods imported into the United States rose in it was still only about percent above the average import level of reflecting substantial increases above prewar in imports of crude materials and semimanufactured goods but no increase in imports of foods and finished manufactures. Our demand for some commodities from abroad can now be fully met but our greatly enlarged need for many others remains far from satisfied. Further increases are to be expected and welcomed in a prosperous economy. ( For additional information regarding the source and character of our merchandise imports see appendix tables C-40 C-41 and ) European Recovery Program. Last spring Congress provided billion dollars for the European Recovery Program including a public debt authorization of billion dollars. The billion dollars of appropriated funds were to be used over the 15-month period ending June unless the President after recommendation by the Administrator for Economic Cooperation found it necessary to use them in months. After a careful review it was decided in November that this more rapid use of the funds would be necessary. By the end of after the Program had been in operation nine months procurement of billion dollars had been authorized. At the outset of the program these authorizations were primarily for food and agricultural commodities but the emphasis has been shifting away from these commodities toward an increasing proportion of industrial products especially machinery and equipment. In the case of certain products for which the domestic market situation is tight a major share of authorizations has been for procurement outside the United States. Through November such " offshore " procurement has constituted percent of the total for all commodities and much larger proportions for petroleum products nonferrous metals fertilizer and some other products The procurement of such commodities in other countries relieves the United States of the burden of supplying them. But the exporting countries receive dollars in payment and with some exceptions they may be expected to spend those dollars in the United States. To the extent that they do offshore procurement will affect the distribution rather than the total amount of foreign purchases in the United States As shipments under the European Recovery Program increase the decline in United States exports may be expected on the basis of existing programs to give way to a rise from the levels reached in the second half of If the expansion in imports continues as there is reason to expect any rise of the export surplus will be moderate Government transactions Needs engendered by war and its aftermath of international tension continued during to overshadow the civil programs of government and to exert crucial influence throughout the economy. It was necessary to hold back government programs urgently needed for peacetime growth and progress while extraordinary activities to meet world responsibilities prolonged and strengthened the general forces of inflation. The enlarged expenditures for national security and foreign aid authorized in will impinge in upon a private economy still sensitive to inflationary pressures. Not only will total Government spending be rising but its impact in critical areas will be intensified The programs of the Federal Government framed in the light of these requirements are set forth in detail in the Budget Message and in various other reports. This report assesses the economic impacts of these Federal programs and of the programs of State and local governments insofar as they can be estimated The best available general measure of these economic impacts is the volume of current cash transactions other than borrowing between government and public without regard to whether these transactions arise in connection with the receipts and expenditure accounts of the regular Budget or in connection with social security or other trust accounts or whether they represent cash payments of some liability which accrued and was recorded as a budget expenditure at some previous date The total volume of cash payments to the public by Federal State and local governments during amounted to billion dollars or billion more than in despite a tapering off of such extraordinary payments as the cashing in of veterans ' terminal leave bonds. Because the reduction in Federal income tax rates was offset by continuing inflation and by expanding State and local revenues total cash receipts in were about billion dollars higher than in and the surplus of cash receipts over payments increased from to billion dollars as shown in Table Despite the very high levels of economic activity which prevailed progress in reducing the Federal debt was seriously retarded during the latter part of the year and the volume of State and local debt expanded very sharply after a moderate increase in Thus while inflation continued the restraining influence of government fiscal policy was weakened. ( For further detail see appendix A. ) TABLE Government cash receipts from and payments to the public [ Billions of dollars ] Calendar year Receipt or payment Cash receipts : Federal State and local Total cash receipts Cash payments : Federal State and local Total cash payments _ Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) : Federal. _ _._ State and local- Total surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ i Estimate based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix A Calendar year A substantial further increase in cash payments is expected this year and next. Federal payments for national security and foreign aid are still rising under authorized programs and we must make some further progress in meeting urgent needs in our domestic economy. In addition payment of accumulated dividends on National Service Life Insurance policies will result in large disbursements. Including the continued upward trend in payments by State and local governments it is expected that total government cash payments will rise to perhaps billion dollars for the calendar year more than billion dollars higher than in Without additional Federal taxation such an increase in cash payments of Federal State and local governments during would mean that the cash surplus that amounted to billion dollars in would be replaced by a deficit this year. Such a drastic shift in the net cash position of all government might provide the stimulus to a fresh surge of inflation Cash payments by the Federal Government. Programs necessitated by past wars and present requirements for national security accounted for just over percent of total Federal cash payments to the public in both and and this proportion may be expected to increase somewhat in The total volume of Federal cash payments to the public declined by about billion dollars between and There were substantial changes in the amounts going to different groups in the economy with corresponding shifts in areas of impact on the economy. As shown in the following table Federal cash payments to individuals declined slightly largely because of the tapering-off in the redemption of veterans ' terminal leave bonds which more than offset moderate increases in wages and salaries and in miscellaneous payments. The most important changes however occurred in payments to business and in loans and other payments to foreign countries and international organizations TABLE Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Total i Individuals Business International_ _ _. _ _ State and local governments and public agenciesAdjustment for outstanding checks and telegraphic orders NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix A Based on incomplete data Calendar year January- July-De- estimate l cember June Total Federal cash payments Calendar year Calendar year Payments The total payments to business increased by about billion dollars between and and are expected to increase further by about billion dollars in Most of this increase is accounted for by expanding payments in support of national security especially for the aircraft procurement and the stockpiling programs. This expansion may be expected to intensify specific shortages in labor and certain critical materials. Indeed rising metals prices already reflect in part the effect of present and planned stockpiling Federal public works have been held to a low level. They increased only about percent in over to a total of billion dollars roughly the same dollar value as in despite a doubling of construction costs. The continuation of projects already under way will require some further increase in More widely dispersed will be the effect of increases in consumer income that will result from disbursements of National Service Life Insurance dividends and proposed increases in social security benefits and other payments to individuals Cash payments by State and local governments. While a number of States have granted bonuses to veterans of World War II more of which will be paid during the very great proportion of the transactions of State and local governments are in support of normal civilian programs such as education community facilities police and fire protection. Rising costs and expanding needs account for the sharply rising trend of State and local expenditures. The hiring of teachers and construction of new schools can not be deferred in the face of the currently large and still growing numbers of school children nor can the laying of streets and sewers and the enlargement of water systems be postponed when the new housing developments requiring them are being built. The need for recruiting new staff while living costs are rising has required substantial increases in State and local pay scales and other aspects of activity are suffering from the impact of generally rising costs Total cash payments to the public by State and local governments in were about billion dollars percent higher than in and a further substantial rise is in prospect for Despite deliberate postponements by many States and localities in the hope of lower costs construction activities have been rising at a very rapid rate and will continue to do so. The dollar value of State and local construction activities which expanded much more slowly than private construction immediately after the war was more than percent higher in than in compared with a little more than percent increase for private construction and only a percent increase in Federal construction. Costs have risen sharply and the rise in physical volume has been substantially less than shown by the dollar figures. While the number of people on relief rolls has remained relatively low increased assistance has become essential and in many cases it has been found necessary to supplement inadequate old-age insurance benefits with relief payments Federal cash receipts from the public and excess of receipts. Federal cash receipts from the public ( including receipts of trust accounts ) increased in the first half of and declined in the second half after income taxes were reduced. Without new tax measures the volume of receipts in would be about the same as in There is however but little comfort in the fact that receipts have continued at a rather stable high level in spite of the tax reduction that was adopted last year. This has come about only as the result of the inflationary rise in dollar incomes profits and payrolls. The inflationary rise in turn was aggravated by the effects of the tax reduction In the excess of cash receipts dropped from an annual rate of billion dollars to billion from the first to the second half of the year. With the expected increase in Federal cash payments and without new tax measures Federal cash transactions will result in an excess of payments this year T A B L E Federal cash receipts from and payments to the public [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Cash receipts. Cash payments _ Calendar year estiJanuary- July-De1 mate June cember Total i _ Cash surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) Calendar year Calendar year Receipt or payment _ i Preliminary ; based on incomplete data * Receipts based on present tax legislation ( for exception see appendix A table A-6 footnote ) Payments based on present and proposed legislation NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix A The question whether cash transactions will show a small surplus or deficit this year is less important than the fact that we have lost the large excess of receipts that early last year was one of the main factors counteracting inflationary pressures. Unless new tax measures are adopted this fiscal support for an anti-inflationary policy will disappear State and local cash receipts. Cash receipts of State and local governments in continued their rising trend in response both to the general rise in national income and to increases in the rates of existing taxes and the imposition of new taxes. A growing number of States have granted to localities the authority which has quickly been exercised to levy a wide variety of new sales and other taxes and fees for specific services. Local governments have exerted great pressure on the States to increase the amounts of State grants a pressure which may be intensified in Revenues from real property taxes which because of stable valuations and rates failed during the war years to rise in line with growing prosperity have since increased as assessments and rates have been adjusted to expand- ing local needs. This indicates that this source of revenue is potentially more productive than has been widely assumed State and local borrowing has continued to increase and at a sharply increased rate. The general picture particularly for local governments is of revenues inadequate to meet pressing current local needs and larger cash deficits and borrowing may be expected in The total cash receipts of State and local governments during were about billion dollars more than billion higher than in The cash deficit was nearly billion dollars. While receipts should rise in payments will probably increase faster leading to a somewhat larger deficit Summary : The Nation 's Economic Budget The Nation 's Economic Budget total or the total output of goods and services of the economy has increased at a fairly steady rate over the last two years when measured in current dollars. Comparing with this dollar value increased by approximately percent. A large gain in physical production occurred from to through the elimination of bottlenecks and fewer work stoppages. The gain from to was smaller about percent because the economy had reached the stage where further increases in production depended upon additions to the labor force and improved productivity and technology. The physical output of the economy has increased more slowly than the dollar values as shown in the following table : TABLE Indexes of output [ = ] Gross national product ( current prices ) Calendar year : total First half Second half * total First half Second half Physical production of goods and utilities Total i Excluding agriculture i Because of the seasonal nature of agricultural crop production the total index which includes agricultural production has not been computed Sources : Appendix tables O-l and Comparing with business income ( retained earnings and additions to reserves ) and gross private domestic investment showed the largest percentage increase ; consumer incomes and expenditures increased less ; government expenditures remained at about the same level ; and net foreign investments declined substantially. ( See charts and and table ) In fact it is an outstanding characteristic of the present economy that business income and expenditures have increased more than consumer income and expenditures since the prewar year * T A B L E The Nation 's Economic Budget Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] first half Economic group Excess of Expendi- receipts Receipts ( ) or tures deficit ( ) CONSUMERS Disposable income relating to current production Government transfer payments and net interest Disposable personal income _ Expenditures for goods and services Personal saving. BUSINESS Retained business receipts from current production Government transfers _ _ Receipts _ Gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) INTERNATIONAL Net cash government loan transfers abroad Net foreign investment Excess of investment ( ) G O V E R N M E N T ( FEDERAL STATE AND LOCAL ) Tax payments or liabilities Adjustment to cash basis Cash receipts from the public Purchases of goods and services Government transfers Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) ADJUSTMENTS For receipts relating to Gross National Product Other adjustments _ Total : Gross National Product second half i Excess of Expendi- receipts : Receipts ( ) or Receipts tures tft.l deficit ( ) _ deficit ( ) Excess of Expendi- receipts ( ) or tures Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer payments and receipts and subtotals including them are in italics ; they are not included in the gross national product Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding CHART THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET The Nations Economic Budget dollar total increased by percent from to The business account increased the most consumers1 account moderately and government account the least. Net/foreign investment declined { BILLIONS O DOLLARS ) F TOTAL * * ( Gross National Product vRECEIPfsX Transfer EXCESS OF EXPENDITURES ( ) RECEIPTS ( ) payments ^ = CONSUMER vj SAVING CONSUMERS BUSINESS EXCESS OF INVESTMENT INTERNATIONAL EXCESS OF INVESTMENT A = | CASH SURPLUS GOVERNMENT ( Federal state local ) ( BILLIONS O OOLLARS ) F Xv : % % XvXv : v : : : v : : vXX \ < \ \ \ \ Xv : v : v : v : v R E C E i p t s : v : x- : ovX \ vX ^ < \ : \ \ \ v>x ^ vXvX-X'X- : * : TOTAL * * ( Gross National Product ) Transfer payments * CONSUMERS BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENT ( Federol,state local ) VAVI CONSUMER vXvi SAVING EXCESS OF INVESTMENT EXCESS OF INVESTMENT Ivl CASH i l SURPLUS ' * TRANSFER PAYMENTS ARE INCLUOED IN RECEIPTS OR EXPENDITURES OF THE SEPARATE ACCOUNTS BUT NOT IN THE TOTAL CROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT. ' SOURCE : SEE APPENDIX A TABLE Changes in the Nation * s economic budget [ Calendar years ] Economic group Consumers : Disposable income * Expenditure _ Business : Retained earnings * Private investment International : Net foreign investment. Qovernment : Cash receipts Cash payments Total : Gross national product. * Includes Government transfers. See table Source : See appendix A The basic causes for the high relative rate of business expenditures in recent years were inherited from the war. Expansion modernization and repair of productive capacity were badly needed business had large liquid assets accumulated during the war and credit was easily available. In addition inflation has permitted profits to rise more than personal incomes and business has been able to finance a great deal of expansion out of current earnings. Rising prices do not have a depressing effect on investment if business expects that they may rise still further ; only when prices are expected to decline do they tend to depress investment. In contrast rising prices have been a more effective brake on consumer demand. It is true that inflation has permitted some increase in the standard of living of those farmers and workers who could increase the prices for their products or services faster than the rise in prices of the products they purchased. By the same token the burden of inflation has fallen mainly on those consumers whose incomes have been fixed or have lagged behind. And although business Government consumers and foreign countries have each absorbed some part of the large increase in production which has taken place since the percentage increase for consumers has been the smallest During the year the inflationary process continued. There was however a considerable change in the character of developments as is shown by comparing the first and second halves of the year. Business investment no longer showed the greatest percentage gains as it had from to and from to as a whole ; Government payments now showed the greatest relative increase. At the same time Government receipts declined as a result of Federal income tax reduction The consequent reduction in governmental cash surpluses ( Federal State and local ) from a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars in the first half of the year to a little more than billion in the second half was the most important change in the Nation 's Economic Budget during CHART THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET The Nation 's Economic Budget dollar total increased by percent from the 1st half to the 2nd half of The Government surplus declined sharply as receipts fell and payments rose FIRST HALF ( BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ) * >X \ vXv>x % v : vX ^ TOTAL * * ( Gross National Product EXCESS OF EXPENDITURES H RECEIPTS ( ) t vlvi CONSUMER SAVING XI CONSUMERS BUSINESS EXCESS OF INVESTMENT INTERNATIONAL EXCESS OF INVESTMENT v | CASH : : A SURPLUS GOVERNMENT ( Federal,state local ) SECOND HALF ( BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ) TOTAL < Gross Notional Produd Transfer payments W ~ Z \ CONSUMER CONSUMERS v.v.l BUSINESS EXCESS OF INVESTMENT INTERNATIONAL EXCESS OF INVESTMENT CASH SURPLUS GOVERNMENT ( Federal j state local ) A N N U A L RATES,,SEASOWALLY ADJUSTED IN THE TOTAL GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT INCLUDES AN ADJUSTMENT OF+. $ BILLION IN F I R S f HALF A N ( $ B I L L I O N IN SECOND HALF SEt APPENDIX A FOR EXPLANATION SOURCE : SEE APPENDIX A SAVING This rise in governmental payments and reduction in Federal taxes combined with price and wage increases added to consumer incomes and business earnings. The inflationary impetus of these developments was somewhat mitigated by the fact that consumer expenditures increased less than consumer incomes and business investment less than business earnings Also net foreign investment declined partly because Federal grants which are recorded in the Government account took the place of foreign investments. Thus the 9-billion-dollar drop in the combined Federal State and local surpluses was as shown in table and chart offset by an increase in net saving and a reduction in the excess of domestic and foreign investment. The new balance was brought about only through another turn in the inflationary spiral. Most of the gains obtained through increases in incomes and reduction of taxes were lost through price increases The analysis of the Nation 's Economic Budget suggests two conclusions It demonstrates the essential role that a Government surplus plays in a period of inflationary pressures and the dangers that would result if last year 's surplus should disappear entirely or be replaced by a deficit. Adjustments that may be needed to deal with such a situation will be discussed in Part II of this report From the longer-run aspect the most important item is the reduction in the role consumption has recently played in the economy relative to business investment and Government expenditures. Adjustments which may become necessary as the special conditions of the postwar period gradually disappear will be discussed in Part III of this report II. Goals and Means of Approaching Them in BASIC ECONOMIC OBJECTIVES HE Employment Act of stated the needs of our economy admirably when it set the objectives of " maximum employment production and purchasing power. " In terms of these objectives the immediate tasks that loom largest in may conveniently be stated T Maximum employment It is estimated that the labor force will increase by nearly one million during This increase will reflect not only the increase in the population of working age but also the large number of students under the GI program who will complete their training and education. The civilian employment goal for should include provision of useful work opportunities for the net increase in the labor force. Maximum employment means steady work at customary hours not work sharing. While some temporary frictional unemployment is inevitable in a fluid economy its volume should be kept as near as possible to the present low level Maximum production An increase in the total production of goods and services of to percent or to billion dollars measured in prices should be regarded as a reasonable objective for this year. In agriculture the improvement in plant and the abundance of last year 's feed crops promise a continued high total output with an increase in livestock products which would somewhat improve consumption standards for our people. On the industrial side about billion dollars have been invested in expansion and modernization since the end of the war. Hence the slight increase in output per man-hour which occurred last year should be enlarged upon this year. In spite of these improvements in industrial productivity there will still be several bottlenecks where there are persistent shortages of capacity for producing electric power and critical materials particularly certain metals. Industry and government should press their efforts to overcome these shortages Maximum purchasing power The basic concept underlying " maximum purchasing power " is that the income generated by productive effort should flow to groups and individuals throughout the economy in a manner that will provide adequate funds and CHART FEDERAL CASH RECEIPTS FROM AND PAYMENTS TO THE PUBLIC The cash surplus was sharply reduced in the 2nd half of and would disappear in under present tax rates and proposed expenditures BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS Estimate Surplus -Deficit * ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY 1st half * CALENDAR YEARS 2dhalf * AOJUSTEO SOURCES : TREASURY DEPARTMENT AND BUREAU OF THE BUDGET Estimate incentives for maximum production in the factory and on the farm and furnish buying power to consumers and business sufficient to take promptly off the market the goods available for their use. Broadly conceived it requires the balanced allocation of resources and manpower in accord with the interests of the economy as a whole. These interests must include support for basic national policies such as national defense and welfare Since prices and wages are the main mediums through which purchasing power is distributed price and wage movements and relationships decisively affect the outlook for stable prosperity. Most economic policies are directed in one way or another toward this problem of balanced purchasing power in order to bring the pattern of production and consumption into better alignment so as to attain economic stability at the highest feasible levels. In addition to price and wage adjustments there is need for a proper balance between total money purchasing power and the supply of goods if inflation or deflation are to be avoided The goal for should be to make as much progress as we can within one year toward achieving adjustments which will maintain purchasing power on a stable basis NEEDED ADJUSTMENTS Fulfillment of our goals for maximum employment production and purchasing power will not come by chance. It will require wise economic adjustments toward which some progress was made during Yet much remains to be done. There are seven areas of adjustment which seem to us of signal importance Fiscal policy The large excess of cash revenues over expenditures running at an annual rate of more than billion dollars in the first half of last year was the main bulwark of our anti-inflationary policy. The review of Government transactions in Part I indicates that this surplus will disappear and change into a deficit unless new tax legislation is adopted. It is well-nigh axiomatic that the Government should operate at a substantial surplus during a period of unparalleled prosperity when inflationary pressures persist. This is essential not only to deal sensibly with the current situation but also to permit fiscal policy to be reversed if recessionary trends should later develop which might call both for tax reductions to stimulate business and markets and for additional public expenditure On general economic grounds tax measures should be devised to result in an increase of at least billion dollars. However the range of prime considerations in matters of tax policy extends so far beyond purely economic analysis that ultimate decisions must be made within that wider perspective In formulating a tax program for the following principles seem paramount : The additional tax measures should ( a ) provide a budgetary surplus ; ( b ) absorb some of the high current profits while avoiding tax measures which would lead business firms to charge higher prices or impair their ability to maintain desirable rates of expansion ; ( c ) guard against aggravating any recessionary tendencies and provide sufficient fiscal flexibility to enable quick readjustments if such tendencies should become strong ; ( d ) reduce the inequities of previous legislation and strengthen the enforcement of the tax-collecting system Clearly there are various combinations of tax measures that would be consistent with the foregoing principles. One workable combination would include a tax on corporate profits and some increase in the tax on personal incomes estates and gifts. Consideration should also be given to reductions or abandonment of some excise taxes and increases of others. These revenue measures should have priority over any technical improvement of the tax system in general although exceptions should be made for the most urgently needed revisions CHART CORPORATE PROFITS Corporate profits reached new peak levels in exceeding the levels of quarter by quarter BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS PROFITS BEFORE TAXES * NO ALLOWANCE FOH INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OP COMMERCE With respect to taxes on corporate profits there are some arguments for an excess-profits tax and others for an increase in the regular corporate tax rates. The excess-profits tax has these advantages : It is sensitive to changes in business conditions and therefore will rapidly reduce its demands on taxpayers in the event of a recession ; it is difficult to shift to the consumer ; it reduces incentives to increase prices ; it may reduce the pressure for increases in wages of a kind that would be inflationary. An increase in regular corporation rates has certain advantages provided the increase is moderate ; it has administrative simplicity ; it avoids the high marginal rate that would exist in some concerns under an excess-profits tax and that might lead to a relaxation of managerial efficiency ; it avoids some of the inequities which might result under the excess-profits tax. In any event the noneconomic elements involved in the choice between these two types of taxes or in a combination of the two make it clear that the decision should rest on the broadest grounds of policy Under present conditions increases in the tax on personal incomes should be limited to the middle and upper brackets primarily on grounds of equity. However a further substantial increase in defense and military aid budgets would call for an increase in personal income taxes in all brackets With respect to estate and gift taxes these taxes can be more easily administered than an income tax with very high marginal rates and such taxes have the minimum adverse economic effects Gash receipts could be increased further by advancing the date of the statutory increase in pay-roll taxes. Early expansion in the social security program would strengthen anti-inflationary factors now and provide for additional purchasing power cushions later Credit policy In addition to the use of fiscal policy it is necessary that monetary authorities at all times be in position to carry out their traditional function of exerting effective restraint upon excessive credit expansion in an inflationary period and conversely of easing credit conditions in a time of deflationary pressures In view of the problem of managing our huge war debt the Federal Reserve Board has only limited power to curb effectively any substantial pressure towards credit expansion. Maintaining a stable and orderly market for Government securities means in effect that the Reserve banks must purchase long-time marketable Government securities offered for sale by bank and nonbank holders and not taken by other investors. These Federal Reserve purchases create an equivalent quantity of bank reserves upon which a multiple expansion of credit can be based. Without power to immobilize these reserves the Board 's ability to restrain credit creation is severely limited since commercial banks insurance companies and mutual savings banks still hold Government securities in an amount of billion dollars and individuals and corporations also hold large amounts which could be readily transformed into bank reserves Whether or not we are likely to be involved in a serious embarrassment on this score depends on the strength of the basic inflationary forces during the coming year and on the measures taken to limit their impact. The forces of inflation may be activated by the requirements of Federal expenditure to meet our responsibilities in international affairs and the Government in that situation would need the power to meet the serious problem arising out of our dual objective of maintaining a stable and orderly market for Government securities and at the same time attempting to prevent an excessive credit expansion Such action as is consistent with the debt management policy includes ( ) raising rates on short-term Government securities in order to make them more attractive to bank and nonbank holders and in order to raise the price of short-term money generally ( ) raising the discount rate and ( ) increasing reserve requirements CHART SECURITY YIELDS AND MONEY RATES Since the end of the war security yields and money rates have remained at a low level but have increased moderately in PERCENT PER ANNUM PERCENT PER ANNUM Aaa CORPORATE BONOS MOODY 'S BANK LOAN RATES CHARGED CUSTOMERS PRINCIPAL CITIES GOVERNMENT BONOS YEARS AND OVER TAXABLE * " " J- ~ WMENT CERTIFICATES OF INDEBTEDNESS ( MONTHS ) I J I1 I SOURCES : TREASURY DEPARTMENT MOODY 'S INVESTORS SERVICE AND BOARD Of GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM. ( EkCEPT 4th QUARTER OF ) Rates on Government short-term securities were raised in July and August bringing the yield on Treasury certificates from about % to 1J4 percent. The immediate effect was a pronounced rise in short-term interest rates generally and a moderate rise in corporate bond yields. These actions in conjunction with developing conditions had some deterrent effect on the willingness of bankers to lend and on the demand for funds. Although a much more pronounced rise in short-term rates than has occurred in the past might be somewhat more effective in deterring credit expansion there are limitations on the possibilities of exerting effective restraint through such action The discount rate was raised from to * percent in January and from * to l * / percent in August. Under prevailing conditions this action also can have but limited effectiveness since with their enormous holdings of Government securities most banks can readily obtain any needed funds by selling securities rather than by borrowing from the Reserve banks At the present time the Board 's power to increase bank reserves is limited to an increase of percentage points against demand deposits for all member banks and additional percentage points against demand deposits for central reserve city banks. Under the temporary authority granted by the Congress in August which expires June the Board had power to raise reserves against demand deposits by percentage points and against time deposits by V/2 points. Raising requirements by the last two percentage points allowed under temporary authority would increase total reserves that banks have to keep against deposits by about 1J/2 billion dollars Though this might help to restrain credit expansion by placing banks under pressure to obtain additional reserves or by absorbing any additional reserves that banks may obtain from gold imports or Federal Reserve purchases of United States securities it could not have much effect considering the ability of the banks to obtain additional reserves. The lapse of the present temporary authority would add several billion dollars to their reserves One proposed method to restore the power of the Reserve System to influence the volume of bank credit is to give up our aim of maintaining a stable and orderly market for Government securities. The immediate impact of such a step however is highly uncertain. Indeed it is entirely conceivable that in some circumstances the unsettling of financial markets following complete removal of the peg would contribute to a serious business downturn. Another method might be the continuance of support but at a lower level in the hope that this would discourage existing holders from selling or bring new buyers into the market to take advantage of higher yields. There is no promise that such a policy would provide a definite solution to the problem. A moderate reduction of the peg might create the expectation of a further reduction and increase the volume of purchases required to support the market. Or if the inflationary pressures were substantial the only effect might be a general rise in the structure of interest rates with the Federal Reserve banks obliged to continue a sizeable volume of support purchases at the lower peg The stability of the Government bond market has been a significant element in the smooth postwar reconversion. This stability has contributed to the underlying strength of the financial structure of the country. It would be a serious error to introduce new elements of uncertainty and possible financial disburbances which would follow a change of the policy with respect to the support of bond prices A constructive approach would be the granting of additional powers to the Federal Reserve Board to vary the level of reserve requirements. This together with use of other powers available to the System would provide a flexible mechanism of credit restraint under current monetary conditions The process would be more effective if applied to all banks insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Authority for the regulation of consumer instalment credit expires on June This authority has had gradually increasing influence in checking credit extension of an inflationary character. To abandon this restraining influence at this time would increase our vulnerability to inflationary strain Voluntary adjustments in prices and wages Since the end of the war we have been faced with an inflationary spiral of prices and wages which at times has appeared to be burning itself out only to flame up again under the impetus of new factors. At the moment we are witnessing a welcome abatement of inflationary pressures in substantial parts of the economy while other areas are still subject to strong inflationary pressures. Much as we may hope that the present relaxations of inflationary pressures will continue and spread to the rest of the economy it would be foolhardy to count on it. This is no time to relax our vigilance against the dangers of a possible spurt in the inflationary spiral. We need to be prepared to deal with that possibility as well as to make the adjustments required when markets weaken An essential part of the process of adjustment depends upon the voluntary behavior of business labor and other groups. Indeed it is upon the voluntary pursuit of sound economic policies that we rely mainly for the strength and progress of our economy. The forces of competition however are never wholly adequate to bring about all the adjustments required. In a full-employment economy beset by inflationary pressures and vexed by international as well as domestic complications the need is greater than ever for restraint and foresight for appreciation of the interests of the whole economy and of how its various sectors interact upon one another Price adjustments. It is the natural inclination of businessmen to gain whatever profits they can. Profits in fact are the central and legitimate purpose of their undertaking. In an inflationary period higher costs actual or anticipated impel them to protect themselves by higher prices. And their apprehension of a possible recession at some later date may impel them to make hay while the sun shines and to make maximum improvement in their financial and physical position while profits are high At the same time the case for a moderate and restrained price policy rests on the law of self-preservation once the conditions of self-preservation are fully perceived. For businessmen know that maximum profits in the long run depend upon sustained prosperity. They know too that this prosperity is endangered when prices are pushed so high or needed adjustments so long delayed as to culminate in a choice between the equally undesirable alternatives of slashing prices too rapidly or attempting to meet a softening of demand through cutbacks in employment and production. The hope that businessmen actually will set their prices below the highest levels that a lush market will temporarily sustain is supported by the fact that many of them have already done so The postwar level of demand has been compounded of many factors : the reconversion needs of business the extraordinary character of some government programs the use of wartime savings and generally high levels of income. Wise management recognizes that prices geared to such a compound demand can not be maintained when the temporary elements disappear. The great danger in a situation of this sort is that management feeling a decline in the pressure of demand will respond by lowering the rate of production rather than by attempting to maintain it by making downward adjustments in prices Recent price trends have been running in two directions. For a considerable range of commodities they have been moving downward or leveling out. For another range of commodities the demand continues very strong in relation to the supply and upward pressure on prices still continues. These divergent trends indicate an over-all market situation which makes it more risky than * a year ago to cling shortsightedly or obstinately to prices beyond those yielding a reasonable return. Increasingly month by month there is need for discernment and discrimination in pricing policy In those industrial areas in which supply has caught up with demand or even exceeded it at present price levels downward price adjustments to maintain a high level of production become essential. Moreover where price cuts are made at initial stages of production they should be passed through promptly at subsequent stages of production and distribution so as to pass the price benefits on to the consumer The discriminating and prudent price adjustments which we have been discussing would reinvigorate demand where it may lag and would help to sustain continuous maximum production. They would assist the market in avoiding the drastic general slashes in prices which would mark the advent of a serious recession or depression. We should not expect the process of price adjustment to bring us back to the preinflationary price level since incomes costs and prices have become interrelated at a higher level of prices It does not lie within the scope of this Report to point to exactly what individual price adjustments are required. But the enunciation of the principle is worthwhile even though its specific application must be left to those on the scene of action Wage adjustments. Labor 's interest in the maintenance of stable prosperity transcends even that of management because while profits may fall more than wages in a period of depression workers and their families bear the real brunt of hard times. Pushing for the highest possible wage advance is dangerous to the economy in a period when that advance necessitates even higher prices. It is more dangerous if this course is followed when rising labor costs lead to reduction in employment. Wage advances that contribute to inflation are undesirable ; but wage advances that may contribute to serious deflation are more so. With the balance between inflation and deflation more closely drawn than it was a year ago a restrained wage policy is now even more urgent in the interest of labor as well as management This admonition should not lead to the assumption that wage principles and profit principles are identical. Profits become unreasonable when they yield more than the amounts which support adequate incentives for production and growth ; but there is no upper limit to wages in exactly that sense. Certainly an objective of the American economy is to provide constantly higher real wages and a constantly improving standard of living as rapidly as our resources will permit. Money wages may however become too high when they run ahead of the supply of goods so that they lead only to more inflation instead of more consumer enjoyment ; or when they attempt to yield to a particular group a larger share of the national output than can be theirs without undue deprivation of others ; or when they induce unemployment There is however sound ground for wage increases which are in line with productivity trends. Further substantial wage increases are still called for in a number of instances where wages are substandard. The postwar inflation has led to a permanently higher level of prices ( though not necessarily as high as the present level ) and it would be intolerable to leave its worst victims without relief. The adjustments required for this purpose would not interfere with the movement of the economy toward greater stability but would in fact contribute toward stability in the long run It should be emphasized that the above discussion of wages is related to a broad anti-inflation program and is based on the assumption that other Government and business policies will effectively contribute to stabilizing the cost of living Treatment of critical shortages and capacity expansion While the supply situation relative to demand has greatly improved in most segments of the economy this is not the case in a number of highly important areas. There are serious deficiencies of supply in the case of lead copper and a few other materials which are of vital importance to the defense plans of the country. These shortages appear likely to persist for some time under circumstances of maximum employment and production throughout the economy. Steel has presented the outstanding shortage problem since the war and would present grave danger in case of the need for a much enlarged defense program. It is therefore necessary to give special attention to policies which may be needed in these fields Expansion of capacity and production. Under developmental contracts in connection with the stockpiling program substantial progress is expected to be made toward overcoming some critical deficiencies of supply. But this attack upon the problem alone is too restricted. There is need to determine the extent to which serious shortages will persist for essential products and to determine what special measures may be needed to stimulate the increase of capacity and production. While accelerated expansion in bottleneck areas would require materials already in critically short supply this effort on a selective basis can and should move forward Voluntary allocation agreements. The shortage situation led to the enactment of Public Law authorizing the President to approve voluntary agreements which he finds will " aid in stabilizing the economy of the United States * * * in curbing inflationary tendencies to promote the orderly and equitable distribution of goods and facilities and to aid in preventing maldistribution of goods and facilities which basically affect the cost of living or industrial production. " The allocations under this law have been confined to steel pig iron and petroleum. In addition the National Military Establishment in fulfilling the stockpiling objectives for critical and strategic materials has recently made an informal arrangement with the copper industry to furnish several thousand tons of copper each month and is discussing similar arrangements with other industries There can be no doubt that even with this limited application the voluntary cooperative efforts between business and Government have produced important results in directing scarce commodities to their more essential uses. However as the proportion of a scarce commodity which is allocated increases orderly distribution to the priority programs tends to be at the expense of the rest of the economy and strong inflationary pressures tend to appear Selective controls The easing of demand in some sectors of the economy can not hide the fact that for other commodities inflationary forces are still strong and may increase. The existence of serious shortages of supply which interfere with essential programs and which continue inflationary pressures has been noted at earlier points. This problem will present itself in a more acute form if it should become necessary to withdraw substantial minor fractions of essential materials from the civilian market as a priority for security programs. There is some prospect that the problems which these shortages present can be met by improvement in the supply situation and by the use of voluntary allocation agreements. This would be the most satisfactory solution. But attention should be given to the possibility that the utilization of mandatory allocation controls might be called for on short notice at points where the present voluntary programs are found inadequate. Since the shortages also carry the threat of serious further price inflation selective price controls also call for consideration The authorization of selective allocations and price controls would not need to rest upon the conviction that they would have to be used. It would rest instead upon the proposition that the Government should be provided with the weapons which may be needed in the carrying out of public programs and in the battle against inflation Rent control The extreme housing shortage has caused us to continue rent control long after other wartime controls have been dropped. Continuation of these controls has held down one important item in the cost of living in the midst of general inflation. They are not rigid however since they do not apply to new housing and the Housing Expediter has substantial power to permit increases to allow for landlords ' expenditures on improvements or to grant relief in cases of demonstrable hardship It is true that those who own property subject to rent control have earned less profit than those who have sold commodities in short supply not subject to control but the vacancy ratio in most rental properties is still so low that incomes of landlords in spite of increases in cost are as good as or better than earnings before the war. In addition removal of rent control would bear most heavily on families with fixed incomes. At this juncture it would also quite possibly stiffen demands for wage increases. Reasons for extending this control outweigh reasons for terminating it. If extended for a year or two we might hope that return to free market conditions could be effected at a time when other items in the cost of living had eased Farm price supports Long-range farm price support policies and programs are being widely discussed. The immediate concern over them stems partly from the drop in farm prices ( see appendix table C-22 ) and farmers ' net incomes during partly from the associated expansion of Government loan and purchase operations and partly from certain adjustments in support levels * provided in the Agricultural Act of to take effect on January The current concern with price-support measures should not blind us to the fact that they are only a part although an important part of a broad agricultural program. Three criteria for a sound farm price support program are relevant within the framework of an economy seeking to operate continuously at maximum levels of employment production and purchasing power. First the program must contribute to maintaining adequate levels of farm income. Second it must simultaneously promote sound price relationships among individual farm products and between agricultural and industrial prices. And third it must be implemented with a variety of measures adequate to give real effect to the support commitments that are made Farm income to be adequate must suffice and must be sufficiently assured to encourage farmers to continue a high level of production commensurate with the Nation 's needs. Furthermore it must enable farmers while doing this to maintain the fertility of their farms and in general must justify the continuing investment in farm plant necessary for achieving our longer-range production objectives. Finally farm incomes must provide farmers the purchasing power to share fully as consumers in the output of a maximum-production economy Intercommodity price relationships must be kept consistent with basic trends in demand and supply conditions. To the maximum extent possible parity-price relationships and support-price programs should encourage shifts to those commodities that are most wanted. Rigid systems of support in violation of this principle can only lead to rigid systems for restricting output that violate our tenets of economic freedom that work against our objectives of maximum production and that in the end take away from farmers ' incomes through decreased volume as much as or more than they add through increased prices The Agricultural Act of represents an important step forward in recognizing the difficulties associated with over-rigid supports. But while retaining this essential improvement the precise formulas for adjustments in support levels including standards for discretionary action need careful review and further testing against the criteria both of adequate farm income and of adaptability to meet specific commodity situations A grave defect in recent agricultural legislation is its failure adequately to implement the declared support intentions with concrete measures for making supports effective. It denies authority for the Commodity Credit Corporation to provide necessary storage facilities. Methods of assigning acreage allotments for basic crops likewise need the most careful examination. There is danger that the rigidity of present methods may in some cases hinder farmers from making needed adjustments in production that the support programs should encourage From a broader standpoint if price supports are to fulfill their proper * role of encouraging the adjustment of farm production to our needs they also should be supplemented by measures to assure consumption at the needed levels. This implies examination of the adequacy of the school lunch program and development of measures wider in scope for assuring that proper diets will be continuously available to all our people It likewise implies more aggressive action to broaden the utilization of farm products to reduce the costs of processing and distributing them to eliminate destabilizing speculative influences from commodity exchanges and other markets and generally to assure that retail prices are properly proportional to the prices that farmers receive. And it would require renewed efforts generally to devise trade mechanisms for making our farm products available in other countries where they are so sorely needed The gains that agriculture has made since the initiation of broadly constructive legislation in should not be jeopardized in the process of adjustment to conditions of the peacetime economy. Rather we must establish the basis for continued progress. Price supports alone can not be relied upon to achieve this. They do not for example solve the underlying problems of small farmers who have too little to sell. Other programs are necessary to deal with their problems. Price supports make their greatest contribution in stabilizing farm incomes against economic downturn. In doing so they contribute significantly also to general economic stabilization Price supports and all the other parts of the broad agricultural program must be directed toward this over-all goal : that all farmers shall have opportunity comparable to that enjoyed by other groups for realizing the high standard of living that our maximum-production economy makes possible III. Basic Objectives for Balanced Economic Growth URING the nineteen thirties the country fell into a tremendous under-use of its productive resources. This led to a dominating fear of surpluses in capacities and in goods. The real problem however was how to restore full use of our productive resources and initiate a further process of growth. During the war years full employment and phenomenal levels of production were achieved but there remained doubts in the minds of many whether we would be able to maintain full and effective use of our resources after the return of peace The Employment Act of is based on the conviction that our economic system can sustain high and steady levels of employment and production But such an outcome is not automatic. It will be achieved only if business workers farmers and the Government are guided less by the records of the past than by the possibilities of the future. The Employment Act therefore calls for estimates of the levels of employment production and purchasing power needed to accomplish the purposes of the law This part of our report continues the effort begun last year to formulate needed levels for the American economy in a somewhat longer perspective than that of Parts I and II which deal with conditions in and adjustments for Such a formulation does not substitute distant dreaming for immediate practical action. It simply recognizes that the decisions affecting the whole economy which we make from year to year will be more intelligent if we take a longer look ahead. The intent is to keep our objectives responsive to current experience by reviewing them annually. The aid of experts in business labor and agriculture and in Government and independent research has been sought. Success in the venture of defining common objectives should promote success in the task of furthering cooperative action in the solution of common problems Such economic objectives are not to be confused with economic blueprints or plans used in regulated economies. They are conceived simply as bench marks for the orientation of private enterprise and public policies. Nor are they forecasts of what would be likely to happen without special effort They depend upon success in accomplishing the objectives of the Employment Act. We present them as an attempt to integrate governmental and private thinking in a way that is essential for making rational decisions D In formulating these economic objectives the future of our foreign relations is now the major uncertainty. However even at present levels of the defense budget and international aid we are able to make some progress toward peacetime objectives. This year for example will see further additions to plant and equipment and a further improvement in the standard of living. A deterioration in the international outlook bringing the necessity for greatly increased defense programs at home and military aid abroad CHART GROWTH IN OUTPUT OF THE ECONOMY Total production as measured by the deflated gross national product has increased about 3/ percent a year since The progress has been irregular RATIO SCALE BILLIONS OF DOLLARS RATIO SCALE BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL ESTIMATES OECADE ESTIMATES 5Q J * DEFLATED GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IS NOT AN NOT EXACTLY I p > i l i i i EXACT * MEASURE '25 '30 '35 '40 '45 '50 OF OUTPUT IN WAR YEARS ( ESTIMATES NOT AND CONSUMPTION RABLE WITH DATA FOR SOURCE : BASED ON DATA FROM DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE DEPARTMENT OF LABOR AND SIMON KUZNETS * " NATIONAL PRODUCT SINCE " would reverse the situation. But an assumption underlying the economic objectives now presented is a gradual improvement in international affairs Between the decade beginning in ( earliest available estimates ) and the decade ending in the gross output of the economy doubled about every years. This is shown in the preceding chart From to a very high rate of expansion resulted in an increase of percent. In the next 10-year period including the Great Depres- sion but little gain was registered. A visitor from Mars looking at the national production chart would have imagined that one-quarter of the arable land had been destroyed by a flood over one-quarter of the population wiped out by plague and one-quarter of the industrial plants destroyed by earthquake. From to including the war years the increase in output was resumed and a rise of more than percent was accomplished. Thus from to the output of the economy again doubled In addition to the increase in output the number of leisure hours has risen substantially. In the last century the hours worked were frequently as high as or more per week. In manufacturing industries the average weekly hours of work have dropped more than percent since PRODUCTION OBJECTIVES A reasonable development for the next few years would be an annual increase in output of about percent. This target depends upon several factors chief among them being the growth in the labor force the length of the average work-week and the output per man-hour It is estimated that our population will increase less than percent annually over the next decade compared with about percent in the period to Since the proportion of the population within age brackets seeking work will increase slightly more the increase in the labor force is estimated at about percent a year. This increase allows for about a million and a half net immigration over the next years. It assumes that expanded social security legislation will enable more old people to retire somewhat earlier. Young people may enjoy longer educations but will engage in considerable summer and part-time work Although average hours worked per week are now at a level consistent with health and reasonable leisure some reduction in annual working time would result from continuation of the present trend toward additional holidays and paid vacations. Such reductions would partially offset the increase in the labor force. Under these circumstances economic growth over the next few years would depend to a considerable extent on the rise in output per man-hour As far as conclusions can be derived from deficient statistics it appears that output per man-hour has increased on the average by nearly percent per year for a half century or more. The rate of increase for manufacturing industries has been about percent. Over the next few years a productivity increase for the whole economy averaging somewhat more than ] / ^ percent a year should be possible. This rate of productivity increase is based on the assumption that Government labor and management cooperate fully in achieving maximum productive efficiency. To achieve it requires continued large investment in labor-saving plant and equipment expanded research and lessening of restrictive practices on the part of both labor and management CHART GROWTH OF POPULATION AND THE LABOR FORCE During the past years the labor force has increased about percent and population about percent MILLIONS OF PERSONS ( RATIO SCALE ) MILLIONS OF PERSONS ( RATIO SCALE ) _ POPULATION- ^ ^ * " * * ^ " ~ ^ ^ ^ LABOR FORCE ^ EMPLOYMENT T ALL SERIES INCLUDE ARMED FORCES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR Mining and manufacturing production The output of mining and manufacturing accounts for about percent of all goods and services in peacetime although it fluctuates more widely than other types of activity. Industrial production is at a record for peacetime. It is almost double the rate of and has increased far more than other types of production and services This high rate of total industrial production partly reflects the abnormal composition of postwar demand. It results from very large purchases of new equipment by domestic business large purchases of consumer durable goods large exports and large Government orders for the defense programs. Over the next few years with an expected increase in the rate of consumption particularly of services industrial production is likely to expand at a rate somewhat less than total output Agricultural production Agriculture and fishing not counting processing of food and other farm products account for about one-tenth of the total output of the economy In we produced enough food to maintain per capita consumption at percent above the average and to ship abroad three to four times as much food as in that prewar period. Assuming peacetime conditions in the world we do not expect to continue to ship abroad the large quantities of foods that have been required in the last few years. On the other hand exports and domestic industrial use of nonfood agricultural products may be expected to increase It should be our aim to increase further the per capita domestic food consumption in order to provide adequate diets for the many millions of families whose consumption is considerably below a desirable standard Even so the increase in the over-all production goals for agriculture does not need to be as large as in those for other industries. Allowing for reduced food exports it is estimated that a to V/2 percent annual rise in agricultural output would provide adequate nutrition for an increasing population Because of improvement in farm productivity it should be possible to accomplish this objective with a somewhat reduced labor force in agriculture Energy production Half our nonhuman energy now comes from coal about one-third from oil one-seventh from natural gas and percent from water power. Practically all the water power and an increasing proportion of the fuels are converted to electricity. It is not regarded as likely that such potential further sources as atomic energy sunlight wind and tides will play a significant role within the next few years although they deserve continuing exploration and development in view of the exhaustible character of mineral fuels Historically the trend of increasing reliance on nonhuman energy has been partially offset by increased efficiency of energy utilization. Nevertheless the demands on primary energy sources ( fuels and water power ) have increased nearly in proportion to total national output. It may be expected that the total need for mineral fuels will continue to increase at about the same rate as total output It is impossible to predict what expansion will take place in the development of power through the use of coal oil natural gas and water power respectively. Competition among these rival sources is sharp and technical developments still in the making will play a large part in shaping relative growth trends. A sound conservation policy should encourage the use of water power and coal as against the more quickly exhaustible oil and natural gas The use of electric power has increased tremendously since the war and there is no sign of any tapering-off in the development of expanded and new uses for this most convenient form of energy. The wider use of light metals and other electro-metallurgical and electro-chemical products in addition to the further mechanization of industry in general and the rapid growth in rural electrification promises a continued increase in the demand for electric energy INVESTMENT OBJECTIVES The unprecedentedly heavy investment of the past few years has brought capacity in most lines of business up to a reasonable relationship to current demand. Utilization rates are high but no longer excessively so in terms of what might be expected under sustained high employment. In a few industries which were greatly expanded during the war such as aircraft shipbuilding and magnesium production excess capacity prevails On the other hand remaining bottlenecks in production of metals and electricity the transmission of gas and in transportation indicate areas where we have not caught up and where provisions should be made to restore an adequate reserve margin A more difficult question ~ concerns the quality or condition of our present productive facilities. Whether they are now in better or worse condition than at some previous time they are less modern and less efficient than they could be. The newest and best types of facilities in any industry are superior to the bulk of those in use and still better types are generally in the offing awaiting development and introduction. This situation is a normal and necessary consequence of the progress of technology and the durability of capital goods. Technology is always in the lead. If technical development were to cease tomorrow American industry could still go on for many years modernizing its plants up to present attainable standards with large investment outlays and large gains in efficiency Needed investment in manufacturing Some indication of gross investment requirements in manufacturing industry may be gained from a study of the relation between gross investment outlays and capacity expansion during the past three decades Contrasting with ( both years of reasonably high utilization of industrial capacity ) the Federal Reserve Board index number of manufacturing output rose by points ( on the base ) This is a rough measure of the expansion in industrial capacity achieved in that interval From to the spring of again taking an interval between two dates with reasonably high utilization of capacity the production index rose another points. In with high utilization the index was another points higher In these three periods of industrial growth the gross outlays for new nonwar manufacturing facilities in prices were almost precisely in proportion to the amounts of apparent expansion in capacity. The record of thirty years thus puts an approximate price tag on expansion and moderni- zation somewhat below billion dollars ( ) for each point of capacity expansion in terms of the Federal Reserve index This analysis of the record of production under conditions of full employment suggests that to maintain adequate manufacturing facilities the future ratio of new investment to total production may be below that of Needed investment in electric utilities Electric utilities is another important field in which it is possible to venture a projection of gross investment requirements. Consistent with our estimate of an increase of percent annually in total production an acceptable estimate of the annual increase in electric utility output is to billion kilowatt-hours. To provide for this output at reasonable ratios of plant-use with allowance for restoration of that normal margin of reserve capacity which is now lacking in many parts of the country we should need to increase capacity each year by approximately 5J4 million kilowatts. Allowing l/2 million kilowatts for further retirements of obsolete capacity as soon as the present tightness of reserve capacity is alleviated the necessary gross addition of capacity would be million kilowatts each year. Capital outlays per kilowatt of capacity for generation transmission and distribution facilities are estimated to run between $ and $ depending partly on the proportions of steam and hydroelectric capacity built. The annual addition to capacity of about million kilowatts would involve an outlay of 2/2 to billion dollars per year This rate of expansion is substantially higher than that attained in Privately and publicly owned utility systems have reported plans for additions of about million kilowatts of capacity over the next three years. It appears altogether likely that assuming sustained growth and activity in the whole economy the electric utility expansion program would have to continue at better than rates. For the next two or three years the rate of expansion is limited by the capacity of equipment producers ; that capacity is itself being increased but no substantial margin of reserve for possible military requirements is in sight Needed investment in mining facilities In mining a major proportion of the foreseeable expansion will undoubtedly come in mineral fuels now supplying percent of our energy As noted in the discussion of production objectives the total requirements for mineral fuels are unlikely to increase more than the percent per annum set for national output as a whole. There is some reason to expect however that more capital investment might be involved in relation to capacity expansion than in the past. The sharp competition which is in prospect among coal oil gas and electricity will speed certain technical developments all of which require relatively large amounts of capital. These are : ( ) further mechanization of coal mining ; ( ) gasification of coal ; ( ) synthetic oil ; ( ) further substitution of electricity for direct use of fuels In the coal mining industry there are great potentialities for further mechanization of mining handling and cleaning operations. With sustained high employment the demand for coal should increase substantially though the amount of increase will depend mainly on the development of liquefaction and gasification of coal and other new uses. However expansion of markets may not automatically call forth corresponding outlays on facilities. In relation to output coal mining requires a large capital investment which is only slowly recovered in earnings. The inducement to make major capital outlays hinges on the competitive outlook far into the future This means that within the next few years we may have to face a major adjustment problem. Investment in coal mining and handling facilities may be checked even prematurely by uncertainty concerning the possible competition of atomic energy The petroleum industry spent about a billion and a half dollars in for wells and other facilities for production of crude oil in the United States and probably almost as much for domestic facilities for transportation refining and marketing. The need for continued expansion is clear but all estimates of future investment must be conditioned upon the rate of development of new oil reserves In billion barrels were added to visible reserves of petroleum and in about billion barrels. Since only billion barrels were withdrawn in our known reserves have expanded roughly in line with the trend of increase in production. In the interests of national security we should attempt to maintain or improve the relationship between reserves and production. If new reserves could hereafter be added at the rate capital outlays at about the scale would have to be maintained. Any increase in the difficulty of development of new reserves would be reflected in larger outlays in relation to accomplishment. At the same time higher prices resulting from such higher costs would have the offsetting effect of encouraging substitution of imports synthetics or other fuel sources The rapid expansion of natural gas production and transmission accounts for the bulk of current capital outlays in the whole gas industry. The natural gas utility companies spent million dollars on pipelines in and a further million on other facilities. The industry association has estimated the current expansion program outlays at million dollars over the five-year period which implies a large decline from present rates of expenditure. The program figures for the later years are almost certainly too low if only because plans are not fully made so far in advance On the other hand the expansion of long-distance natural gas pipelines seems unlikely to continue at present rates for as long as a decade. The present market advantage of gas over other fuels in some industrial regions will be reduced somewhat as higher field prices and pipeline construction costs are reflected in delivered gas prices. Moreover more rigorous application of public policies which encourage the use of natural gas in the areas of its production rather than transmission to other areas may limit the investment requirements of the gas industry Another mineral industry which we know will require large capital outlays in the near future is iron ore mining. Depletion of the high-grade Mesabi ore makes necessary the immediate development of alternative sources. Whether this takes the form primarily of exploitation of new sources in Labrador and elsewhere with heavy transportation facilities outlays in addition to the mining development proper or whether it involves primarily the construction of beneficiation plants for low-grade domestic ore the new investment outlay will be enormous. Development of foreign sources will involve international investment by United States companies Railroad investment Although transportation as a whole is increasingly important in the national economy much traffic has shifted from railroads to other carriers It is anticipated that in line with trends of the past two decades further freight traffic will be shifted to trucks pipelines and waterways and passenger traffic to air lines automobiles and busses. Rail freight traffic would continue to increase though slowly while rail passenger traffic would substantially diminish The need for freight cars is conditioned by the expansion of traffic ( which we may assume to be partly offset by continued improvement in efficiency of car use ) and the abnormally heavy replacement requirements arising from war and postwar conditions of heavy traffic and steel shortage. It is estimated that the average service life of new freight cars now being built will be about years with allowance for the normal proportion of rebuilding To provide a percent annual increase in cars in use and reduce the average age of cars from % in to years by ten years from now would require car purchases at the rate of a year ; or just the number for which steel has been allocated under the present voluntary program. With appropriate allowance for car rebuilding such a freight-car program would cost about million dollars a year at prices. Any acceleration of this program for rehabilitation and expansion of our freight-car fleet for national security reasons would require a car-building schedule substantially larger than the present one Because of the expected loss in passenger business and its small importance as compared with freight only a small part of the necessary equipment outlays should be for passenger cars. The annual average rate of outlays should be about million dollars at prices or roughly the same as in Railroad motive power is in process of Dieselization. In less than percent of all locomotive units ordered were powered by steam. In view of the superior operating efficiency of Diesel locomotives any projection must assume a continued upward trend in traffic handled per locomotive. With allowance for this factor and the age of present locomotives the projected traffic level would call for about new units per year. An annual outlay of about million dollars ( prices ) is entailed. This analysis makes no allowance for the possible substitution of gas turbine locomotives on a substantial scale which is still uncertain In view of the trend to higher speeds and heavier trains substantial expenditures on permanent way will be needed to reduce grades and curves and lay heavier rail. Rail replacement needs are closely related to the amount of freight traffic. Total outlays on roadway and structures in keeping with the other projections should average annually about million dollars a rate slightly in excess of the current rate Total capital requirements of the railroads would amount to about to billion dollars ( prices ) annually representing a rate about onesixth higher than in Actual outlays will of course depend largely on earnings rates construction and equipment costs and the availability of external financing Highways Highway traffic has increased faster than total production population growth or highway capacity. An annual percent increase in output and transportation would require an annual expenditure of at least billion dollars for maintenance repair and new construction of our road system About one-third of this should be assigned to city streets and expressways one-third to primary rural roads and one-third to secondary and local roads. Expenditures in including maintenance and repair are not expected to equal even half our annual long-run needs. Present activities in relation to need are much lower than they were either in the 's or in the 's and far less than what is needed for the future. Provision for the flow of traffic implied in our production goals calls for an increase in these expenditures as labor and materials are released from other uses. It also implies a balanced and economical use of both railroads and highways Agricultural investment The amount of investment that will be required in agriculture to expand output in line with consumption requirements will depend considerably upon the nature of future technological developments. Over the years prior to the war there was little change in the combined value measured in constant dollars of farm horses and mules and farm machinery. The substitution of tractor and tractor-drawn machinery for animal power has however been an important factor in the substantial increase in farm production. The reduction in feed requirements for horses and mules has freed many acres for other production. Great increases in productivity have likewise arisen without any corresponding increase in capital from developments like hybrid corn and improvements in animal breeding and feeding During the war the pressure for rapid expansion of production high labor costs and increased farm income combined to bring about a rapid increase of investment in tractors and other machinery. This increase has been accelerated since the war as such equipment has become more readily available. From January to January the number of tractors on farms and the volume of other machinery and equipment more than doubled. Farmers ' purchases of motor vehicles machinery and equipment for use in production and their expenditures on farm buildings totaled nearly billion dollars from through an average gross investment of more than billion dollars a year in current prices equivalent to to J/2 billion in prices. Since the war however these outlays have averaged around billion dollars annually ( prices ) Over the next few years an annual gross investment would be desirable at least equal to that during the war years Another form of agricultural investment that will be needed is in breeding-herds of livestock. The consumption goals that have been outlined include along with the increase in total production a substantial shift in favor of livestock products which are favored both nutritionally and in taste preferences of consumers. Since the war however livestock numbers have been decreasing. To attain and maintain the level of output of livestock products that appears desirable over billion dollars ( prices ) should be invested within the next few years in building up herds and flocks. Adding this to the investment in farm power and machinery gives around billion dollars as an annual farm investment goal In addition to the investments just discussed a substantial amount should go into land improvements for conserving the soil and maintaining or increasing its fertility. It is difficult to separate farmers ' outlays of this kind between capital investment and current expenses. In addition to farmers ' private outlays substantial public expenditures are needed for irrigation drainage land retirement and for encouraging the widespread adoption of conservation practices in farming and grazing. Public measures in this field are discussed in a subsequent section Forest investment To establish adequate forest growing stocks and otherwise to put our forests in shape to yield the increased timber growth needed by our economy will call for substantial investment in access road construction in our national forests and in privately-owned timberland in planting and timber stand improvement and in protection of forests from fire insects and disease. Forest investment needs are not limited to the objective of timber growing but also include expanding needs for watershed development forest recreation forest range and wildlife Commercial construction New commercial facilities including stores restaurants and other service establishments follow the growth and redistribution of population. Urban redevelopment programs and expansion of suburban residential areas will 6o create the need for commercial construction. In addition there is need for expansion of trade facilities even in many areas of stable population since sales and activity are now much higher than at the time these areas were developed. Office space is also scarce at the present time vacancy ratios being less than percent. The volume of construction of stores restaurants and garages is currently running at about the levels needed to serve an economy growing at the rate ours should expand. However building for offices and warehouses is very low and will need to increase from a third to a half to take care of present and future needs In the immediate future there is need for restraint in commercial construction in order to channel materials into housing. Over the longer range however commercial and private institutional construction should increase somewhat as a proportion of the total and account for billion dollars or more per year The foregoing analysis suggests that the proportion of resources currently being devoted to productive facilities as a whole is somewhat higher than the level that will be required on a sustained basis over the next few years to meet maximum production objectives in a self-sustaining and steadily growing economy. Additions to capital equipment in the past were accomplished in spurts and periods in which they exceeded long-run requirements were followed by periods in which they fell far short. These violent fluctuations in private capital outlays have been a major factor in generating booms and depressions OBJECTIVES FOR CONSUMPTION AND LIVING STANDARDS In an economy of steady growth moving from postwar to peacetime conditions the output of consumer goods and services should increase not only in absolute amounts but also in ratio to total production. In consumers were receiving about percent of gross output compared with percent in and percent in Even allowing for the contingency that Government expenditures and net exports may hereafter account for a larger portion of the Nation 's Economic Budget than in previous periods of high employment it is felt that final consumers should absorb at least percent of all goods and services within a few years. Coupling this with the growth of the economy as a whole the result would increase total consumption per year by about percent and per capita consumption by about percent above present levels This higher consumption pattern must be brought about by a substantially equivalent increase in total consumer income. It will require improvements in the distribution of that income not only to avoid areas of want in a land of plenty but also to avoid higher saving than is necessary to permit the expansion of investment needed for stable growth Changes in consumption patterns would flow from these desirable develop- 6i ments. We have already witnessed great strides forward in standards of consumption of food and other goods although here the standards of many low-income families leave much to be desired. On a national basis we have fallen behind in terms of housing accommodations medical and other health care and the provision of educational facilities. Assuming higher and better distributed incomes and adequate governmental programs relatively greater increases may be expected in these areas. Increased leisure will presumably result also in more travel and higher recreational expenditures in general Periods of high income and employment are also usually associated with a high proportion of expenditures for durable consumer goods. To some extent in the past this has been the result of the fact that in years of depression such purchases have been postponed. Still there is little doubt that an enormous potential market exists for the durable appliances which have contributed so much to the convenience and comfort of modern life. Services and durable goods may hereafter absorb a higher proportion of consumers ' budgets than they did before the war. Nevertheless there would also be some increase in food consumption especially in the variety and interest of the diets of lower income groups and in other types of nondurable consumption. New frontiers will be provided for the development of private initiative by the rise in living standards. The enlargement of many community and governmental services will also be required Balancing production and consumption At present private capital expenditures are running at percent of the Nation 's Economic Budget reflecting in part the need to make up for wartime and some prewar deficiencies. The shift to more sustainable long-run patterns will require a relative decline to about or percent of the Nation 's Economic Budget though perhaps a moderate increase in absolute amounts. In addition certain other elements of the Nation 's Economic Budget such as the Government 's foreign-aid program and expansion of business inventories will decline in absolute or relative importance. To some extent urgently needed domestic programs of the Government will take their place. Nevertheless to reach sustainable patterns of growth will require that personal consumption increase by considerably more than total output and assume a larger relative share in the Nation 's Economic Budget. This means that the general standard of living can and should rise substantially In the immediate situation there may appear to be a conflict between the increase in consumption needed to attain long-run objectives and the actuality of inflationary forces to which largely increased consumer demand would further contribute. The more fundamental danger is that the automatic forces of the market tending to increase consumption are of uncertain and perhaps insufficient strength to bring about needed changes in the patterns of income and expenditure when the temporary factors in demand decline One of the great dangers ahead is that the process of adjusting to these changed patterns will lead us into a depression through failure of consumption to rise sufficiently. But to be forewarned is to be partly though not wholly forearmed. Major reliance should be placed upon and full encouragement given to those free automatic forces within the economy which bring about adjustments. We must get from privately organized activities as much handling of the Nation 's economic problems as they are capable of achieving. But we should be prepared to supplement them when needed through appropriate Government policies directed toward economic balance at the highest feasible levels of activity. In this we should not neglect the problems of those whose living standards have lagged seriously even during past and present periods of high prosperity PROMOTING ECONOMIC GROWTH The Government has played an historic role in stimulating the growth of private industry. In earlier times this aid took the form of grants and protective tariffs. Present-day conditions require new methods. One of these developed in recent decades and particularly during the war is Government scientific research and development Research and information Progress in this field for military purposes indicates the tremendous benefits that may result from scientific research for peacetime application. Research in managerial techniques and market information can also be of great value particularly to small business. The fact-gathering and statistical services of the Government are of enormous value to business managers farmers and others. There are many gaps in this service which will need to be filled in future years at the same time that care is exercised to see that duplication is avoided and economies are effected. Standardization and grading of commercial products and regulation of containers and practices have also promoted equitable and economical commerce The Government can make a signal contribution to the steady expansion of private industry by accepting responsibility for promoting maximum levels of employment production and purchasing power. When business has confidence in the determination to exercise this responsibility vigorously investment planning will be guided more by long-range objectives of economic growth and will be influenced less by fear of impending downswing and depression. The major task of such investment planning would then be to gauge correctly the impact that an expansion in national income will have on the demand for specific products instead of guessing whether general economic activity is going to expand shrink or collapse. The Economic Reports under the Employment Act should progressively help in this task Financing business expansion Since the war capital in large amounts has been available for business reconversion and expansion. This has been due mainly to the large volume of liquid assets accumulated by business during the war as revenues expanded faster than indebtedness and to the unprecedented volume of profits available since the war for reinvestment. Also both long- and short-term credit has been available at low interest rates. The only source of capital which does not appear to have been large compared with earlier experience has been outside equity capital. Total new money raised in the stock market has been somewhat smaller than during the prosperity of the late twenties. But this has been so far offset by retained earnings that business debt-equity ratios are now generally more favorable than in the two previous decades Whether the financial needs of business can be satisfied in the future depends importantly on the level of profits. These are the immediate source from which the bulk of financial needs is met and are also an important factor in the availability of outside capital both loan and equity Abundant profits during the past two years have stimulated and permitted CHART SOURCES AND USES OF CORPORATE FUNDS Internal sources mainly retained net earnings and depreciation reserves supplied a larger part of corporate financial requirements in than in 1947BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS USES SOURCES 'OTHER * OTHER * m r ^ ~ ~ * K * \ PLANT AND t EQUIPMENT ~ ~ RETAINED NET EARNINGS AND DEPLETION ALLOWANCES " " ! Hi _am * * * SEE APPENDIX TABLE C ESTIMATES 8ASE0 ON INCOMPLETE DATA SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( ESTIMATES BASED ON SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION AND OTHER FINANCIAL DATA ) __ .CASH AND U.S SECURITIES NET NEW SECURITY ISSUES 888< INCREASE IN W INVENTORIES to DEPRECIATION RESERVES >- business investment so large in proportion to total national income that it is probable that investment of a lower proportion in the future will meet our long-term peacetime needs. The general level of profits should continue to be ample so long as we are successful in maintaining high production and employment It should not be assumed however that financial resources will be adequate for all types of business or that a higher share of equity investment would not be desirable. Difficulties arise particularly for small and new business enterprises which often find it difficult to obtain long-term bank loans and practically impossible to secure outside equity capital. It is undoubtedly true that certain features of our tax system bear particularly on equity financing. When a reduction in taxes becomes possible the tax system should be revised to strike the best balance between the objectives of maintaining adequate consumer markets and of providing capital of the needed character in adequate amounts Important also are the long-range changes that have taken place in the distribution of income and in the saving habits of the people. Economic policy should recognize that the bulk of saving will come from people in the middle income brackets who are rightly more concerned with the safety of their investment than with gains that involve high risks. This calls for financial institutions that transform these savings into venture capital Study should be made of the experience of Nation-wide or local investment companies which can extend venture capital with diversification of risks. The possibilities of developing other types of organization which could effectively channel private savings into venturesome fields of investment and the extent to which the Government can promote them require thorough exploration. Also the legal and economic problems of investment of insurance reserves require continuing study in the light of the change in saving habits of the people and the changing demand for industry financing The Council of Economic Advisers will continue its work upon these problems Promoting competition The problem of achieving a steady rate of growth of our economy is intimately bound up with the way the price mechanism operates. If it operates so as to promote balance among prices wages and profits the role which Government will be called upon to play in seeking to maintain high levels of employment is thereby reduced. A healthy competition among sellers is an indispensable prerequisite for the proper functioning of the price mechanism in promoting a balanced growth in the rates of consumption and investment In this connection the role of the antitrust policy is of fundamental importance. It is designed to hold in check private monopolistic control to encourage the competitive forces which induce improvement and expansion and to maintain freedom of entry for new and enterprising firms. The im- portance of strengthening the antitrust laws has been repeatedly emphasized in earlier Economic Reports Healthy competition however can not be kept adequately in play simply by legal prohibitions. It must rest upon the attitudes and motivation of business managements. If they were generally to prefer monopoly to competition restrictionism to expansion high profit margins on low production to lower profit margins on high production security to innovation then the essential basis of the private enterprise economy could be undermined Whether competition is effective now lies substantially within the control of business itself. In highly concentrated industries there is a choice between two roads to profits. One lies in the direction of exploring all avenues of reducing costs and prices and expanding sales the other in the direction of exploring all avenues of avoiding price competition with one 's rivals. The latter if dominant could greatly retard growth even though held short of practices and agreements in violation of the antitrust laws If the Government uses the fiscal and other powers at its disposal to moderate the swings in general business activity effective competition should keep cost-price margins down to the levels of reasonable necessity and adjust capacities to the expectation of greater stability. The extent to which this effective competition in large-scale industry is forthcoming will do much to determine what kind and degree of Government action will be needed to promote economic stability and growth Agricultural growth Our production goals require not only continued expansion of total agricultural output but also particular adjustments to the anticipated domestic and foreign demand pattern for foods and other farm products. In addition shifts in types of output and in farming practices are needed to sustain the fertility of our land. Increased agricultural investment both public and private is needed in order to support these changes and to make the most efficient use of our labor Achievement of these goals will require rapid advancement of farm technology and its practical application. This means emphasis on research education and other programs to aid farmers in carrying out shifts in production and management practices. These programs should include special technical assistance and adequate credit facilities Long-term programs for supporting farm prices and incomes because of their immediacy are discussed somewhat more fully in Part II of this report The long-run downward trend in the proportion of our total labor force needed for farm production requirements will continue. It is essential to broaden the educational opportunities for farm children and to plan vocational training that will help a part of the farm population to qualify for profitable off-farm pursuits It is one of the unfortunate but salient phenomena of our economy that countless families have incomes too low to maintain adequate diets even in periods of high prosperity ; and all too frequently these families have suffered even more than others when prosperity has tapered off or disappeared While better training for earning higher incomes should be the main approach to this problem we know realistically that it creates a vicious circle to wait for families to improve their own lot while depriving them of the food housing education and medical care which must be at the foundation of this improvement. Our national nutrition program should be further developed CONSERVING AND DEVELOPING THE NATION 'S RESOURCES Continuing heavy demands for national security and foreign aid following the war place a heavy drain on many natural resources while at the same time requiring some reduction and deferment of essential programs for their conservation and development. Yet the requirements of a high-level economy for agricultural and forest products oil minerals electric power and other basic materials can be met only by early action. This calls for a careful screening process selecting the most urgent and productive projects for development now and pushing ahead with preparatory work for others We must re-examine our development programs in such fields as reclamation and assess them in terms of our national production objectives and of alternative means for achieving the same results. There is danger in doing too much now ; there would equally be danger in a penny wise but pound foolish policy that weakened our native strength Water resources and power A number of programs and projects are now being undertaken particularly in the West for controlling and using water for various purposes including irrigation navigation flood control hydroelectric power and industrial and municipal use. Some of these programs require re-examination in a broad perspective to determine which essential aspects such as hydroelectric power development should be pressed forward with great speed and which may be postponed The desirable annual increase of percent in the output of the economy is not likely to be achieved without a considerably greater increase in electric power. It has been indicated that facilities able to produce million kilowatts of electric power should be added annually to our capacity. Perhaps percent of this might be furnished most efficiently through public hydroelectric power developments at an average annual cost in the neighborhood of million dollars including programs for which the Federal Government has direct responsibility. It is essential that public power programs be expanded in the coming year including construction of transmission lines where needed even where this requires temporary allocation of scarce materials for construction of dams and generators. Hydroelectric power tends to be lower cost power ; it economizes irreplaceable mineral fuels Land resources While much progress has been made in the conservation and efficient use of our existing farm land through education cooperation and the efforts of individual farmers much remains to be done. One quarter of our cropland is being damaged at a rapid rate by erosion and other causes and should be placed under sound conservation practices within the next ten years Our conservation program must be intensified. We should add substantially to our land resources through drainage and irrigation while some land now being farmed should be returned to grass and timber We should make clear to all that public range lands which comprise percent of all range land in the West will be protected and that grazing shall not exceed the sustainable carrying capacity of the range with allowance for other possible uses. We should plan to spend increasing amounts for conserving and restoring those lands. Additional credit should be released for long-range soil conservation Production of concentrated fertilizer from western phosphate deposits should be developed further as part of a program to increase agricultural output Forests There has been no measurable improvement during the past year in our timber prospects. The saw timber cut still far exceeds annual growth. The depletion of our remaining supply especially in small privately owned forest properties is proceeding so rapidly that immediate consideration should be given to legislation for regulation of forest practices. Unless much more rapid progress is made along lines of improved private practices or State legislation for the control of cutting practices national interest and security will require Federal-State action. As in the case of soil conservation improved long-term credit would be helpful. Other forest conservation should be strengthened. Our depleted forest resources should be rebuilt to meet fully our needs on a sustained-yield basis Petroleum and other minerals In terms of production objectives and national security and in the light of the continuing shortages of domestic supply relative to demand new sources and substitutes for petroleum and scarce minerals are needed. A synthetic liquid fuels program now offers the best hope for relieving the mounting pressure on our limited supply of natural petroleum. Under present Federal programs about million dollars annually will be spent during the next few years not including any additional funds that may be provided to assist in the construction of plants of commercial size. The development of tidelands oil reserves should be so regulated that waste is eliminated as far as possible. Programs for a continuous appraisal of our minerals position geologic exploration and mapping and research on utilization of submarginal mineral deposits and substitutes should be expanded as one element of a larger program emphasizing basic scientific research The cost of expanding these research and study programs would be about million dollars a year The need for program review If properly directed this improvement in the utilization of our land forest water mineral and other basic resources will yield a rich national dividend. To a large extent these programs will pay for themselves through the sale of electricity through repayments by farmers for use of water and indirectly through increased productivity stable communities and higher tax revenues. It is imperative that utmost care be taken in planning these huge investments in all phases of program formulation timing of construction and operation A large number of Government departments and agencies and private organizations are involved in the planning and execution of these programs Several congressional committees are concerned with closely related aspects of the same program. Among the Federal agencies concerned there is much overlapping of legislative authority and many contradictions in financing procedures administrative methods and water-use policies. A new approach is needed to assure a program of national resources development that is geared into the economic needs and potentialities of the country One of the reasons for establishment of annually revised production goals is the need for benchmarks which may be used in the appraisal of long-range Government investment programs. The irrigation of land the production of power and navigation facilities programs for the conservation and development of mineral resources and the like must be examined in the light of production needs for industrial and agricultural products for energy and for transportation. The present time during which the less urgent aspects of these programs can proceed only at a slow pace should be used for a thorough re-examination of the consistency of the programs with our national objectives of future benefits related to present costs of comparative urgency and usefulness of various programs and of the best methods of procedure and organization In advancing a unified program for the development of water agriculture forests and other resources and in promoting social and economic welfare in a large region we can learn much from the successful experiment in the Tennessee Valley. Experience has shown that an authority of this type can coordinate effectively a variety of programs and cooperate with States and localities and with private individuals and groups The same methods may or may not be applicable to the development of other river valleys. The programs in the Missouri River and Columbia River and other river basins should be examined in order to perfect coordinated development plans Housing The problem of housing involves an almost unique complex of inseparable economic and social considerations. Housing is both a prime outlet for capital investment and a prime consumer satisfaction. It looms so large in the investment picture that a large and sustained volume is essential for maximum employment and production ; in the latter frame of reference a large and sustained volume is essential for the conservation of human resources and the well-being and contentment of the individual. In an increasingly urban population housing is at the center of the network of developCHART NEW HOUSING STARTS Starts have been declining since spring and in recent months have been running below the rate THOUSANDS OF UNITS THOUSANDS OF UNITS NEW NONFARM DWELLING UNITS ^ J \ I I I I ! I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR ments that range out over the city stores schools hospitals factories transportation. It figures largely in community revenues and costs And yet our housing supply has lagged behind the rise in our general standards of living and far behind our real capacities. Slums corrode our cities and shacks blot our rural landscape. Even in prosperous times for example between and residential production was unstable and when the depression came it sank to about percent of " normal. " After despite extensive public and private efforts the industry revived more slowly than almost any other important activity In the postwar period within the short space of three years we have already witnessed a substantial expansion in home building which cut into the acute shortage but has served the population very unevenly. Starts have commenced recently to decline. This decline has been taking place not because of shortages of manpower or materials not because the housing needs of the country have been met and not because " backlogs " in any real sense have disappeared. It is occurring because the housing product more conspicuously than any other has priced itself out of any reasonably defined market. This is not a mere inflationary phenomenon but rather the resumption of a long prewar trend. It reflects the technological backwardness of the housing industry and a host of related conditions such as land use and local taxation Analyses based on the assumption of continued full employment and high national income indicate that our housing needs can not even be approached without a comprehensive program. Against an estimated annual need of a million or more new dwelling units in urban areas for a 10-year period analysis shows that perhaps one-fifth or more can be provided at workable rent-income relationships only through subsidized low-rent housing. A very substantial part of the balance of the need will require large-scale private institutional investment quite different in its nature from the smallscale home building that has typified the industry Most of the houses built since the war high in price have either served the needs of the high income groups or with the aid of very high public guarantees to private investors have been sold to people of low or moderate means at costs which might involve losses both to them and to the Government in the long run. About percent of the housing now being built is for sale although veterans and others with families of uncertain future size and jobs of uncertain tenure would much prefer to rent. And now the decline in starts has set in before achieving even for one year a rate of new construction as high as the estimated annual need for ten years Vigorous efforts to reduce housing costs are an essential part of a longrange program but can not be expected to produce prompt enough results to meet pressing current needs. Such efforts should recognize that a large and assured volume is the best foundation for achieving economy in production or for working out changes in hourly wage rates consistent with fair annual earnings and reasonable security for the workers involved Enactment of the remaining portions of the comprehensive housing program already before the Congress would be a starting operation toward the more effective solution of the housing problem. It would provide facilities for research and better community planning directed toward lower costs ; it would aid in the assembly of land areas suitable for redevelopment ; it would provide a modest flow of rental housing for families of low and moderate income in urban areas ; and it would directly tackle the insufficiency and inadequacy of rural housing But these proposals are inadequate. For example the provision of units a year of low-rent housing in urban areas should be substantially increased. If this were accompanied by a more rigorous screening of Federal aid in the form of insurance or guarantees for high-priced housing it would not lead to a higher total volume than should be undertaken immediately in view of competing demands upon the economy * In fact less materials per house would be used and the composition of house production would be more in accord with sustainable patterns for the future The increase in the Federal financial burden imposed by a more adequate program would be moderate. While every additional dollar in the Budget makes it larger the inflationary impact should be measured by the effect on the housing industry as a whole. The amount of housing generated by this expanded program would absorb less critical materials and manpower than an equal number of units built for the higher-priced trade Human resources The end objective of our economic and political system is to provide the individual with the means for a high standard of living and with wider opportunities for cultural pursuits. These aims will be furthered by the dedication of more of our resources to education to health to housing and to the enrichment of the whole physical environment both urban and rural in which people live and work and play. The specific programs directed toward these ends and their intimate relationships to a healthy economic structure have been identified in the Economic Report of the President last year and in subsequent messages. It is therefore unnecessary to spell them out in detail again here. But this does not imply any abatement of interest on the part of the Council of Economic Advisers in their fulfillment. As our continuing studies shed more light upon how these programs may be even more closely integrated with the maintenance of a high level of economic activity or how improvement in them may have general economic significance we shall treat of them again INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC RELATIONS Balanced economic growth will require large increases in our imports of raw materials and many other goods and services. Our own interests require that we concentrate domestic productive efforts in those fields where we can produce most efficiently and not draw down our reserves of exhaustible resources unduly. We need large imports to strengthen our conservation policy and increase the stock piles of critical materials ; our imports also provide exchange to purchasers of our exports The main lines of international economic policy for balanced economic growth have already been laid out and great progress has been made in implementing them. The initiation of the European Recovery Program was the main additional step taken during in pursuit of the goal of world recovery and reconstruction. Further progress was also made toward creating conditions for the post-recovery exgansion of world trade on a nondiscriminatory and multilateral basis. The proposed charter for an International Trade Organization was accepted after difficult negotiations by countries ; and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade came into effect. These measures are important steps in the direction of reducing the barriers to world trade Another aspect in the development of international economic policy is the better coordination of our international trade policies with policies in certain other areas of the economy. The present situation of prosperity at home and of extensive American participation in economic affairs abroad offers a favorable opportunity for progress in this field Conflicts between our foreign and domestic programs lie less in general policy than in specific actions. The most serious of these arise out of programs designed to protect domestic producers of specific commodities While these conflicts tend to be submerged in periods of intense demand and inflationary pressure they may be expected to appear in acute form when some markets ease. The best time to resolve these conflicts is now The basic approach in readjusting these domestic programs to our international policy should be similar to that involved in the improvement of farm price support policies : namely to provide the necessary degree of domestic support in periods when it may be needed but at the same time to encourage adjustment of production in line with the basic supply and demand conditions throughout the world. Existing programs adopted to protect less productive industries indefinitely not only are contrary to our basic international policy but also impede our efforts at home to make full and efficient use of our resources. They are a hangover from a period of fear of inadequate market and employment opportunities Even with the maximum feasible level of imports substantial foreign investment will be needed to maintain a level of exports sufficiently high to avoid a painful readjustment in certain areas of domestic agricultural and industrial production. Furthermore such investment will probably be requisite if Western Europe is to relax its restrictive policies and still balance its international payments at a high level after the European Recovery Program is over In the international field the inseparability of economic and political objectives is particularly apparent ; and it is not only in Western Europe that our economic policy must serve a dual purpose. Major areas of the world have emerged from the prewar and war years with a determination to develop their own economic resources by improving their industrial and agricultural equipment. This determination reflects a basic popular aspiration on the part of hundreds of millions throughout the world towards higher standards of living and economic progress after centuries of grinding poverty. The United States can not maintain its world position of moral prestige and political leadership unless it positively supports those aspirations Our abundant stock of capital and large savings enable us to do this by making both capital goods and our knowledge of technology and production methods available abroad. This function is now being performed in a small degree by private capital either directly or through the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. It is to be hoped that it can be done more fully by private capital rather than Government aid as foreign countries bent on capital development give reasonable assurance of safety to private investors. This they must do if they wish to secure capital in large amounts FROM INFLATION TO STABILITY Stabilization policy for the immediate future is still concerned mainly with restraining inflationary forces breaking bottlenecks and selectively adjusting the markets and prices of some commodities. Yet this report has designated some basic longer run maladjustments concealed under cover of the inflationary boom. Since the war increases in consumption have been limited by the very high demands of business for reconversion and modernization after the war and by requirements for national defense and foreign aid. Our analysis shows that over the ensuing years consumer income and expenditure should be increased both absolutely and relatively The fundamental issue is : Will this increase result automatically through the interplay of prices and costs in the market place ? Or will a depression appear when the gap between potential output and effective demand of consumers and business becomes unmanageable as has happened in the past ? Or can affirmative policies as envisaged in the Employment Act close or bridge this gap before it becomes a chasm ? Fundamental strength of the economy It is true that the economy today is in much better position to withstand shock than in the twenties. Business has become better informed and more prudent particularly in its inventory policies. There has been less speculation generally. The so-called " built-in flexibilities " such as the social security system veterans ' programs and the farm price-support program would all have a cushioning effect in case of a downswing. In general large Government budgets make an economy more resistant to shock and on the revenue side the progressive income tax increases flexibility. War-created liquid assets in the hands of business State and local governments and individuals could act as an immediate shock absorber even though their real value has been reduced by inflation. Federal deposit insurance would operate against large-scale withdrawals of funds such as occurred during the last depression and the Reconstruction Finance Corporation could exert some mitigating influence. Finally with a tight labor market more breadwinners per family and more progressive taxation the distribution of income has improved since the prewar period although these gains have been halted by inflation Vulnerability of the economy These improvements however probably do not outweigh the fact that a very high-level economy which has been supported by an investment boom and permeated with inflation is vulnerable to sharp declines. Moreover in terms of the basic problems of lifting consumption to higher levels in the years ahead we can not rely on a simple reversal of the inflationary process with its accompanying lag in consumption. When price weakness becomes widespread businessmen tend to become pessimistic and often curtail investment and production ; consumer purchases are deferred. The stickiness of many prices enhances the shrinking of production as demand falls off Consumers ' real incomes are cut by unemployment more quickly than they gain by price declines. The slack thus develops into a downward spiral Preventive measures More important than the preparation of measures to combat a depression after its advent are those measures which reduce the likelihood of a serious downturn in the economy by correcting maladjustments in time The long-term problem of a shift in the balance between investment and consumption depends for its solution largely upon an improved working of the market mechanism. Adjustments in prices and in wages or some combination of the two are the primary tools. In general these adjustments entail an upward movement of wages relative to prices. But these adjustments require the drawing of some very delicate lines. It is not easy to determine the exact point at which price decreases which increase sales become price decreases which impair business confidence or income and thus reduce production. It is not easy to determine the exact point at which wage increases which add to purchasing power become deflationary because they add too much to costs. It is difficult through the market mechanism alone to solve the problem of timing to determine just when the shifts in the composition of national income and spending should be encouraged without being either excessively inflationary or excessively deflationary Furthermore these shifts involve the interests of powerful organized groups and also involve competing social priorities or values so that agreements are frequently not easy to reach The problem of inflation is not limited to the peculiar conditions of the " postwar boom. " There is a continuing possibility of increases in prices and wages in an economy sustained at high levels of activity. Here lies a problem of long-range wage and price policies that must be solved within the context of general labor-management relations. The important organized groups within the economy such as business labor and agriculture need both the economic analysis and the practical machinery which will enable them better to harmonize their separate interests with the common good and to compose even if not completely agree upon those matters which from a narrower perspective might seem irreconcilable. The work under the Employment Act of boldly conceived and faithfully exercised can help to improve the economic analysis and to stimulate the cooperation required for this central aspect of stabilization in a free enterprise democracy Experience teaches that Government policies are also necessary. One type of public policy the expansion of social security programs is particularly appropriate now because it would strengthen mass purchasing power and markets in the long run while contributing immediately to the restraint of inflationary pressures. By increasing the coverage and benefits of unemployment and old age insurance by introducing disability and health insurance and by providing more adequate public assistance we would thus contribute towards that reconciliation of immediate and longer-run needs which is so difficult to achieve through the market mechanism To have the optimum immediate anti-inflationary effect payroll taxes should be increased by more than the increase in benefit payments. To have the optimum long-range stabilizing effect the expansion of these programs should not be financed exclusively by payroll taxes. It should draw some support in future years from general budget sources A minimum wage realistically adjusted to present price levels also helps to maintain a floor under wage incomes Future tax revisions should also take account of the need to strengthen consumer markets even while they should not neglect the need for stimulating investments especially in areas which offer both great rewards and heavy risks These social security programs minimum wage laws and tax revisions are recommended on the ground of social objectives. These same programs however have an important economic impact and may help to maintain or increase the purchasing power of a considerable sector of the people Balanced growth. The upward adjustment of consumer incomes relatively to prices will be essential in the future to establish sustainable patterns of balanced economic growth. It is important that these adjustments be made. But we can not be sure that these adjustments alone will insure an increase in consumption and the maintenance of a high level of activity Decreases in prices or increases in costs may lead to a recession if they occur at a time when markets are weak and aggregate demand is shrinking Therefore it is essential that during threatening times adequate support be given to demand while fundamental adjustments are going on Such support may be provided by stepping up these basic governmental programs which are essential to economic growth. At times it may become necessary to supplement these programs by specific measures to insure stability. Without adjustments in the price-wage-profit relationship we shall not be able to place the economy on a basis of continuing stability Without the simultaneous adoption of policies designed to promote economic growth we may not safely rely on the adjustments. It is necessary to combine measures that promote growth with those that support stability in an integrated program We should adapt our policies accordingly. In schools housing health and community facilities resource development and conservation transportation and other fields there are enormous discrepancies between the work now being done and the needs of a growing economy. Advance planning on all these fronts should go forward in larger magnitudes than present programs can be pushed. With careful timing these programs should be stepped up sufficiently so that adjustments in costs prices and profits can be made on a strong underpinning which prevents adjustments from turning into a downswing Appendix A The Nation 's Economic Budget Tables A-l A-2 A-3 A-4 A-5 A-6 The Nation 's Economic Budget and Consumer account and Business account and International account and Government account and Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing and Federal cash surplus or deficit A-7. Federal cash payments by function A-8. Federal cash payments by type of recipient A-9. Reconciliation of Budget receipts with Cash Receipts from the Public A Reconciliation of Budget payments with Cash Payments to the Public Page The Nation 's Economic Budget The Nation 's Economic Budget is designed to show significant changes in the economy as indicated by the receipts and expenditures of consumers business and government and by international transactions. The net additions to and absorption of saving of these groups are also shown in the Budget. The total of the Nation 's Economic Budget measures the gross national product i. e. total current production of goods and services On the receipts side the total consists of wages and salaries retained business earnings and other incomes relating to current production and on the expenditure side of purchases of current output Besides expenditures for current output and the corresponding receipts there are transfers of purchasing power such as government payments to social security beneficiaries and veterans ' pensions. While governmental transfers are not derived from current production as a source of purchasing power they do not differ from any of the payments that are so derived They have an important bearing on production and prices and are included in the Nation 's Economic Budget. Omitting transfers from government accounts would understate the size and impact of government budgets on incomes and expenditures of consumers business and foreign trade. In an economic analysis transactions directly related to current production and governmental transfers must both be taken into consideration In the presentation of the Nation 's Economic Budget in previous economic reports transfers were accordingly included with the other governmental transactions on the expenditure side and the receipt of such transfers in total receipts of consumers. The sum of receipts and expenditures including both transfers and transactions related to current production is of course in excess of the gross national product. In order to reconcile with the gross national product which is the magnitude used to measure economic activity an adjustment was made to deduct the transfer items. This large adjustment item gave rise to many questions In the present revised presentation of the Nation 's Economic Budget an attempt has been made to limit the " adjustment " item to corrections of a statistical character. Government transfers are shown separately from expenditures for goods and services in the government expenditure account and also shown as separate items of receipts in the accounts of consumers business and foreign countries and international organizations. These transfer items and subtotals including transfer items are shown in italics while the flows relating to current production are shown in roman type Only the latter figures are added to arrive at the total. This total then needs no major adjustments to make it equal to the gross national product Since the transfers of the government augment the income of consumers business or foreign countries the transfer expenditures and receipts are conceptually equal. The small discrepancy between the totals is due to statistical problems of measurement. ( See note to line of table A-l. ) Tables A-2 through A-5 contain the accounts of consumers business international transactions and the government. They indicate how the receipts and expenditures in each account have been derived and present some break-down of the totals where this has been feasible. Some textual explanatory material relating to the consumer business and international accounts may be found in the Midyear Economic Report of the President of July Table V the government account is new in its present form It shows the reconciliation between taxes estimated on a payment or a liability basis ( personal and indirect business tax payments liabilities on corporate income ) and cash receipts from the public and between expenditures for goods and services and cash payments to the public. ( Table A-5 takes the place of tables and of appendix A in the Midyear Economic Report July ) Following the government account table A-5 there are three supplementary tables on Federal cash receipts and payments. These tables show ( a ) Federal cash receipts by major tax sources ( b ) Federal cash payments by major governmental function and ( c ) payments according to the type of recipient who initially receives the payment whether consumers business foreign countries or State and local governments. ( Tables A-6 A-7 and A-8. ) These tables are designed to give an insight into the impact of the government on the economy. To aid in analysis advance estimates are given for calendar in addition to actual data for and late estimates for The estimates of payments are based on the President 's program and are consistent with the proposed Budget of the United States for fiscal The estimates of tax receipts however are based in general on present tax legislation Tables A-9 and A-10 show the reconciliation of Budget receipts with cash receipts from the public and Budget expenditures with cash payments to the public. A brief explanation of these reconciliations is contained in the Midyear Economic Report page 8i TABLE A l The Nation 's Economic Budget Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] First half Item No Economic group Receipts Expenditures CONSUMERS Disposable income relating to current production Government transfer payments and net interest Disposable personal income Expenditures for goods and services Personal saving BUSINESS Retained business receipts from current production Government transfers __ ._ __. _ Total receipts _ _ Gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) _ INTERNATIONAL Net cash government loan transfers abroad _ Net foreign investment Excess of investment ( ) G O V E R N M E N T ( Federal State and local ) Tax payments or liabilities __ __ Adjustment to cash basis __ __ _ Cash receipts from the public Purchases of goods and services. Government transfers _ Cash payments to the public _ Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) ADJUSTMENTS For receipts relating to gross national product.Other adjustments Total : gross national product _ ( ) or deficit Excess of receipts ( ) or deficit ( ) or deficit S Excess of receipts ? Receipts Expenditures Receipts Expenditures _ Excess of receipts Second half i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer payments and receipts and subtotals including them are in italics ; they are not included in the gross national product Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : This table is based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce and Federal cash receipts from and payments to the public as estimated by the Bureau of the Budget. Estimates for the last half of the year have been prepared especially for the Council of Economic Advisers by these agencies and are based on incomplete data. A number of the principal series comprised in the income and product estimates are shown in appendix C tables C-l through C-6 Those desiring more detailed information may refer to the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business July and to the Survey of Current Business July and November Explanatory notes : Lines : See Table A-2 Consumer Account Lines : See Table A-3 Business Account Lines : See Table A-4 International Account Lines : See Table A-5 Government Account Line : Includes the statistical discrepancy and the current surplus of government enterprises. The statistical discrepancy represents the difference between two independent estimates of gross national product one arrived at by estimating the income received from current output and one by estimating expenditures for this output The adjustment for statistical discrepancy brings the estimate on the receipts side into agreement with that on the expenditure side of the accounts. The discrepancy for was billion dollars and for thefirstand second half of and billion at annual rates respectively. The current surplus of government enterprises must be added to receipts because it has not been included in the income of any sector although it represents income arising from the current production of goods and services Line : An adjustment is necessary to balance the sum of the transfers on the receipts side with that on the payment side because of the fact that somewhat different bases for measurement have been used in estimating various components of receipts and payments. Most of the discrepancies reduce to a difference in timing between the recording of a receipt and a payment. A correction must be made for the difference between the time a tax liability is incurred or payments are made and the time a receipt is recorded by the government. Payment is sometimes made for goods produced in a previous period interest payments on a cash basis differ from the accrued interest shown under consumer receipts etc T A B L E A Consumer account Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] annual rates seasonally adjusted Receipts or expenditures First half Receipts : Personal income arising from current production of goods and services : Salaries wages and other labor income Proprietors ' and rental income _ _ Dividends and private interest _ _ Business transfer payments _._ Total Plus : Net interest paid by Government Other Government transfer payments Equals : Total personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable income Second half i _ Total Saving _ Expenditures : Durable goods Nondurable goods Services i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A Business account Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] annual rates seasonally adjusted Receipts or investment First half Receipts : From current production of goods and services : Corporate profits before tax Less : Corporate profits tax liabilities Dividends E quals : C orporate undivided profits Plus : Capital consumption allowances Less : Corporate inventory valuation adjustment Subsidy payments to business by Government Total Plus : Government transfers Subsidies _ Capital transactions Equals : Retained earnings and additions to reserves Domestic gross investment : Construction .._ Residential nonfann Nonresidential Producers'durable equipment Change in inventories Total Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) _ ( ) __ _ Second halfi Estimates based on incomplete data Fourth quarter estimated by Council of Economic Advisers * Includes acquisition of silver and minor coin not shown separately which was less than million dollars in each period < Less than million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily ^ add to totals because of rounding TABLE A-4. International Account Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] annual rates i Item First half Excess of exports of goods and services over imports Less : Net unilateral 3transfers : Government Private _ Equals : Net foreign investment Second half Less : Government3 long-term capital : Net loans _ _ Subscriptions to the International Monetary Fund and International Bank * _ Excess of investment over Government long-term capital _ Estimates based on incomplete data * Based partly on shipments. Differs from international unilateral aid shown in table A-8 which is on a cash payments basis and is not net * Includes only cash withdrawals under loan agreements. I t does not include noncash transactions such as lend-lease and surplus property credits which are included in text table p. under Government aid * Includes only cash payments on subscriptions to the International Monetary Fund and Bank. In Appendix table C-36 figures include the total subscription including payment in the form of noninterestbearing notes NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding T A B L E A Government account { Federal State and local ) Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] annual rates seasonally adjusted Receipt or expenditure First half Receipts : Tax and non-tax payments or liabilities : Federal State and local Second half i Total Adjustment to cash basis : Non-cash receipts Excess of cash receipts over tax liabilities or payments Total Equals : Cash payments to the public Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) Total Plus : Other Government payments : Transfers to individuals Cash interest payments to the public Transfers to business Loans to foreign Governments and subscriptions to the International Bank and Monetary Fund All other Equals : Cash receipts from the public Expenditures : Purchases of goods and services : Federal State and local ADDENDUM Total cash receipts : Federal State and local Total cash payments : Federal State and local _ _ ___ _ Estimates based on incomplete data Personal and indirect business tax payments and corporation tax liabilities. Includes contributions for social insurance. A breakdown of these estimates may be found for in the Survey of Current Business July table p. They have not yet been published for Consists of deductions from Government employees ' salaries for retirement funds and Government contributions to retirement funds national service life and Government life insurance funds Includes excess of corporation tax receipts over liabilities and excess of personal tax receipts over payments. Cash receipts also include various miscellaneous items such as receipts from sales of surplus property etc Does not agree with net interest paid by Government ( table A-2 ) which is on an accrual basis See table A-3 Business Account ? See table A-4 International Account s This item consists of various other Government cash payments. These payments are not shown as receipts in the other accounts. They include miscellaneous trust account disbursements e. g. withdrawal of deposits made by overseas personnel ; payments for goods and services produced in earlier periods ; checks which have been issued but not paid ( clearing account for outstanding checks ) ; and net payments by Government business enterprises for purposes other than capital formation. In addition an adjustment is made for noncash purchases of goods and services and for surplus property sales NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding T A B L E A-6. Federal receipts from the public other than borrowing and Federal cash surplus Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] actual Item annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half actual preliminary Federal cash receipts from the public : Direct taxes on individuals Direct taxes on corporations Employment taxes Excises and customs Surplus property receipts Deposits by States unemployment insurance Veterans ' life insurance premiums Other Less : refunds of receipts Total cash receipts Federal cash payments to the public estimate Federal cash surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) Includes personal income taxes and estate and gift taxes Based on present legislation Assumes change in method of collections to speed up the payment of liabilities. Includes $ million under proposed legislation advancing the statutory increase in pay-roll taxes from January to July Based on present and proposed legislation NOTE. Figures in this table differ from previously published estimates for the same periods because refunds of receipts are now deducted from gross receipts rather than included as a cash payment. This represents a conceptual revision in the concepts of cash receipts from the public and payments to the public NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding T A B L E A Federal cash payments to the public by function Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] annual rates seasonally adjusted actual Function National defense. International affairs and finance Veterans'services and benefits Social welfare health and security Agriculture and agricultural resources Interest on the public debt Other Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Adjustment to daily Treasury statement _ Second half preliminary _ Deduction from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement Total payments to the public estimate * First half actual Includes proposed legislation Includes almost $ million under proposed legislation to extend coverage of old-age and survivors insurance NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding T A B L E A Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] annual rates seasonally adjusted Payments to actual estimate Total Business : Payments for purchases of goods and services Subsidies and other payments to farmers Loans and investments Interest Subsidy arising from postal deficit Home-mortgage purchases from financial institutions Total International : Loans to foreign governments ( net ) Payments to the International Monetary Fund and International Bank _ Unilateral aid programs Other Total State and local governments and public agencies : Grants-in-aid Interest on the Federal debt Loans Total Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Total Federal cash payments to the public Individuals : Salaries and wages of Federal personnel : Military ( excluding terminal-leave pay to enlisted personnel ) _ Civilian i Allowances to dependents of military personnel Readjustment benefits pensions and other payments to veterans Social insurance beneficiaries _ Loans to home owners __ Interest Other Second half preliminary First half actual ( ) Civilian wages and salaries exclude pay-roll deductions for Federal employees ' retirement and Post Office wages and salaries Also includes cash terminal-leave pay to enlisted personnel cashing of terminal-leave bonds musteringout pay and payment of Government and National Service Life Insurance benefits to veterans ' beneficiaries Repayments exceed loans * Includes interest payments on the Federal debt and a small amount of interest on tax refunds. Interest figures in this table are not comparable with those in Table A-2. Interest in that table includes payments to unincorporated business as well as to individuals and is adjusted for certain inter-account transfers Consists of cash trust account payments other than payment of social insurance benefits and Government and National Service Life Insurance. Such items as repayments of personal funds of military and civilian personnel located overseas which were deposited in trust accounts and payments of earnings to prisoners of war are included Excludes purchases of goods and services by Federal agencies for grants-in-aid to State and local governments and for unilateral aid programs. Such purchases are included in the international and State and local categories to give a comprehensive total for such aid * Less than million dollars In cash payments to the public the Post Office is included on a net basis. The whole deficit is shown here as a subsidy and is included in the business category because the deficit arises primarily out of the subsidy to mail other than first class Not available separately Estimates are on a payments basis while those for unilateral aid in Table A-4 are partly on a shipments basis and are net. Includes payments from Foreign Economic Cooperation Trust Fund " Includes'payments for membership in international organizations and purchases abroad for Army programs NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding T A B L E A-9. Reconciliation of Budget receipts with cash receipts from the public Calendar year [ Billions of dollars ] Calendar year Receipts * Net budget receipts Trust account receipts Total recorded receipts Less : Intragovernmental transactions : Payments to U. S. Treasury by Government enterprises Transfers from general fund to trust accounts Interest received by trust funds on investments in U. S. securities Receipts from sale of surplus vessels transferred to U. S. Treasury but also recorded as a trust account receipt and expenditure Other > Less : Recorded receipts not paid in cash by the public : Deduction from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement funds Other > Equals : Cash receipts from the public i Estimates based on incomplete data * Net of refunds of receipts Excludes billion dollars bookkeeping transfer to Foreign Economic Cooperation trust fund < Less than million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A-10. Reconciliation of budget expenditures with cask payments to the public Calendar year Billions of dollars ] Calendar year Budget expenditures Trust account expenditures Total recorded expenditures Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Adjusted total recorded expenditures Less : Intragovernmental transactions : Payments to U. S. Treasury by Government enterprises Transfers from general fund to trust accounts Interest paid to trust funds on investments in U. S. securities Investments of trust funds and Government enterprises in U. S. securities.. Receipts from surplus vessels transferred to U. S. Treasury but also recorded as a trust account expenditure Other Less : Recorded expenditures not paid out in cash : Deduction from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement funds Interest on savings bonds ( net increase in redemption value of outstanding issues ) Terminal leave bonds issued Plus : Cash payments not recorded as expenditures : Redemption of excess profits tax refund bonds and adjusted service certificates Terminal leave bonds redeemed for cash Redemption of non-interest-bearing notes by the International Bank and Monetary Fund Expenditures of Government enterprises from proceeds of sales of obligations in the market Equals : Cash payments to the public ( * ) ( ) ( ) Based on incomplete data Excludes refunds of receipts Excludes bookkeeping adjustment for billion dollars transfer to the Foreign Economic Cooperation trust fund * Less than million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Appendix B The Distribution of Family Income Before and After Federal Income Tax The distribution of income prewar and postwar Despite the great economic and social importance of the distribution of personal incomes by size classes and of changes in that distribution our statistical data are very incomplete. The best information is for the years and the postwar years but even here the statistical sources leave much to be desired on the grounds of comprehensiveness and comparability. After adjustments have been made in these data to make them as * comparable as possible in all respects however they support the thesis that the distribution of income is now less concentrated than before the war ( table B-l ) TABLE B l Percent of money income received by each fifth of the Nation 's families l Percent of total money income Family units ranked from lowest to highest income All family units Lowest fifth Second fifth Third fifth Fourth fifth Highest fifth Includes single-person families Source : See technical notes p. The shifts in percentage of income going to each fifth of the population do not appear large. But because families at the lower end of the scale have such small incomes to start with small shifts in the distribution represent large improvements in their relative position. The one-half percent increase to in the share of total income received by the lowest fifth represented a nearly percent increase in income per family in this group. This shift in distribution accounted for over $ of their $ average income in ( See also text table p. ) The decline in income concentration from the depression period to the immediate prewar and to the postwar period is most probably due to the In appraising this average which seems very low it should be noted that the term " families " includes one-person families living alone or in hotels and rooming houses Since the income of one-person families runs lower than for families of two or more single persons account for a relatively larger proportion of the lower than of upper income groups virtual elimination of unemployment which raised the share of income of lower and middle groups. The increase in the number of families with more than one earner and the relative increase in farm income are also significant factors. Farm families ' cash income is lower on the average than that of other families but the disparity has been narrowed in the postwar period From the aspect of buying power and family welfare the distribution of income after taxes is more important than the distribution of income received. The trend toward less concentration is somewhat more pronounced if income after taxes rather than income before taxes is compared from the prewar to the postwar period Our figures take account only of the Federal income tax. Information on the impact of all taxes combined sales taxes property taxes income taxes etc. at various income levels is not available for the postwar period The Federal individual income tax which yields more revenue than any other tax is graduated and exempts low-income families. Sales and excise taxes which accounted for over a sixth of all tax collections in bear more heavily than the income tax on lower bracket families who spend a larger percent of their income Table B-2 shows the share of money income going to each fifth of the Nation 's families before and after Federal individual income taxes in and The tax reduced total money income by over percent as compared to less than percent in Consequently the effect of the tax in reducing income concentration was somewhat greater TABLE B Percent of money income before and after tax received by each fifth of the Nation 's families ranked by size of income and l Percent of total money income Family units ranked from lowest to highest income * Before tax * Lowest fifth Second Third fifth Fourth fifth Highest fifth All family units _ fifth _ ^ _ After tax * Includes single-person families Liability for the Federal personal income tax Source : See technical notes p. The effect of the Federal individual income tax in the two years over the higher range of income is shown in more detail in Table B-3 which gives the percentage distribution of families by income levels before and after tax Only percent of families had money incomes before tax in excess of $ per year in and one-fifth of these families were shifted into a lower class by the effect of the tax. The proportion of families with incomes in excess of $ was also reduced by almost one-sixth T A B L E B Percentage distribution of families by money income level and Percent of all family units * Money income classes Before tax Under $ $ $ l,000 $ $ $ l,500- $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ _ $ and over. After t a x Before tax After t a x Includes single-person families Liability for the Federal personal income tax Source : See technical notes p. Changes in income distribution in recent years The trend to less concentration of income that existed before and during the war probably has not continued during the last three years. This was to have been expected since the general inflation of incomes did not extend to all groups equally. To the extent that pensioners retired persons and some others whose incomes are relatively fixed are more frequent at the lower end of the scale the share of income in the lower brackets would decline as a result of inflation. Comparative data suggest some increase in income concentration between and but adequate analysis of the postwar trend must await collection of data. Income after taxes in will partially reflect the changes in the income tax structure made by the Revenue Act of The provision allowing married couples in all States to split their income for tax purposes is particularly advantageous to married couples with combined incomes in high tax brackets especially those who had been filing joint returns. While the raising of exemptions has freed many families at the lower end of the scale from paying income taxes at all and rates in all brackets are reduced the percentage increase in income after tax is greatest for those in a position to benefit by the split income provision A comparison of the distribution by quintiles shown in the President 's Economic Report of January p. with the distribution shown here for would indicate an increase in concentration. However there is some lack of comparability between these two distributions because a separate adjustment for numbers of singleperson families was made in the statistics. Since the income of single persons runs lower than that of other family units this tended to lower the amounts of income in the lower quintiles in as compared to Nonetheless the data before adjustment which are essentially comparable also suggest an increase in concentration TECHNICAL NOTES Sources of data For use has been made of unpublished distributions prepared by the Research Division of the Office of Price Administration based on the National Resources Committee 's study " Consumer Incomes in the United States. " An explanation of the procedures used in analyzing these data may be found on p. of the Economic Report of the President January These distributions were derived from the " Study of Family Spending and Saving in Wartime " ( Bureau of Labor Statistics Bulletin ) and the " Statistics of Income " ( Bureau of Internal Revenue Treasury Department ) " Family Spending and Saving in Wartime " was based on a sample survey of family incomes conducted jointly by the Bureau of Human Nutrition and Home Economics and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The " Statistics of Income " contains tabulations of Federal individual income tax returns for that year The estimates for are based on the " Survey of Consumer Finances " conducted for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System by the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan. The estimate of the tax liability was not based directly on information obtained in the interviews concerning tax returns or on tax returns themselves but on comprehensive data concerning family composition and income assembled in connection with the " Survey of Consumer Finances. " Special tabulations from this Survey were made available to the Council of Economic Advisers through the courtesy of the Board of Governors and the Survey Research Center. The methods used in the " Survey of Consumer Finances " are described in the " Federal Reserve Bulletin " June p. Definition of the family Only the civilian noninstitutional population are included in the estimates. A family unit consists of related persons living in one dwelling A single person living alone is considered as a separate family unit. The estimate of the number of family units in is million ; in million ; and in million Definition of money income Money income refers to income of the civilian noninstitutional population. Income in kind such as imputed rent of owner-occupied dwellings or food and fuel produced and consumed on farms is not included. The estimate of civilian noninstitutional cash income is billion dollars in billion in and billion in Definition of the tax The tax included here is the estimated liability for Federal income tax for the year indicated. Taxes on capital gains and estate and gift taxes are excluded as well as State income taxes Conversion of income into dollars The estimates of average income for each quintile in ( text table p. ) were adjusted to dollars of purchasing power according to the increase in the Consumers ' Price Index adjusted for wartime changes in composition of output. ( See table C-6. ) Comparability with estimates contained in previous Economic Reports of the President The estimates of income before tax included in this report represent a refinement of the estimates contained in the Economic Report of January The estimates of the amounts of income received by upper income groups and by single individuals have been improved by use of data from " Statistics of Income " A detailed discussion of the procedure used to estimate the distributions will be presented at the Annual Conference of the Committee on Income and Wealth of the National Bureau of Economic Research The estimate of the distribution of families by income level before tax represents a minor revision of the estimates contained in table 2-a p. of the Midyear Economic Report July The survey data for income after tax were also presented in the Midyear Report table The present estimates are based on these survey data but are adjusted for population coverage and to agree with an independently estimated aggregate of money income before tax. The estimates for are still preliminary. A need for revisions in the distribution may be indicated by the Statistics of Income which has not yet become available. The distributions for and have been adjusted in the light of the Statistics of Income for those years Appendix C Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power CONTENTS National Income : Page C-l. Gross national product or expenditure G-2. Disposition of gross national product G-3. National income by distributive shares G-4. Personal income C-5. Disposition of personal income C-6. Per capita disposable income in current and dollars Employment and Wages : G-7. Labor force C-8. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments G-9. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries G-10. Average hourly earnings in selected industries C-ll. Average weekly hours in selected industries Production and Business Activity : G-12. Physical production index of goods and utilities C-13. Industrial production index Ill G-14. New construction activity C Business expenditures for new plant and equipment C-l6. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade C Inventories and sales by durable and nondurable goods in manufacturing and trade C-l Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores C-l Distribution of selected agricultural products moving into consumption channels and Prices : C-20. Consumers ' price index C-21. Wholesale price index C-22. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Money Banking and Credit : G-23. Consumer credit outstanding C-24. Loans and investments of all commercial banks C Adjusted deposits of all banks and currency outside banks C-26. Estimated ownership of Federal securities C-27. Bond yields long and short term interest rates and commercial loan rates selected years Corporate Profits and Finance : Page C-28. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations G Profits after taxes large private industrial corporations by industry groups C-30. Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private corporations excluding finance insurance and real estate G Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment private manufacturing corporations by industry groups C Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry groups C-33. Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size classes C-34. Sources and uses of corporate funds International Transactions : C-35. The international transactions of the United States C-36. United States Government aid to foreign countries G-37. United States merchandise exports including reexports by areas quarterly average and C-38. United States domestic merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and C-39. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and C-40. United States general merchandise imports by areas quarterly average and G-41. United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic classes quarterly average and G-42. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic classes quarterly average and Summary : C-43. Changes in selected economic series since and TABLE C-l. Gross national product or expenditure { Billions of dollars ] Period Gross national product GovernPersonal Gross Net foreign ment purconsumpprivate chases of tion exdomestic investment goods and penditures investment services Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half. Second half First half Second half i First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter- First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter V i Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E C Disposition of gross national product Disposition of gross national product Period Total gross national product Export surplus of goods and services Total Government Product war or for national domestic Financed Financed defense civilian by Govuse ernment by other expenditures means aid Billions of dollars ( ) First half Second half * _ First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter s Annual rates : First half... Second half. Percentage of total First half Second half First half Second half a.. First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( * ) i U. S. Government unilateral transfers to foreign countries are included in the export surplus and are excluded from the Government war or national defense expenditures and from product for domestic civilian use a Less than $ * Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers * Percent not shown because dollar figure was less than $ NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce and Bureau of the Budget ( except as noted ) IOQ TABLE C National income by distributive shares [ Billions of dollars ] Proprietors ' and rental income tion o : f employe Period i ii Q Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Corporate profits i ft g C3 m s O EH CO i ' * > EH o3 1929___ 1938___ 1939._ p | Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half Second half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter " First quarter Second quarterThird quarter Fourth quarter National income is the total net income earned in production by individuals or businesses. The concept of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income ( see appendix table C-4 ) and employer and employee contributions for social insurance Net income after inventory valuation adjustment. This adjustment was billion dollars in and billion ( annual rate ) in each half of * Federal and Stato income and excess-profits taxes Less than $ Estimates based on incomplete data ; profits by Council of Economic Advisers and all others by Department of Commerce NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) IOI TABLE C-4. Personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Period Salaries ProprieDiviwages dendsand Transfer Total paypersonal and other tors ' and personal rental interest labor income income income ments income Nonagricultural income * 19301931-_ CO Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half Second halffi First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.._ Fourth quarter ( ) First quarter Second quarterThird quarter.. Fourth quarter ( ) Differs from " compensation of employees " in appendix table C-3 in that it excludes employer and employee contributions to social insurance. Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income compensation for injuries employer contributions to private pension and welfare funds pay of military reservists not on full-time active duty ( pay for full-time active duty included in military wages and salaries ) directors ' fees jury and witness fees compensation of prison inmates Government payments to enemy prisoners of war marriage fees to justices of the peace and merchant marine war-risk life and injury claims See appendix table O-3 for major components See appendix table C-28 for dividend payments * Equals personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net rents agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers fl Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) T A B L E C Disposition of personal income Period Less : Personal Personal tax and income nontax payments Less : Equals : Personal Equals : Dispos- consump- Personal able tion net personal expendi- saving income tures Net saving as percent of disposable income Billions of dollars 1930_ Annual rates seasonally adjusted First h a l f Second half. First half Second half i First quarter Second quarterThird quarter.. Fourth quarter- First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter i Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE C ~ Per capita disposable income in current and dollars Period Disposable personal Population Consumers ' ( thou- price index income ( billions of sands ) ! = dollars ) Per capita disposable personal income Current dollars dollars * 1938_ * Not adjusted for seasonal variation Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half.. _ Second half * First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter * Annual rates Estimated population of continental United States including armed forces overseas ; annual data as of July and quarterly and semiannual data as of middle of period interpolated from published monthly estimates Current dollars divided by the consumers ' price index on the base = to give a rough measure of changes in buying power of disposable income The consumers ' price index has been roughly adjusted to take account of the understatement during the price control period. This adjustment is in line with the report of the Mitchell Committee. The unadjusted index will be found in appendix table C-20 * Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Department of Commerce ( disposable income and population ) and Department of Labor ( consumers ' price index ) IO4 TABLE C-7. Labor force [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Total labor force ( including armed forces ) Period Monthly average : Civilian labor force Armed forces1 Total civilian labor force Employment Total Nonagri- Agriculcultural tural Unemployment _ First half.. Second half First half Second half January February March April ...._ May June July.. August September October November December I,b27 January February March April May June July August September October. __ November December * _ _ 1941___ 1945__ 1946_ _- _ Data for exclude about members of the armed forces who were outside the continental United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the Census. This figure is deducted by the Census Bureau from its current estimates for comparability with data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Labor ( ) and Department of Commerce ( ) TABLE C-8. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments 1Q20-48i [ Thousands of employees ] Manufacturing FedTransTotal eral Con- ports wage State tion Fiand Min- tract Nonconand Trade nance Service and salary Dur- during struc- public local work- Total able governtion utiliable ers goods goods ment ties Period Monthly average : 1930_ 1933___ 1935_ V r ~ " " " First half. _. Second halL " " First half... Second half3. 9,8S2 ^ Q33 1940___ 1943._ 1945__ ( ) January. _ February. _ March April May June July August.. September October November December January _ _ February. March.. April.. May June July August. September October * November * Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked or received pay during the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors selfemployed persons domestic servants and personnel of the armed forces. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force reported by the Department of Commerce ( appendix table C-7 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons and domestic servants ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather or temporary lay-offs and which are based on an enumeration of population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments Not available Includes preliminary estimates for December * Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE C-9. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries M anufacturing Period Total Bitu- Private Class I DUUQminous " Kn-fM steam Tele- w noie- Retail Hotels ( year DurNoncoal ing con- rail- phone sale trade round ) * trade able durable mining struc- roads goods goods $ $ $ $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ 1942.._ tion Monthly average : 1933_ 1938__ _ _ _ _ First half Second half.-. $ m ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) <> ) ( ) $ $ $ $ <> ( ) ( ) ( ) First half Second half e. _ ( ) January February March _ ! April May _ June.. July August __ September-__ October November.. December e January February March April.. May June JulyAugust September.. October November ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips is not included Not available Not available. New series beginning April ; includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees < Annual average includes retroactive pay increases not included in the monthly averages * Includes preliminary estimates for November and December except in the case of class I steam railroads for which data are available only through August Data for these months reflect work stoppages Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for all employees in other industries. Data are for pay-roll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly pay-roll and employment figures are used Source : Department of Labor T A B L E G Average hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Bitu- Private Class I Hotels minous building steam Tele- Whole- Retail ( year consale railcoal Nontrade round ) * Durable durable mining struc- roads phone trade Total goods tion goods Period Monthly average : $ _ $ $ ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( a ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ $ ( ) ( ) $ First half Second half.... First half Second half 's.. January February March April May June July August _ September. __ October November. _ December January February March April May June July August _ September. October e November __ ._ : : ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ $ $ * * Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips is not included a N o t available Not available. New series beginning April ; includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees * Annual average includes retroactive pay increases not included in the monthly averages Includes preliminary estimates for November and December except in the case of class I steam railroads for which data are available only through August Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for all employees in other industries. Data are for pay-roll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly pay-roll and employment figures are used Source : Department of Labor TABLE C l Average weekly hours in selected industries Manufacturing Bitu- Private Class I minous building steam Tele- Whole- Retail saie conNonrailcoal trade phone trade Total Durable durable mining struc- roads goods goods tion Period Monthly average : ) ) ) ) ) ) ) ( ) J ) ) ) ) ( ) ( ) _ 1932___ 1933__ 1935__ 1936___ First half Second half..._ First half Second half3___ ) ) Hotels ( year round ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ( ) January February.. March April May June July August September. October.. November. December.. January February.. March April May June July August September. October s___ November3 C1 ) ) J C ) ) ) ) ) ) ) Not available Average for the year not available because new series was started in April Includes preliminary estimates for November and December except in the case of class I steam railroads for which data are available only through August * Data for these months reflect work stoppages NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for all employees in other industries. Data are for pay-roll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly pay-roll and employment figures are used Source : Department of Labor TABLE C-12. Physical production index of goods and utilities [ = ] Nonagricultural production Total production Period Weights : a Total Nonagricultural Agricultural production Total nonagricultural production Industrial production Total Manufactures Minerals Electric and gas utilities Construction Transportation _ _ First half Second half First half Second half -_ All half year data have been seasonally adjusted except the electric and gas utilities for which no satisfactory adjustment factor is available Computed from the Department of Commerce data of national income. The weight factors are percentages of the national income for each industry to the total for the industries. The weight for construction has been adjusted to include force account and other construction done outside of the contract construction industry the weights for other industry groups to exclude such construction Estimates based on incomplete data * Not available. See footnote * Because of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production only an annual index has been computed Sources ; Based on the following data : Agricultural production. Department of Agriculture index of farm output which measures the physical volume of farm production for human use Minerals. Federal Reserve index of mineral production Manufactures Federal Reserve index of manufacturing production Construction. Department of Commerce value of new construction activity deflated by their index of construction costs and converted into relatives with as Transportation. Department of Commerce index of transportation. The figures for and are estimated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on the basis of transportation data Electric and gas utilities Based on the following series : Electric power generated for public use as reported by the Federal Power Commission and sales of gas to consumers as reported by the American Gas Asso ciation. The two series are converted into relatives with the average for the period as The relative series are combined into an index of public utility production with electric power given a weight of and gas the respective percentages of the revenues b y each of the utilities to the total revenues produced by both in the base period IIO TABLE C-13. Industrial production index [ = seasonally adjusted ] Total industrial production Period Monthly average : Manufacture Minerals Durable Total Nondurable _ First half Second half First half Second half January February March April May June July August _ September October _ November December January February. March April May June July August September October _ November i December * _ _ _. _. __ _ i Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System III TABLE O14. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Public construction By source of funds By type of construction Total Resi- Non- Pubnew den- resilic contial struc- Total build- den- utilpritial tion * vate ing and ( non- build- farm farm ) ing Total public Period Federal Military State and fed- High- Other and erally fi- ways publocal nanced lic industrial Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal variation First half Second half___ First half Second half January February March April May June July August _ September October ___ November December. _ January February March April May June July August September October November December _ Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures in the gross national product Excludes farm and public utility ; for includes negligible amount of public industrial and commercial building not segregable Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Departments of Commerce and Labor TABLE C-15. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Millions of dollars ] Manufacturing and mining Transportation Total Manufac- Mining turing Railroad m Total i ( ) ( ) ( ) Commercial and miscellaneous a Other Electric and gas utilities ( ) ( ) ? Period ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Annual rates not adjusted for seasonal variation First halfSecond half First half Second half _ First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter,i Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Excludes agriculture Includes trade service finance and communication for all years shown. Also includes prior to transportation other than railroad and electric and gas utilities not available separately for those years Not available separately for years prior to * Included hi commercial and miscellaneous prior to Estimates for fourth quarter of and first quarter were based upon anticipated capital expenditures of business NOTE. These figures do not agree with the totals included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce principally because the latter cover agricultural investment and also certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense. Figures for are Federal Reserve Board estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other data Detail will not necessarily add to totals because figures are rounded to the nearest $ Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) " TABLE G-16. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade Manufacturing Wholesale * Retail * Millions of dollars Period Inventories Millions of Millions of Ratio Ratio Ratio dollars dollars of inof inof inventoventoventories to Invenries to ries to Sales * sales tories a Sales * sales Inven- Sales * sales tories * First half. __ Second half First half.. January February. __ March April May June July August September._ October November. December.. January February.. March April May June July August September. _ October _ November : L.31 L.32 L.28 L.31 : L.29 ' L.30 L.30 ] L.36 Not adjusted for seasonal variation Adjusted for seasonal variation Book value end of period Monthly average shown for year and half year and total for month Preliminary figures based on incomplete data NOTE. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of " change in business inventories " included in the gross national product since they cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business, and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Detail ] * will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) TABLE G-17. Inventories and sales by durable and nondurable goods in manufacturing and trade ; [ Not adjusted for seasonal variation ] Total Period Durable goods Nondurable goods Millions of dollars Millions of Ratio Ratio dollars of inof inventoventories to Invenries to Inven- Sales a sales Sales sales tories * tories Millions of dollars Ratio of in- Inven- Sales tories i ventories to sales ' First half... Second half. L.40 : L.25 ] L.18 First half... ] L.27 January February.. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November. December. ] L.76 L.74 L. L.81 L. L.91 : L.76 ] L.62 L.79 L.65 ] L.21 ] L.32 January February. _ March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November. L.92 L.98 ] L.74 ] L.80 ] L.89 ] : L.86 L.72 ] L.79 L.22 ] L.24 ] L.23 ] L.22 ] iL.21 : L.14 L.10 L.19 L.06 L.23 L.35 L.23 iL.26 iL.27 L.23 L.29 L.26 L32 * Book value end of period Monthly average shown for year and half-year and total for month NOTE. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of " change in business inventories " included in the gross national product since they cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) TABLE G Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Millions of dollars * Period Monthly average : Sales ( total for month ) Stocks ( end of month ) First half... Second half Outstanding orders ( end of month ) <> * Ratio of stocks Ratio of orders Ratio of orders to stocks First half Second half January February. _ March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November. December- January February.. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November. i Not adjusted for seasonal variation a Not available Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE.- These figures represent retail sales stocks and outstanding orders as reported by a sample of of the larger department stores located in various cities throughout the country and are not estimates of total sales stocks and outstanding orders for all department stores in the United States. Data are not available prior to Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE G-19. Distribution of selected agricultural products moving into consumption channels and Distribution of supplies Commodity and year Exports and shipments as a percent of total distribution Million pounds Pounds Percent Exports Military Civilian and ship- distribu- distribution tion t * Total i Food : Meat ( carcass equivalent ) : Per capita civilian distribution Million pounds Million pounds Canned fruit excluding fruit juices ( processed weight ) : pack year Dried fruit ( processed marketing marketing marketing marketing Million pounds Dairy products ( milk equivalent ) : K Food fats and oils excluding butter ( fat content basis ) : weight ) : year year year year Million dozen Million dozen Million dozen Number no Fresh fruits ( farm weight ) : Canned vegetables ( processed weight ) : pack year _ _ Fresh vegetables ( farm weight ) : _ Eggs ( fresh egg equivalent ) : See footnote at end of table Million dozen T A B L E C Distribution of selected agricultural products moving into consumption channels and Continued Distribution of supplies Commodity and year Food and nonfood : Wheat ( grain equivalent ) : _ _ Corn ( grain equivalent ) : * Per capita civilian Exports Military Civilian distribuTotal i and ship- distribu- distribution tion tion ments Million bushels Million bushels Million bushels Thousand bales * Thousand bales * Million pounds Nonfood : Cotton : crop crop crop crop year year year year Thousand bales * Tobacco : crop crop crop crop year year year year Million pounds Million bushels Million pounds Pounds food use Exports and shipments as a percent of total distribution Pounds Includes military civilian feeding programs in liberated and occupied areas both from current procurement and from surplus stock Preliminary estimates based on reports for first months and forecasts for balance of year a Includes amounts used for animal feed industrial raw materials and seed except in per capita column If these amounts were excluded the percentages in the last column would be : ; ; ; * Thousands of " running " bales equal to about pounds net per bale. Exports include cotton textiles and yarns on a raw cotton equivalent Estimated domestic distribution ( i. e. S. civilian plus U. S. military ) Domestically produced tobacco on a farm-sales weight equivalent basis and imported tobacco on an unstemmed-weight basis Includes unmanufactured tobacco and an estimated farm-sales weight equivalent of the tobacco used in the exports of manufactured tobacco products Source : Department of Agriculture n8 TABLE C-20. Consumers' ' price index For moderate-income families in large cities [ = ] Period Monthly average : All items Food Apparel Kent Fuel elec- House Misceltricity furand re- nish- laneous frigera- ings tion First half... Second half. First half.. Second half V June January February March April. May June July August September October November December 1930_ ..._ 1945._1946 .-_ _. ._ January _ February March April.. May June July August September October November _ * Estimates based on data available through November Source : Department of Labor TABLE C Wholesale price index [ = ] Other than farm products and foods Period Average : _ First half.. .___ : Second half First half.. Second half * : June January February March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November December January February March. April May June July August September October.. November December __ ._ i Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Labor < TABLE C-22. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Prices received Period Monthly average : Prices paid ( including interest and taxes ) * Parity ratio First half Second half First half Second half * __ January February March _ __ __ April May June July August September October November December __ January... February March April May June July August September October November December i August to July = a = Ratio of prices received to prices paid ( including interest and taxes ) Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE C-23. Consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] End of period Total consumer credit Instalment credit Total Automobile sale credit Charge accounts Other i Other consumer credit a 1930__ 1932__ 1933._ \ [ _ January F e b r u a r y _ March April May _ June July August September. October November. December.. January F e b r u a r y _ March April May. June July August September. October * .__ November * December Includes other sale credit and repair and modernization loans insured by Federal Housing Admin * istration Includes single-payment loans of commercial banks and pawnbrokers and service credit Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE C-24. Loans and investments of all commercial banks [ Billions of dollars ] Investments End of month Total loans and investments Loans Total U. S. Government obligations Other securities June June June June i June June June December __ December December December December June December June June December December December December December December _ Complete end-of-year figures are not available for years prior to Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE C-25. Adjusted deposits of all banks and currency outside banks [ Billions of dollars ] Total deposits adjusted U. S. Governmentl and currency out- deposits side banks End of period Other deposits and currency outside banks Total Demand deposits adjusted Time deposits Currency outside banks June June December _ June December Beginning with December includes U. S. Treasurer 's time deposits open account Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U. S. Government less cash items in process of collection Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System * Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE C-26. Estimated ownership of Federal securities [ Billions of dollars par values * ] Gross debt and guaranteed obligations outstanding End of period Total December December December. December December _ December D ecember D ecember _ December June December 6__ Held by U.S Government agencies and trust Total funds Held by public Nonbank private State Com- Federal and local mercial Reserve corpora- Inditions viduals * govern- banks banks and ments associations * i United States savings bonds Series A-D E and F are included at current redemption values * Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their agencies and Territories and insular possessions Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and insular possessions. Figures exclude securities held in trust departments * Includes insurance companies mutual savings banks savings and loan associations dealers and brokers and foreign accounts in this country. Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and International Monetary Fund in special non-interest bearing notes issued by the U.S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks * Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts fi Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) T A B L E G-27. Bond yields long and short term interest rates and commercial loan rates selected years [ Percent per annum ] U. S. Government security yields Period Bonds month certifiLong15 years cates of term indebted- tially par- and over taxl ness exempt taxable average. average. average. average average. average average average average average High grade corporate bond yields Average ( Moody 's ) of rates Bankers charged acceptcustom- ances ers by days banks in New Aaa Baa principal York bonds bonds Federal Reserve Bank discount rateNew York U.OO U.00 average First quarter Second quarter. __ Third quarter Fourth quarter.. First quarter Second quarter. __ Third quarter Fourth quarter _ Tax-exempt prior to Mar. ; taxable thereafter a Average of yields on all outstanding partially tax-exempt Government bonds due or callable after years rom to ; after years from to ; and after years from From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in one year or less * No partially tax-exempt bonds due or callable in years Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Treasury Department Moody 's Investors Service and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE C-28. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits before taxes Corporate tax liability i ( ) Period Total Dividend payments Undistributed profits Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half... Second half. First half Second half 3_ First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter Fourth quarter _ Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Minus million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE C-29. Profits after taxes large private industrial corporations by industry groups i [ Millions of dollars ] Manufacturing and mining Period t Number of companies m _._ Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal variation First half... Second half. First half Second half. First quarter Second quarter. __ Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter.. Profits after Federal and State income and excess-profits taxes Includes companies engaged in wholesale and retail trade ( largely department stores ) in the amusement industry in shipping and transportation other than railroads ( largely air lines ) and companies furnishing scattered types of service Source : Compiled by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and based on published reports of various industrial corporations TABLE C-30. Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private corporations excluding finance insurance and real estate Private corporations excluding finance insurance and real estate Manufacturing Period Total Mining Total Profits before taxes as percent of sales : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Other Metal manuindus- facturtries ing ComWholemunisale All Trans- cations other and and retail portaindustion public tries i trade utilities Profits after taxes as percent of sales : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter i Includes agriculture forestry and fisheries contract construction and services s Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C-31. Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment ) private manufacturing corporations by industry groups Ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity Industry group Before Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products. Products of petroleum and coal__ Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products. Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks.Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products. _ __ After Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations. Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery. Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks.._ _ Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) _ Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE C Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corpora ' tions bjy industry groups Profits in cents per dollar of sales Industry group total First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Before Federal taxes Furniture and fixtures.Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products. Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) All private manufacturing corporations Food _ Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products _ _- -_ _ After Federal taxes Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles _ Lumber and wood products._ Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal _ All private manufacturing corporations. Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries. Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts _ Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks. _ Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Sources : Federal Tra.de Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission I3Q TABLE C-33. Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by sizje classes Before Federal taxes Assets class ( thousands of dollars ) After Federal taxes total First quarter Second quarter total Third quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Katio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All sizes. _ to to to to and over __ Profits in cents per dollar of sales All sizes. _ to to to to and over Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE C-34. Sources and uses of corporate funds * [ Billions of dollars ] Use or source of funds Uses : Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( increase in book value ) Increase in customer financing Net repayment of R F C loans Other net uses _ _- __ Total sources of funds Discrepancy ( sources less uses ) _ _ Total uses of funds... Sources : Internal sources : Funds retained from operations : Depreciation reserves Retained net earnings and depletion allowances-Reduction in cash and XT. S. Government securities External sources : Increase in bank loans : Short-term Long-term Increase in mortgage loans New security issues : Bonds _ _ _ _ Stocks Increase in liability for Federal income tax_ Increase in trade debt Other net sources * i Excludes banks and insurance companies Estimates based on incomplete data s Net increase ( less than million dollars ) of such loans Sources : Department of Commerce estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data TABLE C-35. The international transactions of the United States [ Millions of dollars ] Item Second Total i half Total Total goods Services Income on investments -_ _ Total exports Imports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods Total goods Services Income on investments Total imports.Surplus of exports of goods and services : Recorded goods. _ _ Other goods Total goods Services Income on investments Total surplus of exports Means of financing surplus of exports of goods a n d services : Net liquidation of gold and dollar assets by foreign countries Net dollar disbursements by : International Monetary F u n d International Bank N e t U. S. private capital outflow to foreign countries Net U S Government loans Net U S. Government unilateral transfers Net private unilateral transfers Total means of financing Errors and omissions _ Exports of goods and services : Recorded goods * Other goods First half First half Second halfi Estimates based on incomplete data Figures for recorded exports of goods in and have been adjusted to include goods shipped to United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas in order to make them comparable with figures for Such shipments are included in exports as recorded by the Bureau of t h Census in b u t were not so included in prior years e Includes goods sold to or bought from other countries t h a t have not been shipped from or into the United States customs area and other adjustments NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C-36. United States Government aid to foreign countries [ Millions of dollars ] Type of aid total A. Unilateral payments : Straight lend-lease UNRRA Post-UNRRA Civilian supplies for occupied areas Transfers to Philippines Chinese aid _ _ __ Greek-Turkish aid International Refugee OrganizationsInterim aid _ European Recovery Program Other First Second Third Fourth First Second Third Fourth quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quarter ter ter i ter ter ter ter ter ( ) ( ( ) ) Ejq u a s : Net unilateral payments Total long-term loans and investments Less : Repayments _ _ Equals : Net long-term loans and investments including International Bank and International Fund Total unilateral payments Less : Unilateral receipts. _ B. Long-term loans and investments : Lend-lease credits Surplus property including ship sales Export-Import Bank United Kingdom loan Investment in International Bank ._ ._ Investment in International Monetary Fund European Recovery Program Other ( ) ( ( ) ) Less : Investments in International Bank and International Fund Equals : Net long-term loans and investments excluding International Bank and International Fund C. Short-term loans ( net ) Net unilateral payments and loans and investments excluding International Bank and International Fund ( A+ B-f- C ) i Estimates based on incomplete data Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE G-37. United States merchandise exports including reexports by areas quarterly average and Period Total Other exports includ- Canada Western ing Hemireexsphere ports AusERP Other coun- Europe Asia * tralia Africa and tries * Oceania Millions of dollars Quarterly average : * First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter Quarterly average : i Turkey is included with E R P countries and excluded from Asia. Exports to Germany in the postwar period relate almost wholly to exports to the three Western zones * Estimate based on incomplete data Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise includmg reexports shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in and goods destined to United States armed forces atjroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE G-38. United States domestic merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and Period Total domestic exports Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured food- Semimanufactures stuffs Finished manufactures Millions of dollars Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * ( ) ( ) <2 ) ( ) ( ) ( ) <2 ) ( J ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter. Second quarter__ Third quarter Fourth quarter 58J3 First quarter Second quarter___ Third quarter... Estimate based on incomplete data Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all domestic merchandise shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in and goods destined to United States armed forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C-39. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and [ = ] Period Total domestic exports Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : i First quarter Second quarter __ Third quarter.. _ Fourth quarter__ First quarter Second quarter ^ Third quarter Unit value indexes Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter i Average of three quarters NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of t h e volume of trade after the influence on value of changes inaverage prices has been eliminated. T h e indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including change in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade. T h e indexes for and are based on data which include goods destined to t h e United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas Source : Department of Commerce x36 TABLE G United States general merchandise imports by areas quarterly average and Other Total general Canada Western Hemiimports sphere ERP countries i Other Europe Asia i Australia Africa and Oceania Millions of dollars Quarterly average : ( ) First quarter... Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : 193648...._ First quarter-. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Turkey is included with ERP countries and excluded from Asia. Imports from Germany in the postwar period relate almost wholly to imports from the three Western zones Estimate based on incomplete data Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise received in the United States customs area from foreign countries. General imports include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising channels plus entries into bonded customs warehouses Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C-41. United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic classes quarterly average and Period Total imports for consumption ManufacFinished Crude ma- Crude food- tured food- Semi-manu- manufac terials stuffs factures tures stuffs Millions of dollars Quarterly average : First q u a r t e r Second quarter Third q u a r t e r Fourth quarter First quarter. _ Second quarter. _ Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Estimate based on incomplete data * Not available NOTE. Imports for consumption include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising or consumption channels plus withdrawals from bonded customs warehouses for consumption Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE C Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic classes quarterly average and [ = ] Total imports for consumption Period ManufacCrude ma- Crude food- tured food- Semimanterials stuffs ufactures stuffs Finished manufactures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : _ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter __ Unit value indexes Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter _ _ i Average of three quarters NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including changes in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade Source : Department of Commerce T A B L E C Changes in selected economic series since and Source : Appendix table number = Economic series Percent changes to Gross national product Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investment Government purchases of goods and services National income Compensation of employees Personal income Disposable personal income Personal net saving Per capita disposable personal income : Current dollars _ dollars ._ Labor force including armed forces. Civilian labor force Employment. Nonagricultural. Agricultural Unemployment _ # TABLE C-43. Changes in selected economic series since and Continued Source : Appendix table number Average gross weekly earnings : Manufacturing Bituminous coal mining Private building construction. Retail trade Physical production of goods and utilities : total Agriculture Nonagriculture __ Industrial production index : total Durable manufactures Nondurable manufactures Minerals Percent changes = Economic series to Inventories : Manufacturing Wholesale- Retail. _ _ _ Sales : Manufacturing Wholesale ._ Retail Consumers ' price index : All items Foods Apparel Rent ._ Wholesale price index : All commodities __ Farm products _ Foods Other than farm products and foods Prices received by farmers Prices paid by farmers ( including interest and taxes ) Parity ratio Consumer credit outstanding end of period Corporate profits : Profits before taxes Profits after taxes Dividend payments Undistributed profits New construction : total _ Private Residential _ _ Nonresidential _ _ __ Public utility and farm. _ Public _ Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Merchandise exports including reexports2 General merchandise imports3_._ i Not available a average = Sources : Appendix C tables as indicated above. Data have been converted to the base U. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. O Price cents I4O