The Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS January THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress January UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL T H E WHITE HOUSE Washington D. C January } The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SIRS : I am presenting herewith my Economic Report to the Congress as required under the Employment Act of In preparing this report I have had the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers members of the Cabinet and heads of independent agencies Respectfully Contents Page I. FOREWORD AND SUMMARY II. LEVELS OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY IN The course of employment and production Employment Production Productivity The flow of goods and purchasing power Consumer income expenditure and saving Business investment income and financing International transactions Government transactions Summary : The Nation 's Economic Budget III PRICE AND INCOME TRENDS AND THE COURSE OF INFLATION... Price trends Wage trends Profits The nature of inflationary pressures Why inflation is dangerous IV LEVELS OF ACTIVITY AND ADJUSTMENTS NEEDED IN Needed levels of employment production and purchasing power Employment objective Production objective Purchasing power objective Fiscal policy to combat inflation The regulation of credit The need for selective controls The need for voluntary restraint Page V. LONG-RANGE OBJECTIVES FOR THE AMERICAN ECONOMY Our ability to grow Development of natural resources and capital equipment Natural resources Business plant and equipment Transportation Urban redevelopment Housing Development of human resources and productivity Size and composition of the labor force Education for the modern economy Research Good health and productivity Security and productivity Fiscal aspects of benefit programs Development of institutions and practices for a highproduction economy Industrial price-wage-profit policies Agricultural and food policies Taxation and debt management International economic relations The timing of economic programs to promote stabilization Appendix A : The Nation 's Economic Budget the Federal Budget and the Distribution of Income prewar and postwar Appendix B : Statistical tables relating to employment production and purchasing power VI To the Congress of the United States : N my first Economic Report to the Congress presented a year ago in accordance with the provisions of the Employment Act of I foresaw a bright prospect for the year In large measure that prospect has been fulfilled However my Midyear Report recorded the fact that agricultural prospects had become less favorable that certain price adjustments were not proceeding satisfactorily and that the need for foreign aid would probably be greater and more prolonged than had been anticipated. During the six months since that report the country has maintained a high level of prosperity but on a wave of inflation which has already caused serious hardship and presents grave concern for the future In this second annual Economic Report I shall set forth the difficulties of the situation by which the Nation is confronted as it enters At the same time I have great confidence in our ability to surmount these difficulties and to show another year of splendid achievement for the welfare of our own people and the meeting of our responsibilities in the family of nations I I. Foreword and Summary T HE year has afforded a new demonstration of the tremendous productivity of the United States when our natural resources our accumulated capital and our able and enterprising labor force are used at high levels of activity. Looked at from another point of view the year has revealed the previously unmeasured size of the profitable market which is furnished when nearly million workers are steadily employed with modern equipment and organization. With high pay rolls and relatively few work stoppages and with a new high record in farm income most of the people were able to enjoy a level of consumption far above prewar standards. We were able also to satisfy many of the wants for durable consumers ' goods whose production had been curtailed during the war and to extend the conveniences of life and modest luxuries to a larger percentage of our homes than had ever shared them in the past. In addition we were able to provide aid to war-torn and distressed countries abroad The main features of last year 's economic activity may be summarized as follows : THE RECORD OF ECONOMIC ACTIVITY DURING Employment during made a new record passing the mark of million civilian jobs in June and even with seasonal dips averaging about million for the whole year. This was almost million more than in and about million more than in Unemployment was even lower than in and reached what is probably the practical minimum Production measured as total physical output of goods was about percent above and percent above the average. A slight drop in agricultural production was more than offset by larger production in manufacturing minerals construction transportation and public utilities. The first Economic Report set up as an objective for a total outpmt of goods and services about percent above This goal was not quite reached. The increased output of goods was partly offset by a decline in services Productivity per man-hour increased slightly over In manufacturing production increased somewhat more than numbers employed Output of the average farm worker declined somewhat because of bad weather conditions but remained far above prewar levels Consumer income after taxes reached a new high in It was running at the annual rate of $ per capita in the last quarter of compared with a rate of $ in the first quarter of However the rapid rise in prices caused the purchasing power of the consumer 's dollar income to decline by nearly percent during the same period. This did most injury to people with low incomes and moderate fixed incomes Total spending for consumption was maintained by reduction in the rate of current saving drawing on past savings and the rise of consumer credit to a new peak of billion dollars at the end of Business investment and income throughout remained consistently above the level of any previous year. Investment in plant equipment and increased inventories amounted to over billion dollars contrasted with billion dollars in Some part of this increase reflected higher prices. Dividend payments reached a new high although corporations retained five-eighths of their profits after taxes to plow back into the business. Retained corporate earnings were double those of the war years and four times those of Flotation of securities mostly of fixedinterest types provided billion dollars of new capital as against billion in Commercial bank loans to business increased about billion dollars in with credit expanding so rapidly in the last half year as to cause grave concern as to its inflationary effect Housing units completed in were nearly double the number in but high costs raised the question whether this rate could be continued Exports of goods and services ran at the annual rate of billion dollars in the early part of the year but declined later. Imports were much less than exports resulting in an export surplus of more than billion dollars for the year. The ability of foreign countries to finance imports declined in the latter part of the year and the future of our international balance will depend in considerable measure on the size of Government aid and private credits extended Government expenditures were reduced to billion dollars in the calendar year leaving a balance of cash receipts of billion dollars which was used primarily to reduce bank holdings of Federal debt. This was a counterinflationary factor during a year of mounting inflation The Nation 's Economic Budget for the second half of indicates a gross national production at an annual rate of billion dollars contrasted with about billion for Investment for construction equipment and inventories increased by percent over and net foreign investments increased by percent while consumer expenditures increased by only percent. The increase in consumer expenditures was billion dollars more than the increase in their incomes. The continuance of such a relationship would not enable consumers to absorb with their current incomes the output of a maximum employment economy when the extraordinary volume of business reequipment net exports and the use of credit level off at more permanently sustainable rates. The relationships within the Nation 's Economic Budget permitted maximum employment and high production through but did not include all the adjustments required for permanent prosperity and growth The maintenance and stabilization of such a high level of production and consumption will require proper adjustment among money price and income relationships. While changes in price and income relationships during the past year have not disrupted activity in any serious way as yet they have brought us progressively into a more unstable situation As we enter the new year the American people are keenly aware that inflation is the dominant problem in our economic affairs * PRICES WAGES PROFITS, AND INFLATION IN At the time of the first Economic Report a year ago I warned against the danger of advancing prices which would undermine our structure of national prosperity. I strongly urged businessmen to bring prices into line with the requirements of a stabilized economy. I called upon workers to limit their demands for wage increases to those situations where wages were substandard or where wage increases would not necessitate higher prices I called for the holding of public works down to the minimum of necessity and called upon procurement agencies to avoid practices that would stimulate price increases Prices in the first quarter of continued the upward trend of the last quarter of In its first-quarter review to me the Council of Economic Advisers stressed the fact that the faster rate at which prices were beginning to move up constituted a serious danger. During the following weeks I emphasized in several public statements the need for all groups in the business world to adopt policies and follow practices which would halt this inflationary trend There then followed several months of a remarkably stable price level One can not say how far this was due to the voluntary action of the many businessmen who deliberately withheld price advances and in a few cases reduced prices or to what extent the cessation of price increases was the result of the widespread resistance of retail merchants to higher wholesale prices or was due to the spread of a generally more cautious attitude among businessmen and individual consumers Although the upward movement of prices had apparently been checked when I presented my Midyear Economic Report I warned that there were strong new inflationary forces. I endeavored again to impress businessmen with the great need for price stability and I again asked labor to refrain from demands for such wage increases as would require price advances. Unfortunately even as the Midyear Report was presented unfavorable developments in agriculture industry and the international situation started changes in incomes and prices quite different from those recommended in my first Economic Report. Businessmen were in the main finding it easy to pass added costs on in price advances of like or greater amount Since June wholesale prices have risen at an annual rate of percent and consumer prices at an annual rate of about percent. Retail food prices have risen at an annual rate of about percent. Rent since the modification of rent control has been rising at an annual rate of about percent. At the wholesale level textiles during the second half of were rising at an annual rate of percent fuel and lighting percent and building materials percent Wages too were moving up. Wage earners had in the first half of the year sought to obtain increases in rates that would maintain their takehome pay at or near the wartime level and thus enable them to buy the enlarged product of goods and services that a high-production peacetime economy could turn out. Wage advances during kept up generally with the cost of living trend during the year but did not gain the ground lost when price increases exceeded wage increases in The renewed rise in the cost of living during the second half of brought demands for further wage increases. At the end of the year there was a continuing prospect of a fruitless and dangerous spiraling of prices and wages Profits were substantially above the level and remained high through the year as increased costs were covered and in many cases exceeded by higher prices. Corporate profits before taxes rose to billion dollars contrasted with billion in and profits after taxes rose to billion dollars compared with billion in Corporate earnings after taxes represented about percent on net worth and percent on sales. Unincorporated non-farm enterprises earned billion dollars before taxes an increase of billion. Total business income before taxes increased by percent during the year. Net farm income before taxes rose from billion dollars in to billion in The record of prices wages and profits during shows how they fed upon one another in a developing process of inflation. In spite of the heartening production record of the year this inflationary trend was profoundly disturbing. It not only produced great inequities among our people but also created the danger of a serious setback The purposes of the Employment Act are beginning to meet their first real test. Unless we as a nation show an ability to impose restraints upon ourselves and to utilize the machinery of our representative government to devise well-considered regulatory measures we stand in great danger that runaway prices overextended credit and unbalanced developments will lead to an economic recession. We can not be sure that such a recession would not be severe and recovery slow and painful OBJECTIVES FOR The first objective for must be to halt the inflationary trend. On November recommended to the Congress a ten-point program for this purpose. Every point in that program is essential The nature of the inflation from which we are suffering arises in part from the total excess of buying power over the available supply of goods and in part from relative scarcities at strategic points in the economy which give impetus to particular price-wage spirals To deal with these two phases of inflation my ten-point program divides into three main parts. First it proposes appropriate restraints upon business credit and consumer credit and commodity speculation. Second to deal with the scarcities at strategic spots in the economy it calls for authority to allocate to their most efficient and necessary uses those scarce commodities and services which enter basically into the cost of living or industrial pro- duction. And third it calls for the extension and strengthening of rent control and for authority to impose rationing and price control on a highly selective basis on items of outstanding importance to industrial production or to the cost of living so that these powers may be used promptly to protect the public if other measures prove inadequate As I have made clear in a statement on December the three points in my ten-point program which were enacted in the special session of the Congress are necessary but insufficient.. The other seven points are needed needed badly and needed promptly This program which the situation requires does not lessen the need for voluntary restraint. This applies both to those who price goods and those who buy goods. No program undertaken by the Government can succeed unless it is accompanied by public cooperation based upon a realization of common dangers and common objectives Taxes at present are providing revenues substantially larger than expenditures. It is important to maintain this favorable balance as long as the inflationary trend continues. However certain adjustments need to be made immediately in order to protect those in the lower income groups hit hardest by inflation Our second main objective for should be to maintain maximum employment achieve maximum production and adjust the price-income structure so as to stop the inflationary spiral without production cutbacks or extensive unemployment More production this year will help in combatting inflation but there is no possibility of enough additional production this year to overcome inflation without other measures. In fact if these other measures are not undertaken inflation may cause such disruption of our economy as to drive production and employment downward With healthy adjustments in our economy achieved during the year our employment objective should be to absorb in useful work the net increase of additional people in the labor force. This would mean an average of nearly million jobs for the year as a whole contrasted with about million as the year 's average for Our objective for production should be to increase the total output of goods and services by some percent above Our third main objective for should be to establish firmer foundations for the long-range growth and prosperity of our economy in the years ahead LONG-RANGE OBJECTIVES The economic growth and stability of the United States can not be achieved by dealing with problems merely from day to day. We must have a sufficiently long-time perspective to do also those things which require some time for their planning and organization Our total annual national production has increased since by percent. We can not expect such rapid advance within the next years because we are now at a fuller use of our resources than we were in Yet we should within years be able to increase our annual national output by percent. Progress at this rate would bring the per capita real income of our people to percent above the level of and percent above the level of But our record of periodic depressions in the past warns us that we can not have stabilized prosperity at this rate of progress without carefully considered and well-directed efforts The Nation 's long-range economic programs should be geared to three major purposes : conserving and developing our natural resources and capital equipment enabling our human resources to become fully productive and thus provide richer and more satisfying lives and improving our economic institutions and practices so as to utilize free enterprise and representative government effectively toward maximum production and sustained general prosperity Development of natural resources and capital equipment Development of natural resources in land water power minerals and forests requires that we make up as soon as possible for the lapses in many of these efforts during the pressures of war and postwar reconversion Wise conservation and development efforts are now all the more needed because in many respects these resources were subjected to excessive drains to supply wartime production One-half of the Nation 's crop and pasture land needs to be put under improved soil management. Programs for flood control and power need to be expanded. Further construction of multipurpose dams and related facilities is desirable. Our sustained yield of saw timber should be doubled. With regard to minerals for industrial and strategic purposes we need increased emphasis upon research development of substitutes and importation and stockpiling There are areas of the country which for a combination of reasons have been underdeveloped or retarded economically. We must push regional development through improved agricultural methods and land use further industrial expansion and diversification and lifting the levels of health and education All of our resource development activities will require the alert interest of the people vigorous private enterprise and a wise pooling of the efforts of Federal State and local governments Our business plant and equipment need to be expanded to sustain continuous maximum employment and production. We shall require more capacity in steel petroleum coke electricity and other industries We can rely mainly upon business for this expansion if business adjusts its plans to an economy of continuous maximum production instead of adjusting its plans to an economy of recurrent low resource utilization Government has the responsibility of providing favorable conditions for adequate and well-balanced private investment in productive facilities with prudent use of Government initiative when private resources lag Both private and public policy must however impose restraints on boomtime overdevelopment and overcapitalization In transportation at least percent of our highways leading into cities need to be rebuilt within years financial aid to airlines should be continued railroad consolidation should be carried out with increasing vigor and national policies should recognize the need for protecting the credit of the railroads Urban redevelopment and housing afford an immense challenge. The blight and deterioration of our cities have created grave problems of municipal taxation and management and have damped the rate of investment in rebuilding. This problem is closely related to the inadequacy and instability of house production. As a start toward the objective of a decent standard of American housing within years and for the release of investment opportunities over a decade of as much as billion dollars mostly private funds in urban redevelopment there should be prompt enactment of comprehensive housing and urban redevelopment legislation Development of human resources and productivity Within years maximum employment will mean million jobs or more To raise the individual to the highest practical level of productivity and to provide an outlet for the increasing part of the labor force which technological changes may displace from the mass-production industries or from agriculture we need improved services in education health and social security For education the first step which should not be deferred is to provide Federal aid for elementary and secondary education to help remedy the deplorable shortages and the maldistribution of school facilities and teachers. At present our ten poorest States are spending about $ annually for each school child while our ten wealthiest States are spending about $ Federal aid should be given not only to this educational effort but also to research work both in basic principles of natural and social science and in their practical application Our health standards are not being met because of the inability of millions of families to purchase adequate medical care with their incomes and also because of the great disparities in the resources of different areas of the country available for investment in hospitals and other health services. We need a comprehensive national health program including prepaid health insurance and aid to hospitals and health centers Social security both in its unemployment insurance and its old-age insurance aspects should be increased and its coverage should be made more general Development of institutions and practices for a high-production economy We have learned from experience that the capacity to produce does not alone assure continuous maximum employment. The distribution of purchasing power determines whether there will be enough funds available to provide adequate investment for maximum production and enough buying power to absorb the output Industrial price-wage-profit policies arrived at without compulsion in a free competitive economy play an important part in preserving or destroying balance in our economy. In those areas where businessmen and workers make conscious decisions about prices wages and profits we must seek through education and understanding to adjust these decisions ever more closely to the broad needs of the whole economy At the same time the adaptability of the economy to changing circumstances requires the maintenance of active competition which through amendment and improved enforcement of the antitrust laws must be preserved where it exists and revived where it has languished. Collusive monopolistic practices must be eradicated and the trend toward concentration of economic power reversed For balanced expansion our economy requires a larger flow of income to consumers. Comparing with today in dollars of constant purchasing power annual expenditures for producers ' durable equipment have increased by percent while annual consumers ' expenditures have increased by only percent. When the export surplus and business retooling and the use of savings and credit level off or are reduced we shall need more consumer income to sustain maximum production More consumer income must be accompanied by better income distribution. In the lowest-income fifth of our families had an average annual income before taxes of only $ The second fifth had an average annual income of only about $ The top fifth had an average annual income of almost $ Agricultural and food policy throughout the decade ahead should be based on the expanding needs of a maximum production economy. With improvements in the incomes and living standards of wage earners and with continued concentration upon improving nutrition our agricultural output should within years reach a level about percent above the present level. This would mean a crop output about percent and a livestock output nearly percent above prewar levels Soil conservation activities should be intensified. Capital investment per farm worker will need to be increased and there JS need for three times as many tractors on farms as before the war. There are or million farmers with too little land or whose land is too poor or whose equipment is inadequate We shall continue to need the farm programs that have been developed to advise farmers in adjusting their production patterns to the changing patterns of demand and to offset in some degree the special hazards affecting their industry through crop insurance and price support for major farm commodities Tax policy for the long run should have two major elements : first a level of revenue above expenditures in all except depression years which will permit systematic reduction of the public debt ; and second a tax structure which will promote stabilized prosperity through adjustment of particular taxes to stimulate or to check consumer expenditure or business expenditure as circumstances require Debt management policies should be so conducted that appropriate restraints on bank credit can be applied without abandoning or impairing the sound principle of Government price support of bonds which the people have bought as an expression of their faith in the Government 's financial security Our international economic relations should be such as to aid in the restoration of Europe under the European Recovery Program. We are now seeking and should seek always to negotiate with other nations better standards for the conduct of world trade so that each country may be facilitated in producing the things which it can produce best and buying the things which can be produced more economically elsewhere. In a framework of increasing world prosperity our country can move forward most confidently to meet the problems of our domestic economy II. Levels of Economic Activity in THE COURSE OF EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION Employment INETEEN forty-seven was a record year for civilian employment. In June civilian employment passed the sixty-million mark for the first time. Allowing for seasonal variations employment in December ( million ) was at about the same level. Employment averaged million for the year contrasting with an average of million in and million in ( See appendix B table VIII. ) This increase in employment was most pronounced in the manufacturing industries with construction and mining registering sizeable percentage gains. Employment increased slightly in trade finance and services and decreased in government Compared with million in the number of unemployed averaged million during In November and December it dropped to million the lowest figure in two years N Production The total physical output of the economy in was about percent above and about percent above the average From to increased output was registered in each major category except agriculture. The total output of farm products dropped percent due to the disappointing corn crop. The slight drop in agricultural output was more than balanced by increased production in manufacturing minerals construction transportation and electric and gas utilities. This is shown in chart and appendix B table XVI The above figures do not fully account for all changes in economic activity since they do not include services such as trade finance and government. It is obviously impossible to measure precisely the production of such services in physical terms but a rough indication is given by employment in the service industries. The number of persons in nongovernmental services in770958 JJ CHART ! THE LABOR FORCE Civilian employment was at record levels in MILLIONS OP PERSONS * MILLIONS OF PCfiSONS * so TOTAL LABOR FORCE \ -<v r ~ ~ > ' ' ' " ^ ^ P,5S ? f t ^ ^ U / TJ ^ CIVIL IAN NONAGRICulTURALji " " ii * " _ L ~ " to ; " " " r : -Zi " l -..A t939 " " " ! J ! ^ ' " T F ? r L j I ! l * -r- -.t : i .s -r " T ! : f * c : * r ~ " i C J945 YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCEi DEPARTMENT OF LABOR ( ) AND DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( /940-47 ) creased moderately from to but this increase was more than offset by a sharp drop in government employment particularly military as a result of demobilization With an increase of percent in the physical output of goods and with a drop in services it appears that the total increase in the output of goods and services together from to was less than percent. Similar results are obtained by adjusting the gross national product for changes in prices The first Economic Report stated the objective of increasing the total output of goods and services by about percent from the end of to the end of Apparently the actual increase was below that objective Production trends were uneven during the year. The second quarter of marked a period of hesitation by individual consumers and business CHART CHANGES IN PRODUCTION OF GOODS Physical output in averaged percent above an increase for atl industries except agriculture PERCENTAGE DECREASE PERCENTAGE INCREASE SOURCE : $ E APPENDIX B TABLE EH explicable partly by high prices and the expectation of early price reductions. The temporary drop in production was prolonged partly by the fact that many plants were shut down entirely during workers ' vacation periods in July and August instead of attempting to stagger vacations over the year In the fall restraining forces gave way to new forces of expansion. Steel automobile printing and fuel output rose above the peaks reached early in the year. However a number of industries continued to operate at lower levels some because of a shortage of raw materials some because of lagging demand. ( See appendix B table XV. ) CHART INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION Output in was far above prewar in alt major industries,and exceeded wartime peaks in some industries PERCENT OF AVERAGE * SELECTED DURABLE MANUFACTURES NOVEMBER * TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT MACHINERY NONFERROUS METALS a PRODUCTS IRON a STEEL LUMBER a PRODUCTS SELECTED NONDURABLE MANUFACTURES AND MINERALS AVER ABE'100 I ( H P HP HP HP HP H CHEMICAL PRODUCTS I I MANUFACTURED TEXTILES a FOOD PRODUCTS PRODUCTS * CONVERTED FROM PUBLISHED BASE ( * * SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCE ' BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE I LEATHER a PROOUCTS SYSTEM FUELS I Productivity Output per man-hour was somewhat higher in than in The increase in production for the economy as a whole was primarily the result of an increase in capital equipment and in employment. Since both capital equipment and employment expanded in manufacturing the capital equipment available per worker ( the most important single factor affecting productivity ) increased slightly if at all. In agriculture even though capital equipment increased in over and employment remained almost constant bad weather was primarily responsible for a decline of some percent in output per farm worker. Output per worker was still far above prewar levels THE FLOW OF GOODS AND PURCHASING POWER Purchasing power over the economy as a whole remained high throughout with resultant high demand for goods and services. The significance of this strong demand and high purchasing power and particularly their bearing upon prices can be more fully understood by tracing the flow of goods and income to domestic consumers and exports to business and government Consumer income expenditure and saving Full employment high wages and large proprietors ' incomes both industrial and agricultural pushed consumers ' incomes to record levels during Most of this money was spent and a decreasing proportion went into net saving. Consumers drew increasingly upon credit to supplement their current earnings. Real purchasing power per capita has remained above prewar levels but the sharp rise in prices has caused it to decline during the past years. ( See table ) Consumer income. In total personal incomes were billion dollars. Increases were registered in each quarter of reaching the annual rate of billion dollars in the fourth quarter. Disposable personal income ( total personal incomes minus taxes and similar payments ) increased from billion dollars in to an annual rate of billion dollars in the last quarter of ( See appendix B tables III and IV. ) Although the disposable dollar income of the average American consumer reached a new high in the rapid rise in prices during the last months caused its purchasing power to be less than in Consumption however was maintained by liquidation of past savings a reduction of the saving out of current incomes and the extensive use of consumer credit Changes in the purchasing power of the disposable income of the average consumer during and show the inability of incomes to keep pace CHART CONSUMER INCOME SPENDING AND SAVING Spending increased more than income BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OP 00LLAR3 DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME * ( Personol income less toxes ) DISPOSABLE INCOME CONSUMER EXPENDITURES Rate of net saving continued to drop PERCENT PERCENT NET SAVING AS PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE INCOME ( ( ( SEASONALLY ADJUSTS ANNUAL RATES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE i i i 1i i i Io with the inflationary rise in prices. Average disposable income in terms of current dollars has increased steadily since the first quarter of rising from $ then to $ in the fourth quarter of an increase of percent. Yet its real purchasing power declined nearly percent during the same period. The decline in real purchasing power was much greater for the millions of people whose incomes were fixed or lagged behind the increase in average incomes The initial impact of the elimination of price controls caused a substantial decline in real disposable income of consumers in the second half of The rate of decline slowed up in the first half of as the price rise tapered off and as incomes continued to increase owing to wage increases and a higher level of employment. During the third quarter the cashing of veterans ' terminal leave bonds counted as addition to disposable income halted momentarily the decline in real purchasing power in spite of the rapid rise in consumer prices TABLE Per capita disposable income Personal income after taxes Period average_ Seasonally adjusted annual rates : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * Current dollars First half of dollars \ Deflated by the consumers ' price index which can not fully reflect changes in the quality and relative availability of higher-priced and lower-priced goods * Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor. ( See appendix B table V ) The decline in the purchasing power of the average consumer 's income since the middle of reversed a very desirable trend in the distribution of real income. High levels of employment and production during the war and postwar period had raised per capita disposable incomes measured in first half of dollars from an average of $ in to $ in and $ in Not only did average incomes increase during this period but also important changes occurred in income distribution. The relative increase in income ( before taxes ) was greatest for families in the lower- and middleincome groups. For example the increase in incomes between and was over percent for the lowest percent of families and only percent for the highest percent of families. This is shown in the following table TABLE Average family incomex Money income before taxes dollars Money income before taxes dollars Percent increase Families grouped from lowest to highest income * Lowest fifth Second fifth Third fifth Fourth fifth Highest fifth to to $ _ $ $ _ Average for all families * Includes single individuals Source : See appendix A section III The table shows the increase in money incomes before taxes. If personal income taxes were taken into account the relative improvement in the lowest income group would be more marked The greater increase in incomes in the lower and middle groups during this period is to be explained principally by the fact that more people were working in that more jobs were on a full-time basis and that many families now had more than one person gainfully employed. Thus the relative gain of these groups was mainly due to a greater availability of jobs. A second cause of the pronounced shift in distribution was that the share of the national income going to farmers whose cash income was low relative to urban groups had increased. Third wage increases from through were greatest in the lower wage brackets Under the influence of these trends there has been a pronounced change in the type of family which constitutes the poorest percent of the population. Many persons formerly unemployed or farmers formerly operating at marginal levels have moved out of the lowest group while persons living on small fixed incomes have moved down relative to others. These trends undoubtedly continued in as the effects of inflation continued to raise the incomes of many groups leaving others behind The number of persons living on relatively fixed incomes is large. Veterans living on pensions number about million. Survivors and socialsecurity beneficiaries total about million persons and veterans living on educational allowances without other jobs about million. The number receiving public assistance at the end of was about million and this number is increasing. Some of these persons of course receive income from more than one of these sources and some have other sources of income CHART AVERAGE FAMILY INCOME All groups received more income in than before the war Greatest relative increases were in the lower and middle groups MONEY INCOME BEFORE TAXES DOLLARS FAMILIES * GROUPED FROM LOWEST TO HIGHEST INCOME LOWEST FIFTH SECONO FJFTH THIRD FIFTH FOURTH FIFTH HIGHEST FIFTH ^ INCLUDES SINGLE INDIVIDUALS S O U R C E : S E E A P P E N D I X A S E C T I O N III Even in many families had incomes below what can be considered an adequate standard : percent of the families had money incomes less than $ and percent less than $ This is shown in the follow- ing table TABLE Percentage distribution of families by income levels in Under to to to to to and over _ _._ * Includes single individuals Source : See appendix A section III Percent of families Cumulated percent of families l Civilian money income classes ( dollars ) Consumer expenditures. Since consumers as a whole spend most of their income currently high levels of income have been accompanied by high levels of expenditure. Consumers were spending at a record annual rate of billion dollars in the fourth quarter of compared with billion dollars during This high rate of spending was a very important factor in the rise of prices The widespread expectation of price declines during the first half of caused many prospective purchasers to delay buying houses and durable goods. But for the year as a whole minor shifts in patterns of demand were far overshadowed by the willingness and ability of consumers to buy Whether this willingness and ability to purchase will continue at current levels will be strongly affected by two factors emphasized in prior Economic Reports consumer saving and consumer credit The decline in net saving. During consumers saved only percent of their disposable incomes a larger proportion than was saved in prewar years but well below the level of percent. Desire to buy durable goods the increased use of consumer credit the pressure on lowincome groups to retain wartime and immediate postwar living standards reduced the rate of net saving. ( See appendix B table IV. ) The decline in the rate of net saving was especially significant since families with high incomes and large accumulations tended to add to their holdings while many low-income families reduced their holdings. Recent studies indicate that more than one-quarter of all spending units and almost half of those with incomes under $ a year held no liquid assets in Consumers who are drawing upon accumulated assets are now using these substantially for general living expenses and medical care rather than for durable goods and housing. Such use of savings for current living expenses is an ominous sign for the economy as a whole Consumer credit. A gradual increase in consumer credit has bolstered the current purchasing power of consumers. The credit outstanding totaled billion dollars at the end of an increase of billion dollars over the level at the end of and billion dollars higher than the previous peak reached in September Consumers are using larger amounts of all forms of credit than they did a year ago. Total instalment credit increased over percent charge accounts percent and other types of consumer credit percent. ( See appendix B table VII. ) Although the present levels of credit are not alarmingly high in relation to the size of our economy the increase that has occurred during the past two years has been adding to inflationary pressures This survey of consumer income and expenditures during points CHART CONSUMER CREDIT Consumer credit continued its sharp rise in BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS END OF YEAR SOURCE : \ rJ | " r ' I " " I " " * " JJLL J O. AJUJbl ULLJilJ. LI I i i l J i 1J M i l i JFMAMJJASONOJFMAMJJASONOJFMAMJJASONO BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL END OF MONTH RESERVE SYSTEM to two causes for concern. On the one hand with supplementation of current incomes through the use of past savings and the extension of consumer credit total consumer demand exceeded the portion of the total national output available for consumers after allowing for business and foreign demand. This excess added to inflationary pressure. On the other hand the rapid rise in prices reduced the real purchasing power of consumers to the point where it will not be adequate to take the consumers ' share of the national output at present prices when certain abnormal demands are reduced and when the rate of consumer saving can not be further reduced. Since adjustment to meet conditions of this kind take time to make this underscores the need for prompt action to halt the rising cost of living. The present situation is particularly serious for consumers who have low incomes or who live on fixed incomes Business investment income and financing The record level of business investment in was another major source of demand for goods and services swelling the pressure upon our available resources. Business expenditures for plant equipment and additional inventories amounted to over billion dollars in compared with about billion in Nonfarm residential construction increased from billion dollars in to billion in These high levels of investment and residential construction in part reflected the effects of higher prices Domestic business investment : producers3 goods. Business outlays for productive equipment were at record levels during the last three quarters of despite continued shortages of many basic materials and machinery items. Total outlays for new equipment in were about percent greater than in with about a third of this increase representing higher prices. These heavy expenditures for producers ' goods were a direct and important stimulus to the economy. Plant and equipment outlays were high in every major field but were particularly noteworthy in utilities transportation and those lines of manufacturing such as textiles which had not undergone a normal rate of expansion or modernization of facilities during the war period Most types of industrial equipment were in considerably easier supply at the end of the year than at the beginning as equipment manufacturers expanded capacity completed their reconversions from wartime production and balanced their inventories. In some fields primarily utilities and transportation the backlog of commitments for new facilities was still great at the year 's end. This was also true of some important manufacturing industries such as steel coke and oil where expansion programs extending beyond were announced Although the rate of replacement and improvement of productive equipment will vary in response to the outlook for demand prices and costs it appears that total plant and equipment outlays may be leveling off. Industrial construction contracts have remained well below the high levels of In many industries postwar expansion programs for capacity are nearly completed. According to the latest quarterly survey by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Department of Commerce all major categories of business plan to spend less on plant and equipment in the first quarter of than in the preceding quarter though more than was actually spent in the first quarter of ( See appendix B table XIX. ) Inventories Accumulation of business inventories which had been a substantial supporting factor in the demand for goods through and the early part of was interrupted in the middle of the year but resumed in the fall. After allowance for normal seasonal variation the rate of accumulation in physical terms during the last quarter of the year was about the same as that of the first quarter of but well below that of the fourth quarter of The book value of all nonfarm business inventories rose about billion dollars during a substantial part of this amount representing price increases Initial programs of postwar restocking in nondurable lines had been substantially completed early in and expectations of a decline in sales and prices led to a more than seasonal cutback of inventories in the second quarter. In durable goods lines with considerable backlogs of consumer demand accumulation was only slowed. As business optimism revived during the latter part of the year inventories were again built up at increasing rates in nondurable lines particularly at the retail level Short stocks of some durable items continue to hamper industrial activity But in contrast to the inventory accumulation of a year ago which represented restoration of war-depleted stocks the recent wave of accumulation appears to have been based largely on the expectation of further price rises in lines where stocks are already adequate. Though overall ratios of inventories to sales are still below prewar ratios liquidation of inventories in case of a decline in sales raises a greater potential threat to the maintenance of production and employment than has been the case at any time since the war began. ( See appendix B tables XX and XXI. ) Private construction. The construction industry expanded less in than most major sections of the economy in terms of physical activity Though its dollar volume was high the physical volume was actually less than it had been in any year from to There was a sharp increase in construction costs in with average costs reaching a level double what they were in In the decade following the first World War the construction industry represented about percent of the economy It now represents only about half that percentage. Unless important changes are made in present methods and prices its relative importance may continue to decline. This problem as it relates to housing is discussed more fully in Section V. ( See appendix B tables XVII and XVIII. ) The number of housing units completed in was nearly double that of and the backlog of houses under construction was as great by the end of the year as at the beginning despite the reduction in construction time and the increased volume of completions. Current high costs however raised question as to the ability of the industry to continue to operate at current levels in the residential field at least. A promising development was the ability of many construction companies to shift from nonresidential to residential construction. Men and materials which were producing factories and commercial construction in were producing housing in Business income and financing. Business income in remained consistently above the level of any previous year. The need for business funds however was also unprecedented due in large part to higher prices. Business spent about billion dollars during the year on plant equipment and increase of inventories exclusive of almost billion dollars devoted to residential construction. In addition the increased cost of inventories due simply to rising prices amounted to about billion dollars Business corporations while paying out a record amount in dividends retained the remarkably high proportion of five-eighths of their profits after taxes in ( See appendix B table XXII. ) Consequently reinvested corporate earnings were a much more important source of business funds in than ever before providing billion dollars compared with billion the previous year. Retained corporate earnings in were about double the annual retention during the war years and four times those of The general profit situation is discussed more fully in Section III Accruals to depreciation and similar reserves were higher than in Due to increased costs these allowances were generally insufficient in themselves to finance replacement of plant and equipment In addition to the internal financing from current receipts business also drew upon its previously accumulated liquid assets though to a much smaller extent than in Nonfinancial corporations for example reduced their liquid assets by around billion dollars in compared with billion dollars in This drop was substantial even when allowance is made in the figure for the elimination of the excess profits tax which permitted firms to begin holding a smaller volume of liquid assets as a reserve for tax payments Flotation of securities for new capital provided around billion dollars in compared with billion in the previous year. The increase was in fixed-interest types of securities reflecting particularly a great increase in the proportion of the total offerings made by utilities. The securities markets furnished less equity capital. Further it is interesting to note that while in the issues for new capital amounted to only around one-sixth of total financial requirements of business in they amounted to around percent. Moreover only about percent of the new capital issues were of the equity type rather than fixed-interest-bearing securities compared with about percent in Another important outside source of funds to finance the investment program of business was bank loans. Banks furnished almost as much new credit to business in as in Most of the expansion of bank credit took place in the second half of Commercial bank loans to business including the purchase of open market paper and excluding agricultural loans increased during by about billion dollars compared with an increase of billion dollars during Agricultural loans which had remained stable during increased in Although outstanding loans declined temporarily during the second quarter the rise in commercial credit in the latter part of the year was so rapid as to cause concern in the prevailing inflationary situation. ( See appendix B table XXVII. ) In residential construction the estimated mortgage indebtedness upon one- to four-family structures increased about one-half billion dollars in billion in and billion in Thus for the last two years mortgage indebtedness has been rising faster than the construction expenditures on new housing. There has been no important shift in the source of funds for this financing. Saving and loan associations accounted for about one-third of the value of mortgages recorded banks for about onefourth individuals for over one-sixth and miscellaneous groups for the remainder. The size of the average mortgage has been rising and is now about percent higher than it was two years ago. Veterans ' loans guaranteed by the Government increased from percent of the total number of recorded residential loans in to percent in the first months of The proportion of new housing started which has been financed with FHA insurance increased from percent in to percent in the first months of During as in other years the situation regarding business investment income and financing was not uniform for all firms and industries Some businessmen experienced difficulties in floating new capital on the security market. Others reached the limit of what they regarded as the safe use of bank credit. Most business required large amounts of additional working capital for carrying inventories at increasing prices and for meeting payrolls at higher wage rates. But after making allowance for these factors it remains clear that the extraordinary rate of business income in general allowed investment to proceed at record levels. Even greater expansion was prevented mainly by lack of material rather than by lack of intention to invest or lack of financial resources International transactions Our international transactions during were characterized by a very rapid expansion of exports of goods and services in the early part of the year followed by a decline. Since imports of goods and services did not change much during the year the export surplus rose and then fell corre- spondingly. For the year as a whole exports of goods and services exceeded imports by more than billion dollars compared with billion in The lack of balance in our trade was thus intensified. Quarterly movements are shown in the following table : TABLE United States exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of dollars annual rate ] Exports of Imports of goods and goods and services services Period average. Export surplus First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter 3_ Includes income on investments Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce The increase in the export surplus during the first part of reflected shipments of goods not only to Europe but also to the countries of this hemisphere and to other continents. ( See appendix B table XXXII. ) It resulted primarily from an increased physical quantity of exports of manufactured products although increased shipments of grain and higher prices for all types of exports contributed to the rising dollar total. There was an intense need for goods in Europe and high demand and purchasing power in other countries Since foreign countries were able to increase their sales of goods and services to us only slightly they had to utilize the aid extended by the United States Government and their gold and dollar assets much more rapidly than in As table shows these two forms of financing which were being utilized at a combined annual rate of billion dollars in the last quarter of were drawn on at a rate of billion in the second quarter of The rate at which foreign countries were utilizing United States credits and their own gold and dollar assets was depleting these resources rapidly and the ability of some countries to import from the United States was being exhausted. Many of these countries were forced to put more rigid restrictions upon their purchases from the United States During the first half of the increase in the export surplus accounted for about half of the total increase in the money value of total national production. Exports of nonagricultural commodities directly and indirectly provided employment for nearly million workers in nonagricultural CHART EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES Exports increased much more than imports in and resulting in a larger export surplus BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATE BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL IRATE EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES * IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES * 3d Or. 4th Qr l94 1st Qr 2d Qr 3d Qr 4th Qr 1st Qr " 2dQr ' > * 3d Qr. 4thQr U S. Government aid continued to be a major factor in financing the export surplus EXPORT SURPLUS to US GOVERNMENT AID J- 3dQr l94 * INCLUDES 1st Qr INCOME ON -i 4th Qr 2d Qr INVESTMENTS ,t 3dQr 4th Qr J- 1st Qr 2d Qr 3dQr l947 4th Qr TABLE Financing the excess of goods and services supplied to foreign countries [ Billions of dollars annual rate ] Means of financing Period Total excess of exports of goods and services i Government aid ( net ) Liquidation of short-term Private gifts Other capital and and remit- means of gold by financing tances foreign ( net ) ( net ) countries ( net ) First quarter... Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter i Includes income on investments * Excludes investment in International Bank and Monetary Fund. See appendix Bf table XXXI for types of Government aid Includes disbursements by International Bank and Monetary Fund movement of private long-term capital and private and U. S. Government short-term capital and errors and omissions * Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce industries. In some of the durable goods manufacturing industries the employment resulting from exports approached percent of the total. It is clear from these facts that our exports during the first half of the year had an important bearing upon total levels of employment and production and upon the level of prices. Foreign demand for certain products in relatively short supply such as grain and steel when added to high domestic demand continued to exert inflationary pressure at these strategic spots in the economy throughout the year. ( See appendix B tables XXXIV and XXXV. ) Government transactions Expenditures. During the Federal Government reduced its spending. Federal cash payments to the public in and are shown in table The largest items of expenditure in were for defense veterans international affairs interest tax refunds and social security. These accounted for about percent of total cash expenditures. ( See appendix A table X. ) During the year expenditures of State and local governments rose above billion dollars compared with billion dollars in Part of this increase resulted from payment of bonuses to veterans by the States totaling almost million dollars in as compared with only a few million dollars in Receipts and expenditures of State and local govern- TABLE Federal cash payments to the public [ Billions of dollars ] Calendar year Total International : Loans to foreign governments Subscriptions to and membership in international organizations7 Total _ State and local governments ( grants-in-aid interest on Federal debt and loans ) Adjustment to daily Treasury statement basis Total Federal cash payments to the public _ _ Total Business : Payments for purchases of goods and services8 Subsidies and other payments to farmers Loans and subsidies to business Interest on the Federal debt -Refunds of taxes * Individuals : Salaries and wages of Federal personnel : Military a Civilian Pensions and other payments to veterans ' Social welfare beneficiaries Loans to home owners Interest on Federal debt Refunds of taxes..__ Calendar year * Group receiving payment and type of payment i Preliminary estimate based on incomplete data Includes dependency allowances Includes mustering-out pay and cash terminal-leave pay * Repayments exceed loans Includes purchases made by this Government for occupied areas and other overseas relief Repayments exceed loans and subsidies Includes subscriptions to the International Monetary Fund and Bank membership in the United Nations and other international organizations NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding ments were probably in approximate balance for the calendar year as a whole but during the second half of the year expenditures began to outrun receipts thus adding somewhat to the inflationary pressure. ( See appendix A table V. ) Construction expenditures of billion dollars by the Federal Government in were somewhat higher than in although the physical volume of work performed declined. Similar outlays by State and local governments were about billion dollars an increase of about two-thirds above the level in dollar terms Despite the war-created shortage of urgently needed public facilities State and local governments as well as Federal agencies have shown commendable restraint in refusing to undertake new construction activities in the face of high prices. Both State and Federal public-roads officials have been meeting constantly with engineers and contractors to hold down costs by simplifying their designs and improving their working methods. Other Federal agencies are alsp employing these techniques Receipts and debt management. While cash payments to the public were being reduced Federal cash receipts during were at the record peacetime level of billion dollars and exceeded payments by over billion. The sources of these receipts were as follows : TABLE Federal receipts from the public other than borrowing [ Billions of dollars ] Calendar year Calendar * year Personal taxes C orporation taxes __ > Employment taxes * Excises and customs.. > Miscellaneous receipts Total budgetary receipts Receipts of trust accounts2 Total cash receipts Source Estimates based on incomplete data Net appropriation to Federal old-age and survivors insurance trust fund is excluded from employment taxes but included in trust-account receipts NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding The cash surplus of over billion dollars in was used primarily to reduce the volume of Federal debt held by the banks. Retirement of securities owned by commercial banks and especially Federal Reserve Banks has been emphasized in order to secure a maximum deflationary effect from the Federal program of debt reduction. Total bank holdings of Federal securities were under billion dollars at the end of the year. This is billion dollars below the peak in February and more than billion dollars below the level of bank holdings at the end of At the present time the gross national debt is under billion dollars as compared with a peak of billion dollars on February However the Treasury cash balance at the present time is under billion dollars although when the debt was at its highest point the balance was about billion dollars. At the present time about billion dollars of the Federal debt is held by Government agencies and trust funds with the remaining billion dollars in private hands. ( See appendix B table XXX. ) In addition to the cash basis for recording Federal expenditures receipts and surplus used in this Report there is the conventional budgetary concept used in the Budget Message. A detailed reconciliation between these two methods is shown in appendix A section II The difference between the cash surplus of over billion dollars and the budgetary surplus of about billion dollars in is accounted for largely by the increase in social security reserves. Appropriations to social security funds whether used for payments of benefits or for reserve accumulation are a charge on the budget thereby reducing the budget surplus in the conventional definition. Using the cash concept however the excess of social insurance contributions over benefit payments appears as an addition to the Government surplus. Such surplus has a counter-inflationary effect as it comes out of labor and business incomes thereby decreasing demand This survey of Government transactions during indicates that high taxes and reduced expenditures have partly offset the powerful inflationary pressures in other sectors of the economy Summary : The Nation 's Economic Budget The Nation 's Economic Budget summarizes in a few broad figures the flow of goods and purchasing power through the main sectors of the economy : consumer households business Government activities and the international area. The following table portrays our economy in action and transition during and : TABLE The Nation 's economic budget calendar years and [ Billions of dollars current prices ] Calendar year seasonally adjusted annual rates Calendar year First half Accounts Ex- Excess Re- pend- ( ) or ceipts itures deficit ( ) Second half Ex- Excess Ex- Excess Re- pend- ( ) or Re- pend- ( ) or ceipts itures deficit ceipts itures deficit ( ) Consumers : Disposable income Expenditures Saving ( ) Business : Undistributed profits and reserves Gross domestic investment : New construction. _ Producers ' durable equipment Change in inventories ~ +l4. ~ ~ " +Il. ~ Total Excess of receipts ( ) or lnvestnifvpt ( ) International : Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) Government ( Federal State and local ) : Cash receipts from the p u b l i c Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) Adjustments to arrive at gross national product Estimates based on incomplete data Note. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix A section I " +I6.T Total gross national product.. ( ) CHARTS THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET BILLIONS OF OOLLARS- CURRENT PRICES CONSUMERS INCOME Hi HBHL_ EXPENDITURES ^ ^ K ^ V Z I 1st half * ~ 2d half * BUSINESS EXCESS C EXPENDITURES 1st half * 2d half * INTERNATIONAL NET FOREIGN INVESTMENT V/////X 1st half * 2d half * 1st half * J947 2d half * * $ asoNJiur Aojusreo ANNUAL BATCS NOTE. THE COMPONENTS NOT AOO TO THE GROSS NATIONAL PR00UCT BECAUSE OF CERTAIN ADJUSTMENTS. SEE APPENDIX A SOURCE : SEE APPENDIX A The changes in the Nation 's Economic Budget between and showed increases in all major categories except government expenditures While a higher price level enlarged the dollar size of these increases the fact that they were not the same in all categories indicated significant shifts in the composition of the economy in action While consumers ' expenditures increased percent investment expenditures for construction equipment and inventories increased percent and net foreign investment by percent. Thus in the expansion of the Nation 's Economic Budget from to the relative increases in outlays by business and net foreign investment were much greater than the increases in consumer expenditures. This is all the more significant as the rise in consumers ' disposable income was billion dollars less than the increase in consumers ' expenditures which indicates that consumers financed a growing part of their purchases by consumer credits use of past savings or a smaller rate of new saving. Consumers saved about billion dollars in while net exports plus the excess of domestic investment over retained corporate earnings and reserves totaled about billion dollars A considerable portion of the increase in personal incomes and profits was absorbed by taxes while government cash expenditures declined. The large tax collections functioned as a kind of forced saving supplementing individual saving and business saving in financing the huge net outlays for domestic capital formulation and the export surplus A comparison of the estimates for the first and second halves of the year shows substantial changes in the component sectors of the economy Outlays for producers ' durable equipment which increased very rapidly during the first half of expanded only slightly in the second half of the year. The rate of increase in inventories dropped in the first half of and rose again in the second half of the year. The export surplus declined somewhat in the last half of the year. Consumer expenditures and new construction increased all through the year in dollar terms Viewed as a whole the adjustments within the economy during were sufficient to maintain maximum employment and high production throughout the year. That this should have occurred during a year of considerable flux indicates the flexibility and strength of the economy This however does not necessarily mean that capital investment exports and domestic consumption grew in balanced proportion or that the factors which maintained high-level activity through can be regarded as the ordinary and permanent elements of economic growth. Price increases operated to hold the purchasing power of consumers at levels which would have been insufficient to permit absorption of the full output had it not been for the extraordinary export surplus the use of savings and credit at abnormal rates and the continuance of backlog business demands III. Price and Income Trends and the Course of Inflation B ACK of the income and expenditure totals whose trends have just been traced lies a whole network of price wage and profit relationships which determine whether or not we move toward economic stability. The changes in these relationships during have not accomplished that end nor have they assured the maintenance of high production and employment in It becomes necessary therefore to examine the underlying facts more carefully and to uncover the dangerous tendencies which they include PRICE TRENDS A review of price movements during can not ignore the events of the last half of The abolition of OPA raised the question how the economy would adjust itself to freedom from price controls. The answer was soon read in the sharp rise of wholesale prices between June and December This was at an annual rate of almost percent one of the steepest rises ever recorded. Consumers ' prices rose at an annual rate of percent during the same period The dangers of this situation were emphasized in the first Economic Report and when prices continued to rise during the first quarter of it was found necessary to repeat the warnings about high prices late in March and in April urging businessmen to exert every effort to " hold the line " and help check the spiraling forces of inflation Prices leveled off in the second quarter of Business was pursuing a much more cautious inventory policy. Sellers of a number of commodities found that backlogs of demand had dwindled. There was evidence that many sellers were seeking to hold prices below the maximum that the traffic would bear. However the pressure which many distributors put on manufacturers to lower their prices had little effect In the early summer of substantial price increases in coal steel and steel products took place following the increase in freight rates and after the new wage contracts negotiated in the coal industry. There also com- CHART WHOLESALE PRICES Wholesale prices after leveling off in the second Quarter of resumed their sharp rise in the second half of the year PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE >OO r FARM PRODUCTS h OS f ' F M A M J J A S ^ * N OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS i J ^ COMMODITIES ^ I N D J F M A M J J A S O N D PERCENTAGE INCREASE SINCE JUNE FOODS f " ' ALL COMMODITIES ' " " sZ ^ ; ' ^ iv> IZ ^ ^ U * * L " /'I " ....< Z \ T i l % * ' ? V * < ; A % $ ' \ ; ^ ,<X .../.r * \ ./...f. : * * * ? * * A SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR ' " ^ \ ? ? ^ SLC ^ ^ > ^ " * ' J FARM PRODUCTS OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS : ' ' Of ' ^ menced a sharp rise in the prices of meats dairy products eggs and poultry due to a normal seasonal downturn in the marketings of these products and to a rise in the level of consumer demand growing out of increasing incomes and the larger number of people at work. And in the middle of August grain prices began to move up rapidly. Although our wheat crop was of record-breaking size our corn crop was poor. This put additional pressure on our domestic supply of wheat to supplement the deficiency in corn for animal-feeding purposes. It also became clear that foreign requirements for wheat would be large because of the poor crop in Europe The large rise in wheat and corn prices caused increases in the prices of flour and cereal products. Led by these specific price increases there developed during the third quarter a general upward movement of prices which continued through the rest of the year Since June wholesale prices have risen at an annual rate of percent and consumers ' prices at a rate of percent The behavior of wholesale prices is shown in table by commodity groups and by periods : TABLE Percentage changes in wholesale prices since June Commodity group June to December All commodities. December March to to March June June to December June to December Farm products Foods All other than farm products and foods Hides and leather products Textile products.. Fuel and lighting materials Metals and metal products ._ Building materials Chemicals and allied products Housefurnishings Miscellaneous Special groups : Raw materials Semimanufactured articlesManufactured products -I.I ' Source : Department of Labor ( see appendix B table XIII ) Wholesale prices during the second half of advanced at a slower rate than during the first quarter of the year. The character of the two movements differed fundamentally. During the first quarter the price rise represented a tapering off of the broad upward thrust of prices following the removal of price controls. It was followed by a period of relative stability when it appeared possible that the inflationary pressures had spent themselves. But the recent sustained rise in prices represents a renewal of inflationary pressures In response to the factors described above consumer prices too have been rising rapidly on a broad front. This is shown in the following table : TABLE Percentage changes in consumers ' prices since June Item All itemsFoods.. Apparel Rent Fuel electricity and ice Hqusefurnishings Miscellaneous June to December March to to December March June June to June November to November Source : Department of Labor ( see appendix B table X I I ) One notable aspect of the rise in consumer prices since June is that unlike the movement of wholesale prices they have been rising at a faster rate than during the first quarter of the year. In the first quarter consumer prices rose at an annual rate of percent. Since June they have been rising at the rate of percent per annum. Two factors contributed to this acceleration. In the first place foods which represent percent of the total consumers ' price index have risen much more since June than they did during the first quarter of In the second place rents rose from June to November at an annual rate of about percent. Since June they have risen more than they had over the previous eight years Although November is the latest month for which complete data are available preliminary reports indicate that consumers ' prices rose over percent between November and December WAGE TRENDS Efforts of labor unions in were concentrated on wages rather than on security issues because the employment situation was good and because of the over-riding importance of the rise in the cost of living Wage adjustments in early largely to compensate for reduced hours had brought about a reasonably stabilized wage situation by the middle of that year. But this stability was shortly disrupted by the rapid rise in the cost of living. By late and early industry in general seemed willing to offer and unions to accept wage increases approximating the advance in consumer prices which had taken place following the lifting of price controls in June. Some of these wage contracts contained escalator clauses to compensate automatically for further rises in the cost of living An examination of the early " second round " contracts of late shows relatively few wage increases above cents per hour most of them falling CHART CONSUMERS1 PRICES The upward with food rents trend prices beginning in retail in to prices the lead continues and increase PERCENT OF AVERAGE FOODS RENT J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J PERCENTAGE A S O N D INCREASE FOODS I ALL L ITEMS * J SINCE JUNE ' " T : J39 ' APPAREL RENT SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR * AL $ INCLUDES H0U $ EFUftNlSHIN6 $ FUEL ELECTRICITY lCEt ANO MISCELLANEOUS GOODS AND SERVICES NOT SHOWN ON CHART within the range of to cents. Contracts negotiated later mainly in April and May in rubber steel automobiles electrical equipment and other metal products were similar to the fall contracts. These settlements were dubbed the " 15-cent package " which included an evaluation of fringe benefits such as paid holidays and occasional retirement or insurance plans Wage earners during this period however generally preferred wage increases and pressure was concentrated on these rather than on fringe issues The wage " pattern " was less widely adopted than the % cents of the " first round. " Numerous contracts were negotiated at a figure below the pattern while many wage and particularly salary workers received no increases. On the other hand some other groups of workers notably in the bituminous coal construction and printing industries won wage increases in excess of the pattern. An examination of the second round contracts indicates that workers in the lower paid industries made smaller gains both absolutely and on a percentage basis than did higher paid workers The effect of the wage settlements in late and was to raise wages both rates and earnings to an all-time high. For the first time average weekly earnings in manufacturing have exceeded $ and throughout most of the wage sector of the economy average weekly earnings have become twice what they were in The wage increases which took place in expanded consumers ' money income by approximately to billion dollars during the year The rise in prices left wage earners in no better position at the end of the year than they were at the beginning. The real income of many groups such as government workers teachers and the white-collar class generally was substantially less From June following the " first round " of wage increases to October the cost of living rose percent compared with an increase of percent in weekly earnings in manufacturing. Earnings in nonmanufacturing industries during the same period registered diverse gains : percent in bituminous coal mining percent in private construction percent in telephones percent in wholesale trade percent in retail trade and percent in hotel services. In general earnings lagged behind living costs Though labor as a whole through wage gains was as well off at the end of as at the beginning workers had lost ground steadily in terms of real income during the last half of This primarily explains the " second round " of wage increases. It also helps to account for the present movement for further wage advances unless an effective anti-inflation program is adopted. ( See appendix B tables X XI and XII. ) Several other wage developments should be noted. There was an extension of the practice of providing paid vacations and holidays to wage earners. One of the results of these practices was to cause a sizable reduc- tion in the number of man-hours worked during the summer particularly in July and August. Increasingly it is becoming industry practice to shut down operations for one week during that period Efforts to standardize job classifications and to develop an equitable wage-payment program have been carried on by industry for a good many years. One of the most notable developments in this area took place last January when following two years of joint effort a wage rationalization agreement was concluded in the steel industry. This was the culmination of a major job-reclassification program designed to eliminate wage inequities both within and among the plants. This scientific approach to a complicated wage problem is a commendable development that could well be adopted more widely PROFITS Profits during reached a new peak. They also maintained remarkable stability throughout the year despite considerable increases in wages and raw material costs. Compared with corporate profits rose from billion dollars to billion dollars before taxes and from billion dollars to billion dollars after taxes. In they averaged after taxes about percent on net worth and percent on sales. The income of unincorporated nonfarm enterprises rose during the same period from billion dollars to billion before taxes. Total business income before taxes in exceeded the total by billion dollars or percent. Net farm income before taxes rose from billion dollars to billion dollars Not only profits for industry as a whole but also profits for most industry subgroups were exceptionally high. There were however some divergencies in trend. Some industries such as food beverages tobacco and iron and steel showed a downward trend although profits continued high while other industries such as oil-producing and refining and automobiles showed an upward trend as well as a high rate. For profit data see Appendix B tables XXII to XXVI. Individual firms within each industry also showed divergent trends This stability of profits throughout the year indicates that business generally reacted to increases in costs by increasing prices rather than by absorbing them in whole or in part by reducing profits. It is also noteworthy that high and stable profits continued even where there was no appreciable expansion in production. In some categories where exceptionally high profits persisted we were very close to a temporary ceiling on production due to physical limitations of capacity and shortages of raw materials and certain classes of skilled labor. While industrial production reached a postwar peak in March receded to a low point in July and has since recovered to approximately the March level profits in manufacturing continued at approximately peak levels throughout the year In appraising profit trends allowance should be made for the fact that business like every other group finds that the purchasing power of money has declined considerably. To maintain the same physical volume of inventories requires large additional amounts of capital funds. Furthermore replacement costs have risen substantially while profits are usually calculated by basing depreciation allowances on original costs rather than replacement costs. Although a portion of the large profits earned during merely compensated for changes in prices profits on the whole were above the levels necessary to furnish incentives and funds for the expansion of business and to promote the sustained health of the economy THE NATURE OF INFLATIONARY PRESSURES The movements of prices and incomes during constituted a strong inflationary trend. Increasingly through the second half of the year the total demand for goods was in excess of the amount of goods and services available at current prices to satisfy the combined requirements for final consumption private capital formation Government services and exports The question has been raised as to whether we had inflationary pressure because of large exports because of the very high rate of business investment because of the large amount of residential and commercial construction or because of the high level of consumer spending. The answer is that we had inflationary pressure because the sum total of these combined factors exerted too great a demand on available supplies. No one factor can be singled out as the principal cause Moreover these factors could not have become fully operative without funds to make them effective. In addition to funds growing out of current incomes there were several large special sources of funds in The major ones were : ( ) the liquidation of dollar balances and sales of gold by foreign countries and spending by foreign countries of loans and grants provided by the United States ; ( ) the spending of liquid funds accumulated by business firms during the war ; ( ) the liquidation of private savings ; ( ) the increase of bank credit to finance inventory accumulation capital expansion and construction ; ( ) the increase of consumer credit ; and ( ) the ashing of veterans ' terminal-leave bonds. Some of these sources of liquid unds are being exhausted and are nonrecurring so that further expansion mist increasingly be financed out of current income credit The inflationary impact of spending was strong in all fields capita ! expansion exports and consumption. The high level of domestic business investment and construction aided in unfolding a total demand which in- creased prices individual incomes business profits and Government receipts. The supply of consumer goods was limited by the large amount of resources devoted to capital goods and exports. Consumer demand swelled by wage increases by high farm earnings by the use of consumer credit and by the cashing of terminal leave bonds was in excess of the supply at current prices The general excess of demand does not fully explain the resumption of the price rise in the second half of the year. In an important degree the rise stemmed from actual and anticipated shortages of specific commodities which caused price rises at particular points and from there spiraled into higher costs and prices all through the economy The most important specific shortage developed in the grains. This led to higher prices of many food products. New wage demands resulteH from the increased cost of living. These in turn presented the prospect of higher costs transmitted into higher prices. The specific shortage was thus generalized into a broad increase of prices at many points and often these increases were greater than were necessary to meet increased costs The spiraling of prices from a specific point of shortage was not confined to the case of food products. It also existed in the case of key industrial products particularly steel The inflationary forces arising out of generally excessive demand and those arising at points of specific shortages are interacting. If general demand were not so great the upward pressure on the prices of specific commodities in short supply would be less and could not so easily spread to other commodities. Moreover the mere prospect of higher prices at particular points gives rise to strengthened general demand. Expectation of higher prices for instance stimulates the demand of business for inventories and of consumers for goods. Expectation that higher wages will follow higher costs of living may cause the increase in prices to take place even before wages have been adjusted upward In the face of the special and general factors outlined above the precarious basis of the restraint and stability which had developed in the second quarter became evident. The fears of a recession subsided the spiral effect of wage and other cost increases got under way the increased cost of living gave rise to expectations of further wage demands and the impact of expected foreign aid programs received wide attention. Such influences induced an upsurge of speculative activity superimposed upon the already great strength in most markets. In addition there occurred a collateral development which had great significance. The high business demand in the earlier part of was financed almost wholly out of current revenues and liquid assets with only moderate use of bank credit. After the middle of the year when business expectations ran in the direction of higher prices and as higher prices actually emerged business borrowing underwent a rapid increase The year 's end brought no evidence of an early weakening of inflationary forces. Unless anti-inflationary steps are taken the prospect is that in view of the grain shortage prices of food especially meat will go still higher Business sentiment now appears to entertain the expectation of strong markets for as far ahead as it can see. There is added to the forward outlook the possibility that even though other sources of excessive demand diminish and a substantial budget surplus is continued the inflationary spiral will be supported by funds from credit sources While the export surplus even with our foreign-aid program may be smaller than in exports are heavily concentrated on commodities that are subject to especially strong domestic demand. This makes it desirable that foreign aid funds be used as far as possible to finance purchases from other countries. The fact that foreign aid presents problems provides no reason to doubt the wisdom of a foreign-aid program which meets essential requirements of other nations within the limits of our own resources The effects upon other countries directly and upon us indirectly of not providing this aid would be calamitous. Upon broad grounds of national policy it is essential that the program go forward. But it must be recognized that carrying it out will make it all the more important that we invoke the measures required to stop the inflation WHY INFLATION IS DANGEROUS During the course of an inflationary movement there are many who find it difficult to think that anything is wrong. There is a ready market everyone is employed wages are good production is high profits are good and industrial capacity is being expanded There are some indeed who find real merit in the situation. They say that the cure for specific shortages is still higher prices. They expect that these will stimulate larger output and restore balance. But this is a vain hope. The stubborn and intractable fact about an economy already operating at peak levels is that output can not be expanded except by slow degrees Nor are the immediate consequences of inflation as favorable as superficially appears. Some people are gaining at the expense of others. The heavy weight of higher costs of living bears down upon the millions of families who are unable to keep up with advancing prices. Economic relations degenerate into a hectic struggle to catch up or keep ahead. No firm basis can be established for orderly and stable progress But what most fully justifies every effort to halt an inflation is the certainty that if it runs its course unimpeded it will spread in its wake the AQ disaster of falling markets unemployment and business losses. A rapid general rise in prices has the effect of unduly bunching investment in inventories and equipment at early dates and according to distorted calculations of possible profit. It induces investments many of which will not pay out Rising prices breed upon easy access to credit which supports the trend They introduce speculative activities which also support the trend. They produce a price structure which is increasingly sensitive and precarious and vulnerable to changes in business and consumer expectations spending and investment At whatever point these developments induce a reversal of business sentiment or a withholding of consumer demand some markets weaken with a spreading impact. Caution dictates the withholding of demand. Buying for inventory capital expansion and consumption declines. A decline of production necessarily follows spreading unemployment and loss of income from point to point in a widening and deepening downward spiral These developments are not inescapable. A well-designed program of measures to combat the inflationary trend will permit us to reach a state of economic stability without an interlude of severe depression. Such a program is presented in Section IV IV. Levels of Activity and Adjustments Needed in I N spite of some disappointments on the supply side and serious inflationary distortions on the demand side during we enter on a high tide of economic activity and with prospects for another prosperous year if we handle our economic affairs wisely and firmly. The Employment Act calls upon the President at the opening of each year not merely to review current trends but also to state what levels of employment production and purchasing power during the ensuing year are needed to carry out the policy declared in the act and to recommend measures by which these objectives may be attained. These two requirements will be met in this section We face in the months and years immediately ahead a test of whether we have the foresight and courage to safeguard our economy against a return to the devastating sequence of boom and depression. If we are to complete safely the transition from a war economy to a stable peacetime economy and clear the way for the great progress which lies within our reach we must promptly take vigorous measures to check the course of inflation which now has the economy in its grip NEEDED LEVELS OF EMPLOYMENT PRODUCTION AND PURCHASING POWER Employment objective The American economy is now operating at a level of employment which may be regarded as a practical maximum. It is estimated that the labor force will increase by about persons during If we provide them as well as the present labor force with opportunities to work this would mean an average civilian employment of almost million for the coming year Production objective This labor force will have at its disposal expanded and improved capital equipment and there should in general be a better flow of raw materials During the past year business expended billion dollars for plant and equipment approximately one-half of which represents a net addition in excess of wear and tear and obsolescence. Since there are still some shortages of materials particularly in metals some of the new plant and equipment may begin operating at the expense of somewhat less production in older plants It should be our objective to open up most of these bottlenecks in the course of with the use of new capacity to produce materials and components which are now scarce. Assuming that new capital equipment and other efficiency factors raise nonagricultural productivity somewhat more than percent our objective should be to increase the output of goods and services in this sector of the economy to a level somewhat more than percent above For farm production the Department of Agriculture has announced production goals for this year which call for an increase of percent in the acreage of crops. Reduced feed supplies however will inevitably cause some decrease in the output of livestock and livestock products Balancing this against a possible increase in crop production it appears doubtful that total agricultural production this year can surpass that of For the economy as a whole an increase of total output by about percent above is a feasible objective. To reach this objective will require skillful management the maintenance of good labor-management relations and some improvements in the geographical distribution of labor Purchasing power objective Our purchasing power objective for should be to effect the economic adjustments which are necessary to afford adequate protection against increasing inflation. The view has been expressed that the only cure for inflation and the only means of providing maximum real purchasing power is more production. Certainly the continuation of full employment and the removal of impediments to maximum production will provide the surest long-run remedy for scarcity prices and the exploitation of monopolistic situations. But we can not increase industrial and agricultural production enough within the next few months to catch up fully with market demands or to surmount the inflationary dangers of the coming year Weather will be a major determining factor in our farm output. The reduction in the corn crop of has required drastic revision of livestock producers ' operations and makes it certain that supplies of meat poultry and dairy products will be less abundant in than in On the industrial side also the inability to re-equip producers and to fill pipe lines while simultaneously turning out enough consumers ' goods for all the demands of a fully employed population and providing needed foreign aid will result in some relative shortages during The basic shortages in coke in steel and other metals in petroleum and petroleum transport facilities and in railway cars and motive power will not fully be made up during This leads to the conclusion that even were our employment and production goals for fully realized this would not of itself meet our purchasing-power objective nor substantially dispel the need for other affirmative anti-inflation measures. More than this we face the danger that the continuance of maximum employment and production will be impossible unless we achieve the necessary purchasing-power adjustments in the price-wage-profit structure. When a price-wage spiral breeds business uncertainty and impairs confidence employment and production go down instead of up The affirmative measures which I have proposed to the special session of the Congress and which I shall here reaffirm are not a substitute for more production but rather constitute the only assurance of maintaining high and increasing production FISCAL POLICY TO COMBAT INFLATION It is well established that a substantial excess of Government receipts over expenditures is counter-inflationary The Federal agencies will have to make cash payments to the public in calendar year of over billion dollars. This is about billion dollars less than cash payments to the public in calendar year It includes proposed expenditures under new legislation mainly foreign aid of about billion dollars. ( These figures and those below represent cash payments and receipts and apply to the calendar year. They differ in both respects from the conventional Federal Budget as is explained on page and in more detail in appendix A section II. ) Over percent of the total is required for defense and for veterans Most of the remainder represents expenditures to carry out the provisions of existing law and to meet the Government 's commitments such as interest payments on the public debt refund of taxes loans to foreign governments social-security payments and expenditures under previously authorized contracts On the basis of receipts from present taxes and of expected payments the excess of receipts over expenditures for calendar year will be substantial. With inflationary pressures a major threat to the stability of the American economy no action should be taken now to reduce this excess But while waging war against inflation we should not neglect the casual- ties. Certain tax changes now will help those millions of families whose disposable incomes have lagged more and more behind the increased cost of living during the past year and a half I therefore propose that the Congress enact legislation extending a costof-living tax credit of $ for each taxpayer and each dependent To offset this decrease in government revenues corporate taxes should be increased sufficiently to yield an equivalent amount. Corporations were given early relief after the war in very substantial amount through repeal of the excess profits tax. While present corporate income taxes are very high by all prewar standards they have permitted both high business activity and an unexampled addition to capital investment. An increase in corporate taxes would not cause production to fall below the highest output that available materials capacity and labor will permit. It would however have an anti-inflationary effect which would wholly or in large degree offset the inflationary influence of the reduction in individual income taxes Any net change one way or the other in the effect of these tax revisions upon inflation is outweighed by the manifest equity of the revisions proposed In any event these equitable adjustments will not interfere with success in our anti-inflationary efforts if the other anti-inflationary measures which I shall now discuss are promptly adopted and vigorously applied THE REGULATION OF CREDIT In the process of inflation one of the most potentially dangerous sources of excessive demand is the expansion of credit. This applies to consumer credit commercial credit real estate credit and credit on securities I again recommend that the power of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to regulate consumer credit be restored. Even under the controls which existed and which expired only on November the volume of instalment consumer credit outstanding had increased from billion dollars on January to billion dollars on November Since the lapse of control and due only partly to seasonal influences the rate of increase has moved sharply ahead. A further rapid expansion at this time can only contribute to inflationary price increases. ( See appendix B table VII. ) Also dangerous is the mounting volume of mortgage debt urban and rural. The longer-run interest of the people requires careful consideration of the present financing policies of both private and governmental agencies More dangerous than the expansion of consumer credit is the over-rapid expansion of commercial loans by banks. During the first half of commercial credit expanded only moderately but during the second half it rose at an annual rate of almost billion dollars a much more than seasonal increase. This increase coincided with the upsurge of inflationary developments The increase of bank credit was both a result and a further source of inflationary pressure. The increase in bank loans reflected a growing demand for funds that arose from a variety of sources. In adapting their operations to a rising cost and price structure business firms needed a larger volume of credit for working capital and borrowed additional amounts to maintain and expand expenditures on plant and equipment. Farmers increased their borrowing to purchase real estate and to acquire farm machinery and finance other capital improvements. Increased consumer buying of durable goods payments for the purchase and modernization of homes and outlays to meet current living expenses were financed in part by expanded bank loans When demand from other sources is already pressing against the price structure the injection of large amounts of bank-created funds to support business real estate and consumer expenditures necessarily contributes to further inflation. The impact of this additional supply of money is felt first * of course in those markets in which the borrowers are direct participants But as the funds are used by the borrowers to purchase the goods and services they want they become part of an enlarged general income stream. As other temporary sources of demand decline the expansion of bank credit could potentially keep the inflationary trend rising and interfere with the gradual transition to a stable situation. Among the strategic points at which to curb the inflation movement none is potentially more powerful than the restriction of bank credit The control of bank credit is not a simple task nor is it free from dangers Unwisely exercised it could overplay its role and precipitate an undue liquidation of credit and a lowering of economic activity. Furthermore the problem is complicated by the relation of credit to the administration of the public debt. Limitation of the amount of commercial lending would probably be accompanied by higher interest rates. Except as special devices may be introduced which can partially insulate the public debt two unfortunate developments might take place : a decline in the value of Government bonds held by the public and an increase in the cost of servicing the debt as refunding takes place. But these difficulties can be surmounted through the wise exercise of restraints upon excessive bank credit In view of their central relation to the control of inflation current proposals for credit control especially those which have been presented by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System for the increase of bank reserve requirements should be given close study by the Congress and legislation should be enacted of a sufficiently comprehensive character to make available all the powers that may be needed Within the last fortnight the leaders of our commercial banking system have taken positive organized action to secure the curtailment of inflationary expansion of bank credit by their members. I commend this far-sighted action. If they succeed in this voluntary effort they will be curtailing credit at the points where it is most likely to exercise inflationary influence and further general action might not be required As part of our program for restraining excessive credit expansion the Federal bank supervisory agencies have already announced policies designed to confine extension of private bank credit to legitimate production requirements. The credit standards of the Government lending agencies have also been reviewed with the objective of checking inflationary influences from this source. It is essential that the major Government credit agencies in making direct loans and in guaranteeing private loans shall pursue policies consistent with a national anti-inflationary policy THE NEED FOR SELECTIVE CONTROLS While the credit controls and budget policies discussed above are essential instruments for halting the inflationary trend there have arisen specific situations which in all probability can not be dealt with adequately by these measures The most important of these special situations is the shortage of grains and the related mounting price of food. In the case of meat for example the shortage will almost certainly be greater next spring. The use of credit and budgetary controls to the point where they could halt the rise of meat prices would probably cause widespread unemployment. Depriving people of their livelihood in order to cause a decline in the cost of food is obviously not an acceptable alternative. Nor is it an acceptable alternative to let mounting prices ration the short supply at the expense of millions of families of modest income In meeting this situation consumer rationing of selected commodities would not only relieve the demand pressure but would also provide for a more equitable distribution of the available supply. There should also exist limited powers of price control to be used for combating rising prices at those points where they bear most disastrously upon the cost of living I have already recommended to the Congress that such powers be authorized. It is also necessary to authorize and to use if necessary on a selective basis price control of a few vital industrial products that are in short supply since we have had ample demonstration that these areas of shortage are also a focal point of spreading inflation There should also be set up powers for dealing with the distribution of basic industrial and agricultural products where scarcity threatens to impede production or raise prices unduly. These should not subject business firms to a detailed plan of operation prescribed by the control agency but merely provide a check on such distribution of scarce supplies as is found to be impeding domestic production defeating the purposes of the foreign aid program or working inequities as between legitimate users of the scarce commodity In areas where price control might be employed its workability might be impaired by excessive wage increases. I therefore repeat my recommendation to the Congress that authority should be granted to prevent wage increases where such action is necessary to maintain any price ceiling that may be established. This is a power which should be restricted in its use and might not need to be used at all. Its existence would not supersede the general practice of fixing wages by voluntary agreement nor would it relieve labor of any of the responsibility it now bears for moderation in wage demands to help curb inflationary pressures I also repeat my recommendation that rent control be continued and strengthened. Nothing could be more disastrous to the standard of living of millions of people or better calculated to initiate another spiral of wages and prices than the continuation of the sharp increases in rents now under way. This is particularly true because relaxation of rent control could not effect a rapid increase in the supply of housing The measure enacted by the Congress toward the end of its recent session extended the Export Control Act and also extended the authority to allocate transportation facilities and equipment. In addition it authorized measures to increase the production of food in non-European foreign countries and to encourage conservation practices in this country. While these steps are desirable they constitute only a small part of an effective anti-inflation program The same measure also provided for voluntary agreements among businessmen relating to the allocation of transportation facilities and scarce commodities and relating also to the regulation of speculative trading on commodity exchanges. While I have stressed many times that certain types of appropriate voluntary action are important the experience reviewed in this Report and the facts which it sets forth demonstrate conclusively that governmental action along the lines that I have recommended is absolutely essential THE NEED FOR VOLUNTARY RESTRAINT The need for some government controls does not lessen the need for voluntary restraint. Only with the voluntary cooperation of the American people can any controls be made to work effectively and the more effective voluntary restraint becomes the less will controls be needed I have already urged consumers to restrict their purchases of scarce products. The Federal Government is deferring many public works projects and following procurement policies designed to minimize their effect upon price increases. I urge State and local governments to do likewise Businessmen should defer expansion that does not immediately augment production. They should also strive to maintain inventories at the lowest efficient working levels The campaign to sell savings bonds will be intensified. Voluntary savings of all types should be encouraged. The new bond buyers and millions of loyal Americans who enabled their country to finance the war are assured that the power which their Government possesses to maintain the value of their bonds will be exercised wherever necessary Most important of all businessmen should hold the line against price increases and reduce prices wherever they can foregoing a quick and dangerous excessive profit in favor of long-run stability. And labor should be moderate in its wage demands mindful of recent experience which demonstrates the impossibility of registering real gains in an inflationary spiral I can not too strongly emphasize that every self-imposed voluntary restraint in the making of purchases in the setting of prices and in the demand for wages contributes to the restoration of economic stability and prolonged prosperity. But to the extent that the result is not achieved by these means it is essential that proper agencies of Government be given and that they use powers to restore the balance When an inflation is in progress there is no way of predicting when it will break of its own accord. One can only be certain that if permitted to run its own course it will break with destructive force. How serious or prolonged such a situation would be in the current instance can not be foretold Whatever its character if a depression occurs it will be far more costly in human welfare and will involve the Government in far more pervasive intervention in the economic life of the country than the measures which are necessary to prevent it. I therefore urge that the Congress consider with the utmost speed the nature of the problem which we have to meet and adopt the measures that are appropriate to its solution V. Long-Range Objectives for the American Economy OUR ABILITY TO GROW HILE striving to overcome the inflation of today we can not safely neglect the problems of tomorrow. No great nation lives for the moment alone. In restraining the excessive demand which is now apparent we must not cripple the market for an expanding output of American industry and agriculture. Our whole history shows that unless we go forward we shall slip backward. Our economy should be stable but nonetheless it must continue to grow We can not set aside long-range considerations while we deal with the immediate task of combating inflation. The Employment Act requires that we set objectives for the needed levels of employment production and purchasing power. Such objectives require that we look ahead and appraise our economic potentials in the perspective of long-range economic growth The best way to realize the growth that we can achieve is to look at what we have recently done. The Nation 's Economic Budget has already been used in this Report as a summary device to depict the present state of our economy. In table it is used to show the enormous strides that we have made since just before World War II with the figures adjusted to allow for price changes No one can fail to be impressed by the fact that ^ within years our annual national product has increased by about percent measured in constant prices. Some part of this increase is explained by the fact that our economy in was not running at maximum employment or production. The relentless pressure of the war speeded up certain economic developments The American people hold a profound conviction that our war-time production record furnishes a significant demonstration of what we can do with maximum employment and effective economic policies In recent years a number of attempts have been made by private and public research agencies to measure the growth that lies ahead if we are successful in maintaining maximum levels of economic activity. These W CHART THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET IN CONSTANT DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ! tt HALF OF PRICES CONSUMERS Showing our economic growth from to i $ f with adjustments for chonges in prices BILLIONS OP OOLLARS 1st HALF OF PRICES INCOME f GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT BUSINESS EXCESS OF EXPENDITURES INTERNATIONAL NET FOREIGN INVESTMENT * GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT IS NOT EXACTLY THE SUM OF THE COMPONENTS BECAUSE OF CERTAIN ADJUSTMENTS. SEE APPENDIX A SOURCE : SEE APPENDIX A T A B L E T h e Ration 's Economic Budget in constant dollars calendar years and Billions of dollars first half of prices Calendar year Calendar year * Excess Re- Expend- ( ) or ceipts itures deficit Excess Re- Expend- ( ) or ceipts itures deficit Accounts Consumers : Disposable income Expenditures Saving ( ) Business : Undistributed profits and reserves Gross private domestic investment : New construction Producers ' durable equipment Net change in inventories Total Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) International : Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investGovernment ( Federal State and local ) : Cash receipts from the public Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) or pay- Percent increase Adjustments to arrive at gross national product Total gross national product TTlfiptS ( ) * Estimates based on incomplete data Source : See appendix A sections I and II studies recognize that foresight is not perfect and that our knowledge of technological trends and economic relationships is still limited. Further improvements in these measurements are needed. But even now they can serve to furnish us at least with some broad outlines of our prospects and problems Ten years from now if we maintain maximum employment we should reach a level of nearly million jobs. This allows for population growth It also allows for withdrawal from the labor force of some women to their homes and for longer school attendance of some of our young people Output per man-hour for our economy as a whole has increased by approximately percent annually in recent decades. The war brought many technological advances which have not yet been adopted fully by peacetime industry. Assuming even the very conservative estimate of percent annual increase in productivity and allowing for population growth maximum production years hence would mean an increase of about percent in our total output of goods and services if average weekly hours of work remain unchanged. This would mean per capita disposable income about percent above the level of and percent above the level of in terms of constant dollars. Some part of this possible increase may of course be taken in the form of increased leisure We have within our reach an economic environment that would make it unnecessary for masses of people to be undernourished or ill-housed to work in obsolete plants and shops or to lack essential medical care social security or education. No one would need to go without adequate rest and vacation after hard work. Attainment of these economic objectives would afford ever-increasing opportunities for individual initiative and greatly strengthen the cherished free institutions of American life But these gains will not come by accident. They would not be registered in an economy characterized by a period of idle or wasted resources after any period when for a few years we attain full utilization of our plant and labor force or in an economy running at only three-quarter capacity even in " fairly good times. " The attainment of our objectives will depend upon the best efforts of industry agriculture and labor working with sympathetic understanding of one another 's problems and of the common good. It will depend on a clear appreciation of maladjustments in the relationships among production prices and purchasing power ; it will depend upon the willingness of all concerned to make necessary adjustments and upon vigorous and forward-looking government DEVELOPMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND CAPITAL EQUIPMENT In the perspective of balanced economic expansion for the future our first attention should be concentrated upon our productive resources developed and potential and the ways in which these resources are utilized Since the beginning of the war we have been forced to forego at many points development of our basic natural resources and the essential maintenance and improvement of our capital facilities Improvement of the country 's natural resources and its capital equipment is a cooperative effort. Private groups and individuals State and local governments as well as the Federal Government are challenged by the task. An expanding base of natural resources and capital equipment is necessary for the realization of increasing production and a rising standard of living Natural resources Land. To meet the needs of a population of perhaps to million persons by living in an economic environment of sustained maximum employment and production with a considerable volume of agricultural exports would require an increase of about percent in agricultural production. It would also require a substantial shift in the pattern of agricultural land use to meet changes in demand The yield of present cropland can be enlarged by improvements in giant breeding increased use of machinery supplemental irrigation increased use of fertilizers and more efficient marketing. To some extent we can also increase production by adding to cropland through drainage clearing and irrigation Erosion of top soil and depletion of soil fertility are becoming more and more serious. About million acres now cultivated should be used for grass and trees. Despite significant progress in soil conservation in recent years half the Nation 's cropland and pasture still needs to be put under improved soil-management practices as rapidly as possible. Expanded research education and demonstration programs are required. We need a Nation-wide program for increased application of fertilizers to depleted soils About half our acreage of farm pastures and range land has been impaired seriously by overgrazing fires and other abuses. Large tracts of land which should be ranges have been plowed for wheat. Higher levels of meat consumption can be met only if individual farmers and stockmen who own two-thirds of the country 's range-land adopt better grazing practices. The million acres of western grazing land controlled by the Federal Government much of it organized in grazing districts is being improved but a large part of it requires further rehabilitation Water Bound up as they are with land uses water resources should be developed and controlled as an integral part of a broader national and regional resources-development program. Expanding programs are needed to prevent floods provide for navigation furnish urgently needed power promote recreation control pollution conserve fish and wildlife and maintain and improve underground and surface water supplies needed for agriculture and other uses An impressive example of the interrelated nature of water and land resources is provided by large multiple purpose dams and accompanying watershed programs. Such integrated programs should be stepped up as soon as economic conditions permit in a number of our larger river basins Forests. The estimated million acres of private and public commercial forest land in the country ultimately will grow all the timber products we are likely to need provided they are well managed. The problem is most acute in saw timber. Our present saw-timber stand is less than half that in and is poorly distributed and deteriorating in quality and size. Better forest practices would provide the greatest assurance of adequate supplies for the future. Achievement of better practices may be furthered by strengthening and expanding technical and other assistance to private forest landowners including farmers. In addition multipurpose development of the national forests and other Federal forest land should be pushed to help meet national needs Minerals. Ample supplies of all essential minerals are vital to an expanding economy and for the Nation 's security. Those minerals with which we are well endowed such as coal and phosphates should be mined and utilized efficiently. Those minerals for which we depend on foreign sources such as tin antimony chromite and strategic mica will continue to require stockpiling and intensive search for substitutes and alternative sources of supply. Finally those minerals for which we depend partially on foreign sources such as zinc lead copper and increasingly high-grade iron ore call for policies which emphasize stepping up the rate of discovery improving mining methods and developing commercial processes for the utilization of low-grade ores. For petroleum new techniques and sources of supply from coal natural gas and oil shale will have to be increasingly relied upon to prevent the reserve situation from deteriorating and to meet the rapidly growing demand Regional development. Some large regions in the country possess the basic raw materials population and locational advantages to support a much higher standard of living but are below the national average in material well-being. They require large-scale developmental efforts both for their own benefit and to contribute in larger measure to the national welfare. The objective should be to narrow such differentials by raising productivity and incomes in the lagging regions particularly through improvement in agricultural methods and land uses further industrial expansion and diversification and lifting education and health levels In recent years large parts of the West have been growing in terms of per capita income and production at rates well in excess of national averages but they are so meagerly equipped with capital and population that they may accurately be termed underdeveloped. Programs for the development of these regions are practical and productive and should be continued The Territory of Alaska furnishes a special case. Because of its resources and its strategic location as our last northwest frontier a concerted and expanded effort on the part of public and private agencies and individuals for the rapid economic and social development of Alaska is required Regional development requires integrated programs of business labor agriculture and all levels of Government. The Council of Economic Advisers in cooperation with other agencies of the Government is studying this problem Business plant and equipment Productive capacity. A growing economy requires balanced expansion of our capacity to turn out consumer goods and crude and semi-finished materials and equipment For the greater part of the last two decades business expansion has been irregular. In the worst depression years of the 's outlays were insufficient even for normal replacement. Table which covers producers ' durable equipment shows how the rate of expansion varied from decade to decade before the war TABLE Gross and net outlays for producers * durable equipment by decades Billions of dollars average annual rate Percentage of gross national product Decade Gross outlays Replacement Net expansion Gross outlays Replacement Net expansion ? < t Source : Simon Kuznets National Product Since National Bureau of Economic Research New York New stimulus to business investment came with the defense program of But during the war though certain critical facilities were expanded we had to curtail many lines of civilian goods and expansion of all facilities not contributing to war production. After years of depression and wartime restriction productive capacity was highly unbalanced and generally inadequate to meet the peacetime demand. The high rate of investment in new equipment during the past years reflects in part the efforts of producers to make up the deficiencies In some industries present capacity appears adequate for the near future In others such as electric power and petroleum refining expansion of capacity is substantial and is likely to continue for a considerable period until a better balance between demands and capacity has been reached. In a few industries net capacity expansion during was less than that required annually to sustain maximum production and employment The best available studies indicate that to attain the levels of employment and output we hope to reach we shall need substantial increases in the output of such basic commodities as steel petroleum products coke and CHART CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION Many industries are operating at close to practical capacity INOEX ( YEAR OF MAXIMUM UTIL1ZATI0NM00 ) I PETROLEUM REFINING * * * * CAPACITY _f * r * ^ y ^ PRODUCTION r _ >+ ^ ELECTRICITY CAPACITY ^ ^ H PRODUCTION " ^ j u- S E L INGOTS AND S E L T E T E CAPACITY \ y V \ COKE f ^ r s ^ * ^ v PRODUCTION i ( \ p S PRODUCTION PORTLAND CEMENT CAPACITY \ ~ i i i i i i i i i r i i i I I I I " " J PRODUCTION nn i i i mT i i i i i i i i i i i i r HOTS : CAPACITY AND PRODUCTION FOR EACH INDUSTRY HAVE BEEN PLOTTED SO AS TO TOUCH AT THE YEAR WHEN THE RATIO OF PRODUCTION TO CAPACITY REACHED ITS MAXIMUM. SUCH POINTS CORRESPOND APPROXIMATELY TO OPERATIONS AT THE LIMIT OF PRACTICAL CAPACITY THOUGH RATED OR THEORETICAL CAPACITY WOULD IN MOST CASES BE HlSHER ALL FIGURES ARE ESTIMATES BASED ON INCOMPLETE OAT A SOURCES. BUREAU OF MINES ( COKE. CEMENT AND PETROLEUM ) FEDERAL POWER COMMISSION ( ELECTRICITY y AND AMERICAN IRON AND STEEL INSTITUTE fSTEEL ) 6o electricity. For these industries the needed increases during the next years range from to percent. Though such studies make no claim to precision the only reasonable expectation is that continued high-level production will require large increases of capacity in the industries mentioned and in many others Chart gives the historical perspective of expansion of capacity relative to output in several important industries. The tightness of present capacity is apparent. Potential stringencies are even greater than might appear from the chart. For example ^ if either freight cars or steel were more plentiful demand for many other commodities would increase disclosing further deficiencies in capacity. In fact there are some industries where present capacity is inadequate for current output providing less elbow room than management considers desirable for continuously efficient operation satisfactory servicing of the market and emergencies. Dependable reserve capacity of electric power generating facilities for example is normally at least percent of peak load for any system. Near the end of it dropped to below percent for the United States as a whole ; in most areas no reserve capacity was available and in some areas acute shortages exist The needed capacities for various industries are related. There is no point in having capacity to make more automobiles unless we have capacity to supply steel and other materials. The output of steel is limited by supplies of coke scrap steel furnace capacity blast furnace capacity finishing capacity and rail transportation The same principle applies to the development of raw-material-producing and raw-material-consuming industries. There is a serious question in particular whether our capacity to produce fuels and energy is being expanded fast enough to meet the fuel and energy demands indicated by expansion in other lines If the whole level of output is to rise steadily and rapidly with minimum waste of capacity the balancing of expansion in different industries calls for considerably more thorough study than it has been given in the past Modernization of facilities. The amount of business capital required is only partly measured in terms of scaling up capacity to meet enlarged demands. As table indicates a large and increasing share of outlays for business equipment is devoted to replacement. The rate at which this renewal and improvement proceeds is set not so much by physical wear and tear as by the profitability of setting up facilities of new types or for new kinds of products or at new locations. Industrial equipment and structures are often obsolete long before they are worn out In deciding upon replacement business has not felt it could afford to substitute new types of equipment for old as rapidly as the pace of technological advance would make possible. This lag was accentuated during the war 6i At its close the progress of industrial and business technology had accumulated a reservoir of potentially profitable opportunities for modernization If still more rapid technical advances are made and if prospective production economies justify the costs of accelerated modernization both business investment and the rate of increase of productivity will exceed past rates Programs and responsibilities. In a period of far-reaching economic change an adequate investment program of expansion and modernization taxes the vision and initiative of business management. This is especially true of the long-range planning of business expansion in a manner which preserves proper relationships among the productive capacities of various industries In a free enterprise system business investment rests on profit expectations which in turn reflect the outlook for consumer spending costs of production and investment availability of improved techniques availability of funds and the degree of uncertainty and risk involved in gauging these and other factors. The investment " program " is essentially the sum of a great many private programs privately planned financed and executed. Government investment and operation in special cases such as hydroelectric power and atomic energy development clearly serve the public interest. More generally the Government can help to develop a favorable climate which will encourage business to adopt adequate investment programs As the task of making up obvious war-accumulated deficiencies in productive capacity is completed and as inflation is reduced increasing attention will have to be given to fostering favorable conditions for balanced expansion and for aggressive development of new fields of investment. The most essential condition is continued acceptance and determined implementation of the national policy laid down in the Employment Act of A policy of sustained maximum production requires that the actions of business labor and Government be based on broad agreement as to our over-all economic goals and on a reasonable degree of assurance that appropriate action will be taken to achieve them Transportation In our far-flung economy transportation needs are so obviously related to the development of natural resources and industrial production that the people long ago undertook through their Government to encourage and in many cases to participate in the building of extensive transportation facilities Shipping. Maintenance of a healthy shipbuilding industry capable of rapid expansion and the continued operation of an efficient and competitive merchant marine are not only necessary to national security but are also essential elements in the achievement of a continued high level of employment in the United States. Except for a few ships which are urgently needed now construction of new vessels can well be deferred until inflationary demands have eased and materials are more readily available Our present needs for shipping should be met basically by the use of existing war-built vessels. Meanwhile the shipbuilding industry by virtue of repair and conversion of war-built ships is operating at levels considerably above the prewar average Highways. In the field of highway transportation the Congress more than years ago created what is now the Public Roads Administration At that time the Congress gave top priority to the problem of getting the farmers out of the mud providing access to our agricultural resources and to markets for these resources. Although substantial progress has been made in this direction much remains to be accomplished. In addition major tasks before us are the efficient maintenance of rural roads and their reconstruction as age or increased traffic dictate The second objective making it possible to get to and from cities was well on the way to attainment before the war but we have lost ground in the last or years. Costs of maintaining many of our highways are so high that it is more economical to rebuild them. Maintenance and traffic records indicate that within years at least percent of existing highways will have to be rebuilt A third task providing adequate facilities for intra-city traffic and healthy urban growth is one we have hardly begun to tackle. The Congress has recognized the national importance of this problem by authorizing the expenditure of million dollars per year out of the million dollars Federal-aid funds for building through arteries in cities. This is an important undertaking and deserves continued attention Air trnnsportation. The Government has undertaken a program of financial aid to air lines through mail payments under which rates of payment are related to the operating income and operating expenditures of the air lines and to the volume of the mail and the value of the service. Those charged with the administration of this program are constantly testing its effectiveness Government aid is most effective when it stimulates the resourcefulness and inventiveness of private enterprise in developing and applying technological advances in aviation The Government has also expedited the construction of necessary airports by sharing costs of construction of many publicly owned fields. The Federal Airport Act of authorized Federal expenditures aggregating million dollars over years. While that program is being completed growing experience will furnish a basis for further decision as to the pattern of the aviation network which national prosperity requires and how far it is desirable to go in multiplying air lines and in furnishing to a multitude of communities air transportation facilities with their accompanying burdens of maintenance costs Railroads. A most urgent national problem in the field of domestic transportation is the maintenance of an expanding and efficient railroad service Large earnings of the war period permitted the more prosperous lines to fortify their financial position and brought about the financial rehabilitation of many railroads which for years had been in receivership. These great improvements in their financial position are rapidly being dissipated by the effects of inflation and the railroads will benefit as greatly as any part of our business institutions from a successful effort to end the inflationary movement It is in the national interest to insure the continuance of efficient rail transportation. Consolidation of facilities though it has shown but little progress after nearly years of study and effort offers such possibilities of convenience and economy that it should be steadily pursued. We can be optimistic about technical improvements helping to offset the rising costs of wages and goods if management and labor are alert to the opportunities which their introduction offers. The need must be recognized to protect the credit of the roads in order to enable them to finance the heavy expenditures which are necessarily involved in these technical changes Urban redevelopment Approximately three-quarters of our population and three-quarters of our wealth are now essentially urban. Our cities both large and small make up an integral part of the productive plant that we need for maximum growth. Improved planning and redevelopment of these cities will not only enhance their physical usefulness as facilities for manufacturing and commerce but will also increase workers ' productivity in a living environment more conducive to good health and high morale When land is assembled in suitable blocks to facilitate economic redevelopment extremely large investment opportunities become available. The construction industry will be called upon to supply management labor to supply skills and manufacturers to supply building materials and all the products and services which go into residences schools factories offices stores and the other elements which constitute the communities of today Moderate government outlays in redevelopment of urban areas will provide large investment opportunities for private capital. It has been estimated that over the next decade as much as billion dollars mostly private investment could profitably be employed in these redeveloped areas. This is in addition to general urban public works It is none too early for basic planning of land acquisition and the working out of financial arrangements for urban redevelopment. This will permit rapid progress when there is less pressure on certain materials in short supply and when additional investment opportunities will aid in maintaining maximum levels of employment and production The present acute housing shortage requires a large amount of new construction in outlying areas before we can engage in slum clearance and urban redevelopment on the large scale that will be needed. Some of this suburban construction needs to be located in whole new communities with adequate provision for municipal services commercial facilities and available employment opportunities. These need to be carefully integrated with better planning of our present urban areas. Otherwise urban congestion will be aggravated and local governments both central and suburban will be faced with ever-mounting costs Private enterprise and local initiative alone can not rebuild and modernize our cities. Private developers lack both the resources and the legal powers to acquire land in large enough blocks to permit sound profitable redevelopment. Local governments are obtaining powers of land assembly but lack financial powers to undertake the task on the scale needed to encourage private investment and to permit cleared land to be made available at economically feasible prices Local governments should take the initiative in providing for site assembly and for area planning and for streets schools and water sewer and other connected facilities. State governments should provide enabling and fiscal legislation. Under existing State powers some worthy redevelopment projects have been undertaken but most informed sentiment is in general agreement that some Federal aid is also required. The Federal Government is also concerned with highways airports Federal buildings and other facilities as well as with slum clearance and low-rent housing I again urge that the Congress consider Federal aid to urban redevelopment along the general lines I have previously recommended Housing We must maintain residential construction at much higher than present levels in order to eliminate the quantitative shortage and also to replace urban slums and rural shacks with an American standard of housing within a reasonable period of time From the viewpoint of economic stabilization there is a compelling reason for maintaining residential construction at consistently high levels. In the past the volume of housing production has fluctuated more violently than any other major segment of economic activity. This is shown in chart The instability of housing has contributed significantly to the CHART RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY Residential construction has fluctuated more widely than other economic activities PERCENT OP AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE | I 30a // J / L200 / m * a re / j \ 1/ / JL ~ m J x \ mOB WEN7 'AL L- LJ t * / S Gh OS NATIONAL PRODUGT ^ C H \ v A J \ \ ( i I1 / / \ \ / LJ RTMENT Di SI 'ORE SALes / r/ ? V I I pV s. / 1i ( NC1UDES P/HVATC FARM AND N0NFARM AND PUBLIC SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( CONSTRUCTION AND GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT1929-47 ) BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM ( DEPARTMENT STORE SALES ) AND HOUSING AND HOME FINANCE AGENCY ( GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT1920-28 ) instability of the economy as a whole and stabilizing residential construction would be a powerful factor in helping to stabilize the general economy The importance of housing in the national economy is shown in chart A reasonably steady flow of house production starting at a high level and increasing gradually from year to year is essential during the next decade. Taking account of our growing population the urgent desirability of replacing substandard units as rapidly as possible and the amounts of home building that will help to maintain maximum employment for the economy as a whole we need an average of more than a million new urban dwelling units a year for the next years. The needs of rural areas are also great During more than new permanent nonfarm dwelling units were started and conversion and temporary units brought the total to more than Measured by volume and allowing for shortages of materials and the unusual strength of competing demands this was a good start for a 10-year program. But the record can not be measured by volume alone. When examination is made of the relationship between the cost of this housing and our income structure it is clearly apparent that most of the housing is being built for families in the higher income brackets. To the extent that families of low and middle income are being served the high cost is placing an excessive financial strain upon them The cost of housing has been getting further and further out of line with incomes. Only a small minority of our families can afford to purchase new houses of satisfactory size and quality. This is true despite the fact that we have maximum employment and a high national income and a better income distribution than we had before the war. Unless housing costs drop the volume of private residential construction will almost certainly decline in coming years placing new difficulties in the way of our CHART HOUSING EXPENDITURES IN RELATION TO GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT Housing expenditures doubled since hove increased less than the gross national product GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT / NEW CONSTRUCTION REPAIRS ADDITIONS ALTERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE t RENT OF TENANT-OCCUPIED UNITS AND RENTAL EQUIVALENT OF OWNER-OCCUPIED UNITS FURNITURE AND HOUSEHOLD EQUIPMENT. FURNISHINGS AND OPERATION SERVICES SUCH AS FUEL AND UTILITY AND DOMESTIC SERVICES SOURCE * DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND HOUSING AND HOME FINANCE AGENCY maintaining maximum employment. The poor adjustment of housing costs to income in the 's is precisely what caused a sharp and increasing decline in home building which commenced four full years before the general depression to which it contributed Industry and labor and local governments need to bend ever-increasing efforts toward the abolition of obsolete practices and restrictions. Many of these restrictions have developed as protective devices for individuals or organizations caught in the insecurity of an industry subject to wide fluctuations. The fluctuations have caused the restrictions far more than the restrictions have caused the fluctuations. Only an affirmative program for stabilizing housing construction can clear the way for the elimination of restrictions reduction in costs and adequate provision of housing Even the minimum housing program required embraces a number of items. These include research and experimentation to devise better building techniques and concerted efforts to modernize building codes ; land assembly programs as an aid to housing ; the use of Federal insurance to stimulate longer term investment with lower financing charges both for home ownership and for rental housing ; special forms of insurance to amplify the interest in large-scale projects already being shown by builders and institutional investors who have the resources to lay the foundation for the reorganization of the housing industry along more modern lines ; and the provision of publicly-aided housing in urban and rural areas on both a rental and home ownership basis for families of low income On several occasions ^ I have recommended the enactment of comprehensive long-range housing legislation. Postponement of this action represents postponement of attention to a problem of utmost economic importance DEVELOPMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES AND PRODUCTIVITY Even with modern factories fertile fields abundant sources of power and raw materials and smoothly flowing arteries of commerce the growth of our economy will depend ultimately upon the men and women whose mental and physical energies constitute its greatest wealth. We have learned that those programs which make people healthier and more secure also make them more efficient. In this light the educational and health and social security programs which were once thought of as purely " social " take on a deep economic significance Size and composition of the labor force Our total population now about million will continue to grow for a number of decades at a rate exceeding prewar estimates. This is due to an unusually high rate of marriages and births during and since the war together with a steadily declining death rate. As a result of population growth and plentiful job opportunities the labor force and particularly the employed segment of the labor force has expanded during and after the war Civilian employment is now percent higher than the war peak and percent above the level One result of the war has been to increase the employment of teen-age workers and of men and women in the older age groups. The exacting economic demands of modern employment no less than social considerations should impel us gradually to reverse this trend. Educational and retirement programs thus influence the optimum use of our labor force While these considerations should increasingly determine the size of the labor force there is the further question of its quality. The progress of industrialization has led to the use of more complicated equipment although much of it is more automatic in its operation. This reduces both the physical exertion and the need for manual skill of operatives generally At the same time it increases the proportional demand for engineers and supervisors of higher technical training. And while many operatives have their task reduced to a simple routine they assume new responsibilities for the proper handling of expensive machinery As members of labor unions voting on strike action and other union issues and as citizens reacting to economic policies and candidates for office they need a higher degree of economic and civic education. The general requirements of intellectual competence are steadily moving upward Moreover the progress of modern technology both industrial and agricultural means that a smaller proportion of the population is required in manufacturing and farming and more people are available for the service callings and professions where even higher levels of training are required This trend is reinforced because some of these areas will suffer from shortages of trained personnel for some time to come teaching medicine and nursing being the chief examples The adjustment of the labor force to the changing character of our economy thus commences with the problem of education Education for the modern economy With a higher average of competence required by our economy the most urgent educational problems now center in the elementary and secondary schools. It is here that boys and girls receive their basic training and prepare themselves to absorb more specialized training The number of children of school age is increasing far more rapidly than had been estimated before the war. In there were million children between the ages of and ; by there will be more than CHART THE SCHOOL-AGE POPULATION More children will require increased school facilities MILLIONS OF CHILOREN AGED YEARS I960 * BASED ON TOTAL POPULATION FORECASTS MADE ON THE ASSUMPTIONS OF HIGH. FERTILITY LOW MORTALITY,. AND NET IMMIGRATION OF I MILLION PERSONS EVERY YEARS AFTER JULY I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE million. By school enrollment should be more than one-third above the level In the face of this need our educational plant is desperately inadequate State school officials report minimum needs for billion dollars of capital outlays for elementary and secondary schools twice as great as total construction expenditures for all levels of education during the decade of the 's. Due largely to low salaries the number of trained teachers is not keeping up with the increasing need. These shortages in plant and personnel are much more serious in some regions than in others. While the States with the highest per capita incomes are spending about $ annually for each school child the States with the lowest per capita income are spending only about $ This maldistribution of educational opportunities is both result and cause of differences in wealth and income in the several areas. Some of the States that are paying least per capita for education are devoting a higher percentage of their total revenues to educational purposes than others with higher per capita outlays. Federal aid to elementary and secondary education should contribute to that equalization of opportunity in various parts of the country which will fit our youth for living and working in the kind of economy that we shall have when they are grown CHART EDUCATIONAL EXPENDITURES IN HIGH AND LOW INCOME STATES Low per capita income means low educational standards even with equal effort to finance schools EDUCATIONAL EXPENDITURES PER PUPIL HIGH PER CAPITA INCOME STATES LOW PER CAPITA INCOME STATES EOUCATIONAL EXPENDITURES AS PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL PERSONAL INCOME HIGH PER CAPITA I INCOME STATES * LOW PER CAPITA INCOME STATES % SOURCE : FEDERAL SECURITY AGENC * A large proportion of the young people who are now crowding the elementary schools will progress through high school and enter college after They will replace the veterans who are now in college. Compared with an enrollment of million when the war started and a current enrollment of million we should now plan for an enrollment by of to million students in an expanded and improved system of higher education I urge the Congress to consider a comprehensive program of Federal aid to education and to enact immediately assistance to elementary and secondary schools Research The expansion of national output as well as national security depends increasingly upon scientific accomplishments. Before the war we drew heavily upon the basic discoveries of scholars all over the world. The war impeded this free flow of knowledge from other lands and destroyed much of it at the source. During recent decades our own progress in industrial and agricultural research has been tremendous but we can not afford to rest on our laurels. There is need for enlarged research both in basic principles of physical biological and social science and also in their practical application Part of the expansion required to meet a reasonable goal of research development will occur as part of the long-range growth of our economy Considerable growth in industrial research may be counted on. Existing universities and research institutes will continue to make important contributions. But it is clear that the required expansion in research into scientific principles and their application will be impossible without a comprehensive program in which Federal aid should play a part Good health and productivity Study of health records affords another example of the connection between the economic objective of maximum production and the humanitarian objective of improved well-being. With the labor force at its present size the annual cost of illness long-term disability and accidents is about man-years. A part of this loss arises from improper working conditions Occupational diseases and industrial accidents also take their toll. An even greater charge upon productivity are the millions of people who are physically substandard without being disabled. Inadequate diet is impairing the strength of too many workers. Our goal should be the establishment of safe working conditions and an increase in the physical standards of the whole population This problem has economic aspects not only because health standards below the maximum attainable reduce productivity but also because the lifting of these standards requires economic measures which remove the incapacity of many communities to support and of millions of individuals to purchase adequate medical care On these grounds I again urge the Congress to enact a comprehensive national health program of the character I have already recommended Security and productivity Job security. No matter how stable a particular business industry or region may be it can rarely avoid unemployment in the event of a serious depression. A national policy of vigorously promoting maximum employment will be the longest step toward the sense of individual security which is conducive to high productivity There is no substitute for this national policy but it should be supple- merited with planning by individual firms and industries for the stabilization of their own activities. Wage security plans have been proposed and a report on this subject is being prepared by the Council of Economic Advisers Training programs an adequate and efficient public employment service and other improvements of the labor market can all play their part. For those who will be temporarily unemployed despite our best efforts unemployment compensation should be increased in amount and duration and extended in coverage Maximum production must be based upon proof that it is not selfdefeating. Only by providing alternative jobs for those who suffer displacement and by ironing out the fluctuations in business can we convince both labor and industry that restrictive tendencies are unnecessary for them as well as hurtful to the economy as a whole Old-age security. The retirement problem has economic as well as social aspects. Those who have withdrawn from productive activity because of age continue to require goods and services and to make expenditures which flow into the general income stream. A systematic national program which provides for regularity and certainty in the basic income of those who have retired is a more efficient economic policy than the haphazard treatment of this problem which preceded the establishment of old-age insurance. Such a system has the further advantage that it helps to regularize the saving habits of workers during their productive years There are now more than million people in the United States about percent of the total population who have reached the age of ( See appendix B table XXXVI. ) By about million people or about percent of the population will have reached that age. Our systems of protection against the economic hazards of old age and dependency are inadequate. There are now some million jobs in which workers can not build up wage credits for old-age retirement. The coverage of old age and survivors ' insurance should be extended and benefits should be adjusted upward with a higher limit upon earnings which may be received after retirement without loss of benefits A lowering of the retirement age will be feasible in future years as we attain the levels of national output that sustained maximum employment and production will bring. At the same time industry should provide opportunities for the efficient employment of those older people who are able and willing to work although they have earned the right to retire Public assistance. The social insurances are supplemented by publicassistance programs financed by States with the aid of Federal grants The public-assistance programs are now more significant both in terms of the number of people aided and in terms of total expenditures than the social insurances. About million people now depend on public assist- CHART THE AGING POPULATION The total population continues to increase rapidly with relatively more people over MILLIONS OF PERSONS MILLIONS OF PERSONS YEARS AND OVER i YEARS I i 1i UNDER YEARS I960 * FORECAST BASED ON ASSUMPTIONS OF HIGH FERTILITY. LOW MORTALITY AND NET IMMIGRATION OF I MILLION PERSONS EVERY S'YEAR PERIOD AFTER JULY I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ance in part because existing social insurances particularly old age and survivors ' insurance are deficient and because there is no national health insurance program. Expansion of social insurance will decrease the need for public assistance expenditures but those who must still rely on public assistance should receive adequate payments. The Federal Government should make grants to States to help them finance general-assistance payments and all public-assistance grants should take account of variations in the ability of the States to finance adequate assistance programs Freedom from discrimination. Maximum employment and production can not be maintained when men and women are discriminated against because of race or color creed or national origin. An effective system which will assure fair employment practices should be established Fiscal aspects of benefit programs The whole question of benefits can not be divorced from the question of the cost of the payments and how these costs are borne. It is of paramount importance to bear in mind that the costs of unemployment old age and sickness are borne by the community whether social security measures exist or not. Social security measures involve a change in the distribution of money goods and services among consumers only to the extent that the existence of the measures diverts additional funds to the support of the aided groups. This diversion does occur but the additional funds are far less than the total volume of benefits provided under the programs Nevertheless the fact that wage earners ' risks are met under social security measures through payments derived from taxes rather than directly from private sources in itself has economic implications. The social insurances are now financed by employees ' contributions and employers ' payroll taxes ; the public assistance payments are financed from general revenues Employees ' pay-roll taxes place a heavy drain upon mass purchasing power while the employers ' share of these taxes adds to costs of production. In financing an expanded social-insurance program these economic aspects should be considered DEVELOPMENT OF INSTITUTIONS AND PRACTICES FOR A HIGH-PRODUCTION ECONOMY Preceding sections have discussed the means by which our natural resources our capital equipment and our human resources may be developed to support a maximum level of well-being. But the ability to produce will not alone assure economic stability and growth. Recurrent periods of recession or depression have led to the realization that maximum resource utilization depends upon many adjustments within our complex economy. It is necessary for us to apply systematic forward thinking to the shaping of our economic institutions and the practices of the men and women whose behavior determines how those institutions will in fact operate The problem of progressively improving these institutions policies and practices so as to attain balanced growth of the economy divides naturally into four main parts : first in the industrial area we need price-wage-profit policies which maintain balance between the output of industry and the ability of consumers to buy that output. Second in the agricultural area we need balance between city and farm income and between farm and industrial prices. Third the fiscal policies of the Government such as taxation and debt management need to be so contrived as to afford maximum incentives to production and to improve the balance within the economic system generally. And fourth we must strike a wise balance between our internal economic activities and our international trade Industrial price-wage-profit policies The national purpose of maximum employment production and purchasing power enunciated in the Employment Act of includes a declaration " to foster and promote free competitive enterprise and the general welfare. " Discussion of industrial price-wage-profit policies may therefore quite properly begin with the problem of maintaining a truly competitive system of free enterprise Maintenance of competition. To operate effectively without a high degree of Government intervention a free enterprise economy must adjust itself to changing conditions through appropriate movements of prices costs and production. In a very vital way this depends on the maintenance of fair competitive rivalry among business enterprises. This is recognized in the long-standing policy embodied in the antitrust laws the central purpose of which is to prevent monopolistic control of markets and in the words of the author of the Sherman Act to gain for the people the advantage of " the natural competition of increasing production. " Unregulated private monopoly tends to undermine independent enterprises and to create exaggerated extremes of wealth and power within the country. Strong monopoly elements are likely to retard seriously the costprice-output adjustments necessary to economic stability with full employment. For these reasons as well as for the other counts against unregulated monopoly there must be a strong and continuing pressure by the Government to keep alive the competitive characteristics of the business system If this were not to be done we should have to look forward first to a great increase of private monopolistic control of American business and thereafter since this would be intolerable to a great increase in the public regulation of business activity if not actual public operation in some fields In considering the character of competition in the future it is impossible to ignore the tremendous changes which have occurred in the organization of business control over the past or years. From a situation in which industry was typically organized on a small scale basis we have arrived at a situation in which there exist corporations of gigantic size. In many industries one two three or four companies control a major fraction of production. In many areas of industry modern technology requires that firms be of a very considerable size. The best opinion is however that the largest enterprises in many industries are larger than is necessary to secure the benefits of technical efficiency. In the future amendment and enforcement of the antitrust laws the principle should be followed of checking the further excessive concentration of industrial control and by protecting the position of smaller competing enterprises of reversing the past trend toward concentration Much of the adaptability of the American economy stems from the initiative and enterprise which give rise to small business concerns throughout the Nation. They should have the opportunity to develop and prosper The existence of the antitrust laws although not a sufficient basis for a healthy development of new enterprises is an essential condition. Beyond this we must insure that no artificial barriers to their growth exist either through the tax laws or otherwise and in particular that credit suited and adequate to their needs is made available The present degree of concentration of economic power and the existence of other monopolistic elements pose very grave problems. It was in recognition of this fact that the Temporary National Economic Committee was set up in to engage in a far-reaching inquiry into business organization and practice. The central problems have not been altered by economic changes in the intervening years and it is important that in the light of the findings of the TNEC we move forward to a clear enunciation of public policy and a program of public action The problem of price policies. The effect upon prices of corporate bigness and collusive monopolistic practices is only one aspect of a much wider pricing problem. Many a business manager fears that the use of price reductions to expand his share of the market will merely result in retaliatory price changes by other firms. Business therefore has sought as far as possible to place the competition for markets which it must meet upon some other basis than price competition. The pricing system is thereby deprived of much of the elasticity needed to adjust relative changes in cost and demand Moreover in the effort to realize profits through the ups and downs of business prices and profit margins are geared to the expectation that full use of capacity is not a normal situation. This means that in periods of high production pricing policies and practices are followed that produce a level of profits designed to protect the individual company during future declines in business activity rather than to contribute to the prevention of such declines. Such policies are not conducive to the continued health of the business community because they act on the assumption that it will not continue The price mechanism may serve either to promote or to prevent a safe balance among prices wages and profits. The greater the success of our free enterprise system in maintaining this balance the less need there will be for direct governmental intervention in the economic system. This imposes a heavy responsibility upon those business managers whose decisions importantly affect the levels of prices wages and profits. Management must recognize that sustained maximum production requires that gains in productivity be passed on through lower prices and better wages to the fullest extent consistent with adequate incentives to business enterprise The collective bargaining process to determine wages also plays a vital part in the determination and maintenance of healthy price-wage-profit policies It can not fulfill its function if it is used merely as a test of the sheer force which one party or the other can exert in the pursuit of immediate selfinterest. Collective bargaining must be based upon a better understanding of the long-range interests of management and labor in the context of the interests of the whole economy The greatest opportunity for bringing about economic betterment lies in achieving and maintaining a proper balance among prices wages and profits. One of the purposes of the Employment Act is to provide a new climate for pricing policies. The act contemplates that the combined resources of business labor agriculture and the Government will be used to do away with business fluctuations of the violence known in the past. To determine what price and wage policies and practices are appropriate to this objective a reexamination of the problem is necessary Therefore I have instructed the Council of Economic Advisers to continue its work on this problem with the assistance of representatives of- all groups concerned. The results of such a study should contribute to the development of sound legislative proposals. But its most important outcome should be a wider and deeper understanding on the part of the Government business labor and consumer groups as to the price wage and production policies and practices which will contribute most fully to the maintenance of high levels of consumption and investment Markets and income distribution. During the postwar period our economic balance has thus far been maintained in the sense that we are still operating at maximum levels of employment and very high levels of production. But the situation is precarious to the extent that the balance can not be maintained indefinitely without changes in the current pattern of economic relationships The Nation 's Economic Budget in constant dollars for and shown on page of this Report indicates changes in the relationships of the major components of the economy. At the present time an unusually large proportion of the market demand for goods and services results from business investments net exports and Government outlays. These have attained a level relatively higher than consumer expenditures compared with the prewar period. In terms of prices annual expenditures for producers ' durable equipment have increased by percent while annual consumers ' expenditures have increased by only percent above the prewar level We can not regard the relationship between capital formation and consumption either in or in as a model for the future. Domestic capital formation in was not sufficient. On the other hand we are now in the stage where the improvement and modernization of our national productive plant has a high priority claim on our resources. Nonetheless after the most urgent deficiencies in our national plant have been overcome and the extraordinary export surplus has been reduced a very substantial increase both absolute and relative in individual consumption will be possible and necessary. Without this substantial increase in the general standard of living we would not be able to sustain an expanding economy of full resource utilization The increases in consumer incomes and expenditures which have taken place over the last decade are the result not only of the general increase in national income but also of significant changes in income distribution. On page of this Report estimates are presented which show the trend toward better distribution of family incomes. This trend needs to be continued if ready and constant markets are to be available for a potential increase of percent in total output of goods and services within a decade. The trend should be continued also because there are still millions of families whose incomes are too low to provide a decent standard of living. A substantial part of our increasing productivity should be devoted to the betterment of these families An increase in full-time employment and in the number of employed persons per family were important elements contributing to creating equality of income during the past decade. But with maximum employment now virtually achieved further increase in these factors can no longer be expected. Already recent trends in the real incomes of individuals and families indicate that we are losing some of the gains registered before price inflation gained momentum in the middle of This price inflation presents in a new and aggravated form the old and unsolved problem of assuring continuous maximum production by maintaining the maximum real purchasing power which must go with it without relying too long upon the depletion of savings extraordinary use of credit and an abnormal export surplus Our central problem is to make gradual readjustments so that the conditions for permanent stability are reached without generating a recession of employment and business activity in the process Agricultural and food policies The new farm problem. For two full decades after the first world war congressional and executive policy was dominated by " surpluses " and low prices for farm products. The trends in our economy since the start of World War II have changed basic conditions so markedly that the farm CHART CONSUMER INCOME FOOD CONSUMPTION AND FARM INCOME Increased consumer income has brought higher food consumption and has raised farm income PERCENT OF " AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE REAL DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME ( PER CAPITA ) * CIVILIAN FOOD CONSUMPTION ( PER CAPITA ) fin I I I I I I I I I Un REA L NET FARM INCOME * * ( PER CAPITA ) I ADJUSTED FOR CHANGES IN CONSUMERS ' PRICES " NET INCOME OF PERSONS ON FARMS FROM FARMING ADJUSTED FOR CHANGES IN PRICES PAID BY FARMERS FOR COMMODITIES USED IN FAMILY MAINTENANCE SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE ( FOOD CONSUMPTION FARM INCOME AND PRICES PAID BY FARMERS ) DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( DISPOSABLE INCOME AND POPULATION ) DEPARTMENT OFLABOR ( CONSUMERS'PRICES ) 8o problem of today is not to dispose of surpluses but to get enough production to prevent inflated prices. ( See appendix B tables VI and XIV. ) If we succeed in our efforts to maintain industrial stability we can look forward to many years of large markets and agricultural prosperity. Farmers have a large stake in this endeavor. The farm problem today and in the foreseeable future should be stated in terms of a maximum production economy. Farm policies should aim at continuing expansion To achieve stabilized farm prosperity there will need to be changes in the traditional patterns of farm production. Increased efficiency will be required to enlarge the total production of a farming industry which can not be materially increased in acreage. The depletion of our soil resources during the war years calls urgently for the extension of conservation programs Needed levels of farm production. The greatly increased demand for food on the part of our civilian population was a remarkable feature of our wartime economy. This profound change in eating habits founded upon higher and better-distributed national income has continued since VJ-day In per capita food consumption was about percent above the average. Among the items increasing more than the average were chickens and turkeys percent ; eggs percent ; meats percent ; and fluid milk and cream percent. ( See also appendix B table XXXV. ) In view of the growing population and expanding income we should seek within a decade to raise agricultural production about percent above present levels. This would mean that crop production would be about percent and livestock production nearly percent above prewar levels Increasing farm productivity. Achievement of the high objectives set for agriculture will require efficient use of resources. This means increasing emphasis upon research and education to improve technology. It will necessitate an increased capital investment per worker to raise the individual 's productivity about percent above the prewar level. It will also mean using two or three times as much fertilizer as before the war about three times as many tractors on farms and more of other types of machinery and equipment There are still tremendous variations in the efficiency of farm manpower use. Many farms are well organized. But some or million are too small or have poor land or have inadequate buildings and equipment There is need to increase the efficiency of labor on such farms and to help some farmers and farm laborers find other more profitable employment More adequate educational and financial aids should be provided for this purpose Security for agriculture and the farm market. Both farmers and con- 8i sumers should be protected from the feast-and-famine cycle that the vagaries of nature impose from time to time on farm production. Technological progress will reduce this problem but there will be continuing need for crop insurance and for storage programs for staples and marketing programs for perishables. Orderly marketing and the widest possible distribution of bumper crops call for educational and service work with industry and consumers in moving large supplies Great opportunities exist for further advances in marketing farm products through intensified research and through educational and service programs. From the farmer 's standpoint marketing improvements mean wider outlets and more adequate returns for his product. From the consumer 's standpoint they mean both savings in costs of these products and better more adequate and more conveniently available supplies Commodity price supports are desirable as assurances against special dislocations which might arise in case of recession. I emphasize however the need for keeping support levels flexible. I am glad to note the effort currently being made by various groups outside as well as inside the Government to modernize and improve the parity formula I also realize the stake of many American farmers in maintaining a stable and satisfactory foreign market. Our farmers should continue to export substantial quantities of wheat cotton tobacco rice and fruit. Though export demands especially for grain are now at a high level some of our more difficult long-term problems are in the foreign trade field Interdependence of farm and city. Maintaining an expanding demand for farm products depends not only on maximum employment for the whole economy but also upon raising the incomes and living standards of those portions of the urban population who have suffered from excessively low incomes even in times of prosperity So long as percent of our total families have incomes under $ a year and percent have incomes under $ a year as is shown in table on page the dietary standards of these low-income families can not comport with the true meaning of maximum production for agriculture. Studies made in indicated that the families and single individuals having incomes of $ or more enough to satisfy their food wants fairly liberally at the price level then prevailing bought percent more fruit percent more vegetables and meats and milk and percent more eggs than the average for the population as a whole. This means that minimum wage and other programs designed to encourage a better income balance throughout the wage-earning population should be regarded by the farm population as serving their interests also. The farmer is a prime beneficiary of well-distributed prosperity High and stable levels of food consumption are essential to a prosperous agriculture. When demand is high there is little need for direct price supports. Programs to maintain food consumption can go far to prevent economic recessions to maintain good markets for farmers and to safeguard the diets and health of the public. Our agricultural and food program should therefore give increased emphasis to measures designed to protect the diets of such groups as school children and low-income families Just as the farmer sells to the city and depends upon urban prosperity so also the products of industry are sold to farmers in larger quantities when there is farm prosperity The relatively low income of farmers before the war was proverbial Its effects on the demand for industrial products are equally striking. This is shown in the following figures comparing per capita net income from farming of farm people with what they bought in three significant years : Farm income per capita : $ ; $ ; about $ Farm implement sales : million dollars ; million dollars ; around million dollars Mail-order sales : million dollars ; million dollars ; over million dollars Feed and farm supply store sales : million dollars ; million dollars ; nearly billion dollars Despite recent gains the purchasing power of many farmers is low compared with that of nonfarm people. The average per capita income of farm people derived from all sources was $ in while the income of nonfarm people was $ This low average for farm people reflects not low farm prices prices were high but the low productivity of many farmers The more widespread enjoyment of satisfactory incomes in farm areas will provide enormous new outlets for industrial products. As recently as only percent of all rural homes had refrigerators or ice boxes ; only percent had electric irons and only percent had running water Since then the installation of these conveniences in farm homes has given businessmen and wage earners some conception of the large stake they have in the maintenance of farm prosperity and its extension to an everincreasing number of farm families. Electrification particularly is providing for farmers a vast range of labor-saving equipment and living conveniences and is creating an increasing market for industrial products Our economy is indivisible. Maximum production and purchasing power in the city and on the farm are inseparably connected. As shown by the relative instability and inadequacy of farm income in the past and the impact of this upon the whole economy the economic future of the country as a whole will require concentration upon those policies which will enable the farm population to share equitably in economic growth and in the improvement of living standards Taxation and debt management Taxation. The first feature of our long-range tax policy must be the maintenance of tax revenue which except in years of depression will balance the Federal budget and provide a substantial surplus for debt retirement It is a remarkable feature of the postwar period that there has been so little fear of the effects upon the national credit or upon the national well-being of a public debt ten times as large as the debt which a dozen years ago was causing much uneasiness in the financial world. But although we have learned that an enormous public debt is not necessarily ruinous to public credit nor destructive of national prosperity we should never forget that within it is a sleeping danger. If less propitious conditions arise within the economy the public debt may indeed be found a serious burden upon the process of readjustment. Every consideration of prudence with respect to future problems of the national economy and of the national credit in critical circumstances requires a firm and sustained policy of reducing the public debt The second requirement of our long-range tax policy is that the tax rates and the character of the taxes be such as to help sustain prosperity. This can not be done by a tax structure that remains the same regardless of changing economic circumstances. Lowering particular taxes on business may at one time be needed as a means of stimulating business expenditures when they are inclined to lag but maintaining or advancing taxes at another time may be needed as a means of checking overexpansion or overcapitalization. These adaptations can be made without the injection of uncertainties into businessmen 's calculations greater than those they are already accustomed to deal with. Similarly the abatement of taxes on consumers or certain classes of consumers may at one time be important as a means of supporting their purchasing power whereas at another time the maintenance or increase of taxes may be the most effective means of damping an inflationary tendency There is an obvious conflict between the desire of consumers to have taxes upon their incomes reduced and the desire of business to be relieved of taxes which figure in operating costs or which lessen the funds that they have for reinvestment and business expansion or that large income receivers have available to invest as equity capital. This conflict of private interests must in the consideration of tax policy be resolved by the Congress through adjustments which will promote the most prosperous and stable economy There is no formula by which the best distribution of the tax burden can be determined. However the lessons of wartime and early postwar experience seem to indicate that for the sustaining of an economy of maximum production and a market commensurate with this rate of production more concern will need to be directed during the years just ahead toward easing the tax burden on the consumer than toward accelerating the rate of capital formation Debt management. The vast increase in the public debt has not created the difficulties that many people feared partly because our national debt is owned by our own citizens and partly because of the technical skill with which the debt has been managed jointly by the Treasury Department and the Federal Reserve System A most important part of our debt-management policy has been the program to support the market for Government securities. During the war period when it was vitally necessary to maintain a market which would absorb vast issues of securities at low interest rates the Federal Reserve stabilized the market through its open market operations in buying and selling short-term Government securities at low rates of interest Now that it is no longer necessary for the Government to increase its debt short-term interest rates have been permitted to rise. A decline has also been permitted in prices of bonds from the premium prices to which they had risen as a result of market demands in the early postwar period No bonds however have been permitted to fall below par and it is the declared purpose to continue active support of Government bonds for the purpose of maintaining an orderly and stable market at a low level of long-term interest rates The established policy of supporting the market for Government securities makes it possible for banks to obtain additional reserves on the basis of which to expand credit by selling part of their large holdings of securities to the Federal Reserve. This policy therefore does not permit the Federal Reserve to make effective use of the traditional method of limiting inflationary movements in the economy by requiring banks to borrow in order to obtain additional reserves and by raising the discount rate charged on such borrowings. The result of such a policy would be an increase in general interest rates. If the rate of interest upon other investments rose they would become more attractive than Government bonds both to banks and to other investment holders who would call upon the Federal Reserve banks to buy bonds. Any purchases by the Reserve System would offset the effects of the restrictive discount rate policy In the recent congressional hearings there have been proposals to solve this dilemma by abandoning the support policy and freeing the Federal Reserve banks to bring about an anti-inflationary contraction of credit by increasing the discount rate as was done in No such change in policy should be considered. The financial world should rest easy that the investment market will not be subjected to the demoralization which swept over it in when the unsupported market for Government bonds fell about percent below par Affirmation of a policy of supporting the Government bond market as a continuing program of the Government requires the use of other and less dangerous methods to restrain inflationary bank credit. Voluntary but effective restraint by the banks of inflationary bank credit expansion may prove adequate to the problem. If it does not more direct action by the Federal Reserve banks will be required. Such actions as may be taken will not involve withdrawing support from the Government bond market International economic relations The far-reaching effects of World War II upon the use of economic resources and upon the trade and business relations between nations will be felt for many years. The enormous destruction of the physical and organizational basis of production spread over most of Europe and parts of Asia while elsewhere many new industries were developed and old ones stimulated. In the reconstruction process many alterations in the patterns of economic organization and trade relations are taking place. Great Britain is engaged in a difficult task of industrial and trade rehabilitation while two other former leading industrial nations Germany and Japan are now thrust into minor roles The relative importance of the United States in the world economy has been greatly enhanced partly because some of the older great nations have suffered adversity but primarily because of our own increase in production Although other nations fortunately possess most of the resources which they need for reconstruction certain critical resources such as food and machinery which are needed to revitalize their productive energies can be supplemented only by supplies from the United States and other countries of the Western Hemisphere. The program which I have asked Congress to authorize in order to assist European recovery over the next years may make the difference between success and failure of world reconstruction The changing economic position of the other industrial nations is of great significance. During the war and its aftermath many areas that formerly looked to these nations for industrial products have become intent upon their own industrial development. They can not secure supplies sufficient to meet their increased requirements for capital goods from their traditional trade sources and they are beckoning increasingly to American machine makers to American capital and to American skill in management and production A development which we can not yet evaluate is the growth of the policy of state control of foreign trade in many countries. Because of critical shortages throughout the world there has been little relaxation of the wartime controls over exports imports and foreign exchange and the course of action in some countries indicates a purpose to continue these controls Our experience however shows that the difficulties of trade between a nation with state control and a nation with free enterprise can be surmounted and they can be expected to diminish as goods become more readily available in world markets Other developments bound to affect the course of trade are the occupation of Germany and Japan and the emergence of several new independent and self-governing states Against this background of new developments we can place the more familiar consideration of our own requirements. For some commodities we must have foreign markets or undertake a serious task of shifting our resources. A substantial part of agricultural and industrial employment is in production for export. On the other hand our need for imports especially of raw materials will increase notwithstanding our progress in the production of substitutes for such materials as natural rubber and silk two of our most important prewar imports. The great enlargement in national production which has been portrayed in this Report requires a corresponding increase in those raw materials which come from abroad and in many other goods and services supplied by foreign countries. The heavy drain of war production upon our own natural resources must be remedied by a conservation policy supported by heavier imports and the national security must be fortified by stockpiles of strategic materials which we do not produce at home Undeterred by the uncertainties arising from new political and economic conditions this Government has been striving consistently to promote recovery and reconstruction efforts which would eventually contribute to mutually profitable and harmonious international economic relations. In addition to relief and reconstruction aid we have supported within the framework of the United Nations a series of international organizations such as the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development the International Monetary Fund and the Food and Agriculture Organization to cope with the different categories of economic problems. This vast effort is now well advanced and many of these international organizations are already operating Still in process of creation is the International Trade Organization. The draft charter of this organization lays down a code of fair play in the international trade field. Nondiscriminatory and multilateral trade unhampered by high barriers is the central aim of the proposed organization A major step toward this long-range goal is the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade recently concluded between ourselves and other countries. This agreement reduces or eliminates preferences affecting a large part of our trade with the British Commonwealth. It provides for reductions of many tariffs and the maintenance of a low rate or free entry on other products. These concessions are protected by provisions designed to prevent participating countries from resorting to alternative means of restriction or discrimination. Like the proposed charter of the International Trade Organization this agreement will help establish conditions under which world trade can flourish in less troubled times and under which the present reconstruction efforts can be carried forward The recovery of foreign production and ability to export our own high demand for imports and the international agreements to reduce obstacles to trade may be expected to help other countries buy our products in the future without depending upon the extraordinary financial assistance that is now required. Nevertheless it is natural and desirable that we maintain some surplus of exports in the years ahead by the steady investment abroad of private capital. It is desirable both from our point of view and that of other countries that we a country rich in capital make some of our savings available to areas where capital is needed and where properly safeguarded private investments can earn a good return THE TIMING OF ECONOMIC PROGRAMS TO PROMOTE STABILIZATION While it is most urgent now that we combat inflationary dangers we can not wait until the tide turns before considering affirmative measures that will be needed in the future. Economic conditions may turn rapidly but the formulation enactment and initiation of economic and fiscal programs require a considerable amount of time. Prudence demands that we look ahead and prepare for tomorrow while we act for today In timing the adoption of measures for long-run prosperity we must give careful consideration to the following principles : ( ) Certain programs related to national security and foreign policy to promotion of urgently needed production and to protection of our natural and human resources against serious economic hazards must go ahead even though Government outlays for foreign or domestic programs contribute to the necessity of anti-inflationary measures ( ) Certain adjustments such as the increase in minimum wages and tax adjustments are needed in order to mitigate the hardship imposed on those who are the hardest-hit victims of the inflationary price rise ( ) Major parts of the proposed expansion in the social security program will be deflationary in the first period after inauguration. Therefore there is no reason to postpone the adoption of these urgently needed measures ( ) Federal State and local public works in general should still be deferred wherever feasible. We need however certain initial steps immediately to prepare these measures for future years. For instance the Federal Government and State and local governments should be preparing drawings and specifications for public-works projects to be undertaken when needed. In my budget for the fiscal year I have included appropriation requests and estimated expenditures in amounts sufficient for the initial steps of new public works ( ) When the inflationary pressure subsides we should speed up the programs of resource development transportation and urban rehabilitation and further expand the social security health and education programs Since our first experience with the Employment Act is occurring under conditions that give priority to measures needed to counteract inflation we are given time to consider carefully the measures that will aid in meeting the threat of unemployment at some time in the future. But we must not fritter away the time thus granted us. We must not be complacent and believe that the job of employment stabilization has been solved. A boom carries in it the seeds of its own destruction. We must be prepared to act in time if we want to make good our promise and prove to the world as well as ourselves that an economic system of free institutions can be made to work steadily as well as efficiently Appendix A CONTENTS Page I. The Nation 's Economic Budget Explanation of the tables The constant dollar estimates II. The Federal Budget III. The distribution of income prewar and postwar List of Tables I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII The Nation 's Economic Budget Consumer account Business account Net exports and net foreign investment Government cash receipts and payments to the public Adjustments to receipts ( or income ) in the Nation 's Economic Budget Adjustments to expenditures in the Nation 's Economic Budget Federal cash surplus calendar years andl948 Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing calendar years and Federal cash payments to the public calendar years and Reconciliation of Budget receipts with cash receipts from the public calendar year Reconciliation of Budget expenditures with cash payments to the public calendar year QX I. The Nation 's Economic Budget Explanation of the tables Table I presents the Nation 's Economic Budget for calendar years and the first and second half of T A B L E I. The Nation 's Economic Budget Calender years ; and [ Billions of dollars current prices ] seasonally adjusted annual rates First half Second half Economic group CONSUMERS Disposable income Expenditures BUSINESS Undistributed profits and additions to reserves Gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) INTERNATIONAL Net foreign investment.. Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) GOVERNMENT ( Federal State and local ) public Cash receipts from the Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) A D J U S T M E N T S ( To arrive at gross national product ) For receipts., For payments Total Gross National Product * Based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources. The Nation 's Economic Budget is based on the estimates of national income and product by the Department of Commerce and of Government cash receipts and payments by the Bureau of the Budget Corporate profits before and after taxes in the last half of are the tentative estimates of the Council of Economic Advisers. All estimates for the second half of are preliminary and subject to revision A number of the principal series comprised in the national income and product estimates are shown in appendix B tables I through IV ( by calendar years from through and by quarters for and ) Those desiring more detailed information are referred to the National Income Supplement to the Survey of Current Business published in July of Appendix A of the Economic Report of January contains a general description of the income and product flows depicted in the Nation 's Economic Budget Change in treatment For purposes of statistical simplification a minor change in treatment has been incorporated in the present estimates of the Nation 's Economic Budget from that used in previous reports to the Congress. The Nation 's Economic Budget presents Government receipts and expenditures on a cash basis. In estimating business and personal income and expenditures the Department of Commerce does not reckon the transactions of individuals and businesses with the Government on a cash basis ; e. g. corporate taxes correspond to liabilities rather than payments. Adjustments were formerly made in the income of business and consumers as estimated by the Department of Commerce to place these accounts on a cash basis as far as transactions with the Government are involved thus making them consistent with the Government accounts in the Budget It has been decided however that the advantage of conceptual consistency in the Nation 's Economic Budget table is outweighed by the complication of having two sets of estimates of income which are similar in purpose and differ only for technical reasons. Consequently all adjustments are now consolidated in the " adjustment " item at the bottom of the Nation 's Economic Budget table and the consumers ' and business account correspond with the Department of Commerce concepts The simplification is most important in the business income account. The latter has formerly included a considerable number of adjustment items mostly representing transactions with the Government which made the adjusted total differ markedly from the accounting concept of business income. For example the difference between business tax liabilities and payments to the Government as well as receipts from the sale of surplus property were formerly adjustments in business income. The present treatment of business income which corresponds more closely to business usage is described below The Accounts Consumer account. Table II below shows the principal sources of personal income personal taxes and a break-down of expenditures by important classifications. Consumer income includes the net profits of unincorporated business. Expenditures exclude purchases of new homes but include imputed rent on owner-occupied dwellings TABLE II Consumer account Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] seasonally adjusted annual rates Receipts or expenditures First half Receipts : Personal income Labor income Proprietors and rental income Dividends and interest _ Transfer payments Veterans * Other Less : Personal tax and nontax paymentsEquals : Disposable income Second half * Expenditures Total Durable goods _ Automobiles and parts Household equipment and furniture. Other Nondurable goods Food * Clothing and shoes Other nondurable goods Services Housing Other..Saving i Preliminary estimate based on incomplete data Includes employer disbursements for wages and salaries minus employee contributions for social insurance plus other labor income Includes business transfers * Includes military pension disability and retirement payments mustering-out pay readjustment selfemployment and subsistence allowances terminal leave bonds and other miscellaneous payments Includes alcoholic beverages NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Business account. The business income acocunt is shown in table III Business income includes undistributed corporate profits and the adjustment for corporate inventory valuation plus capital consumption allowances for all business. Because there is no information on entrepreneurial withdrawals it is impossible to include an estimate of retained earnings for unincorporated business. Thus the true amount of business saving is understated and personal saving over-estimated by an equal amount. Since investment includes the investment of all business including the investment of individuals in homes business income and expenditures are not entirely comparable TABLE III Business account Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts or investment seasonally adjusted annual rates First half Receipts : Corporate profits Less : Corporate profits tax liabilities Dividends _____ Equals : Corporate undivided profits Plus : Capital consumption allowance Less : Corporate inventory valuation adjustment Equals : Undistributed profits and additions to reservesDomestic gross investment : Construction Residential nonfarm Nonresidential Producers ' durable equipment Change in business inventories Total ___ Second half * ._ Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) i Preliminary estimate based on incomplete data The adjustment for inventory valuation arises out of the definition of gross national product or income. The increase in the physical volume of inventories measured in current prices is included as part of the gross output of the economy and the income derived therefrom as part of the gross national receipts. When prices are rising the value of inventories increases more than the increase in physical volume since the value of the existing stock rises as units are sold and replaced at higher costs. Income arises in the form of " windfall " profits which are not derived from current production. The inventory valuation adjustment measures this income. By deducting this adjustment from retained corporate profits income and output are obtained on a comparable basis. ( It should be noted that an adjustment for noncorporate inventory valuation is made in business and professional income by the Department of Commerce. ) The investment items shown in the business account can not be totaled to indicate the amount of funds required for financing. For example investment includes only that part of an increase in the value of inventory arising from an increase in physical volume while the whole amount of any increase in the value of inventories must be financed. Needs for capital also arise in connection with the transfer of fixed assets though such transfers are not reflected in the gross national product. In addition some investment in equipment is financed through depreciation allowances and some is charged to current expense. Agricultural equipment is fre- quently financed out of farmers ' current income and residential construction by the owner-occupant. Thus these investments do not give rise to financing requirements in the usual sense International account. Net foreign investment equals the excess of goods and services supplied to foreign countries including income on capital supplied to them over goods and services received minus the excess of unilateral transfers to foreign countries over transfers to the United States The net balance of unilateral transfers or gifts to foreign countries by the United States Government is included in Government expenditures for goods and services while private gifts to foreign countries are included under consumers ' expenditures in the Nation 's Budget. Such transfer expenditures are therefore deducted from exports in order to avoid double counting Unilateral transfers do not constitute the entire means of financing exports made available by the Government but only that portion which is a gift and which consequently does not constitute investment abroad. The total of Government aid used in financing exports in and is shown in table page of the text and in greater detail in appendix B table XXXI The derivation of net foreign investment from the excess of exports of goods and services is shown in table IV below TABLE IV. Net exports and net foreign investment C a l e n d a r y e a r s a n d IBillions of dollars ] Annual rates Exports and investment Net exports of goods and services _ Less : Net balance of unilateral transfers : Government Private Equals : Net balance of payments on current accountLess : Adjustment for expenditures in United States territories Equals : Net foreign investment First half Second half * ! i Based on incomplete data Government account. A break-down of Government cash receipts and payments to show Federal State and local governments separately is shown in table V. ( The derivation of Federal cash receipts and payments from budgetary receipts and payments as well as a break-down of Federal payments by functional classification and Federal receipts by source are shown in section I I of this appendix. ) Adjustments to receipts and expenditures. The gross national product for any period is the current output of the economy valued at prices to the final user. Gross national expenditure is confined to expenditure for that output and gross national receipts to income arising from that output Expenditures or receipts arising from the sale of assets existing at the be- T A B L E V. Government cash receipts and payments to the public Calendar y e a r s a n d [ Billions of dollars ] seasonally adjusted annual rates Receipts or payments First half Receipts : Federal.._ State and local * Second half i _ Total payments Total receipts Payments : Federal State and local * Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) i Based on incomplete data Excludes Federal grants in aid ginning of the period are not included in these concepts nor are sums transferred in the form of gifts pensions annuities etc Tables VI and VII show the deduction which must be made from the sum total of receipts and of expenditures to eliminate capital transactions transfer payments and double counting in the estimate of the gross output or income T A B L E VI. Adjustments to receipts ( or income ) in the Nation9s Economic Budget Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] seasonally adjusted annual rates Description First half Total receipts ( or income ) .Less : Income not derived from current production of goods and services : ( a ) Net interest payments by government ( b ) Transfer payments to individuals .__ ( c ) Subsidies less current surplus of Government enterprises. __ ( d ) Receipts from sale of surplus property Adjustments to Government cash receipts Statistical discrepancy Equals : Gross national receipts Second half i Based on incomplete data a Includes excess of Government receipts over liabilities on corporate income taxes and of Government receipts over personal tax payments minus contributions to Government retirement funds National Service Life Insurance and Government Life Insurance. The last items are noneash in nature and consequently are not included in cash receipts of the Government ,but must be included in the gross national income NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding The constant dollar estimates Transforming the current dollar estimates in the Nation 's Economic Budget into constant dollar equivalents necessitated the use of special price TABLE VII. Adjustments to expenditures in the Nation 's Economic Budget Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] seasonally adjusted annual rates Description First half Total expenditures of consumers business and government Less : Government transfer payments To individuals J To business _ Abroad * Government cash interest payments Tax refunds Other adjustments Equals : Expenditures for gross national product Second half * Based on incomplete data Includes payments to social insurance beneficiaries veterans ' pensions and readjustment allowances etc. Agrees with the Commerce concept of transfers to individuals Includes Government subsidies domestic sales of consumer-type surplus property net receivables and capital transactions. ( Purchases of consumer-type surplus property are included in consumer expenditures. Hence a deduction is made to avoid double-counting. ) * Includes loans to foreign governments and subscriptions to the International Fund and Bank and sales of surplus property abroad Includes the net expenditures of Government corporations which do not represent capital formation plus payments from deposit accounts set up by military and civilian personnel overseas less noncash expenditures for goods and services NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding indexes because of the variety of types of incomes and expenditures involved ( See page of text. ) These indexes were constructed by breaking expenditures down into a large number of components and deflating each by the most appropriate price index. The implicit index of price change for each account consumers business and Government could then be determined from the sum of the deflated components. This " implicit " index was used to adjust the income in each account The usefulness of the estimates of National Income and Product would be greatly increased if it were possible to present the key series in terms of constant as well as current dollars in all recent years. However at the present time no price indexes adjusted to take account of the differences in the composition of war output and civilian type output are available Comparisons between and are more satisfactory since the present composition of production is more similar to that of than to that of the war years II. The Federal Budget Table VIII shows the Federal cash surplus for calendar years and the anticipated surplus for calendar The estimate is based on the assumption of continued high levels of employment and income no changes in tax legislation and the enactment of the Presidential recom- mendations for new legislation as set forth in the budget message for fiscal Estimates of the main sources of cash revenue for the same years are shown in table IX while table X shows expenditures by function insofar as this was feasible with available information Tables XI and XII contain a reconciliation between budgetary receipts and cash receipts and between budgetary payments and cash payments respectively. The budgetary accounts contain some receipts and expenditures which have no immediate economic impact being merely accounting entries from the standpoint of the economy as a whole. For example funds may be transferred from the general and special accounts to the trust accounts without affecting transactions with the public or funds may be set aside for interest accruing but not yet payable. The cash receipts and payments on the other hand present Government operations on a consolidated basis. Transactions between various types of accounts are eliminated as well as various types of expenditure which do not involve receipt or payment of cash. The estimates of cash receipts from and payments to the public are more informative for purposes of economic analysis than are the conventional budgetary concepts ; the cash concepts are consequently used in the Nation 's Economic Budget TABLE VIII. Federal cash surplus Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] Receipts or payments * Cash surplus Receipts Payments i Based on actual data through mid-December a See footnote tables I X and X below TABLE IX. Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing Calender years and [ Billions of dollars ! actual Source estimate estimate J Receipts of trust accountsTotal cash receipts. _ Personal income taxes Corporation income taxes. Employment taxes Excises and customs Miscellaneous receipts * Based on actual data through mid-December ' Assumes no changes in tax legislation and continued high levels of employment and income * Excludes amounts transferred to trust accounts NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE X. Federal cash payments to the public Calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] actual Payment Budget account : National defense Veterans ' services and benefits _ International affairs and finance ___ _ Interest on the public debt Eefunds of receipts Other Trust accounts Exchange Stabilization Fund Deductions from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reportsAdjustment to daily Treasury statement basis estimate [ estimate > Total payments to the public i Based on actual data through November * Includes anticipated Presidential recommendations for new legislation Note : Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE XL Reconciliation of Budget receipts with cash receipts from the public Calendar year [ Billions of dollars ] Description Net budget receipts Trust account receipts ^ Total recorded receipts Less : Intragovernmental transactions : Payments to U. S. Treasury ( miscellaneous receipts ) by Government enterprises Transfers from general fund to trust accounts Interest received by trust funds on investments in United States securitiesReceipts from sale of surplus vessels transferred to U. S. Treasury ( miscellaneous receipts ) but also recorded as a trust account receipt and expenditure Less : Recorded receipts not paid in cash by the public : Deductions from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement funds National Service Life Insurance premiums paid with terminal leave bonds prior to general redemption date Equals : Cash receipts from the public2 Based on actual data through November Excluding borrowing NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding ioo TABLE XII. Reconciliation of Budget expenditures Calendar year with cash payments to the public [ Billions of dollars ] Description Budget expenditures Trust account expenditures Exchange Stabilization Fund expenditures Total recorded expenditures Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Adjusted total recorded expenditures Less : Intragovernmental transactions : Payments to U. S. Treasury ( miscellaneous receipts ) by Government enterprises Transfers from general fund to trust accounts Interest received by trust funds on investments in United States securitiesInvestments of trust funds and Government enterprises in United States securities Receipts from sale of surplus vessels transferred to U. S. Treasury ( miscellaneous receipts ) but also recorded as trust account expenditure Less : Recorded expenditures not paid out in cash : Deduction from employees ' salaries for retirement funds Interest on savings bonds ( net increase in redemption value of outstanding issues ) Terminal leave bonds issued Subscriptions in non-interest-bearing notes to Bretton Woods Organization from General and Exchange Stabilization Funds Plus : Gash payments not recorded as expenditures : Redemption of excess profits tax bonds and adjusted service certificatesTerminal leave bonds redeemed for cash Redemption of notes by Bretton Woods Organizations Expenditures of Government enterprises from proceeds of sales of obligations in the market Equals : Cash payments to the public Based on actual data through November Less than million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding IOI ( a ) III. The Distribution of Income Prewar and Postwar There has been little opportunity to compare the distribution of income in the United States over a number of years because the results of various surveys are not readily comparable. Sample studies of income national in scope were made in and The estimates presented in this report are the result of an attempt to revise and arrange the data to make them as nearly comparable as possible. Distributions for the wartime years were not included in the present analysis because the pattern of family structure and income was abnormal during the war period. The following paragraphs describe the procedure that was used to compare the income distribution in the years and The results obtained are still subject to further refinement and revision but they are probably reliable enough to indicate the general changes that have taken place in the distribution of income and are believed to substantiate the conclusions presented in the text Income distributions used for prewar and postwar comparisons The estimates for used for these comparisons are based on the second Survey of Consumer Finances by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. This survey covering a national sample of households shows the distribution of money income for the civilian population by income level for the calendar year. The results are presented both for spending units and for family units. Family units including single individuals form the basis of classification used in the present analysis { Federal Reserve Bulletin July pages and ) While the small Federal Reserve survey is sufficient to derive useful estimates on an over-all basis larger surveys by the Bureau of the Census and the Bureau of Agricultural Economics in include distributions by family size occupational group size of community and other breakdowns significant both in themselves and for general income analysis These data have not been utilized in the present report since the results are not yet available on a national basis. Preliminary tabulations from the Census sample of urban families however appear to substantiate the findings of the Federal Reserve study For the distributions shown here are derived from the Study of Family Spending and Saving in Wartime conducted jointly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the Bureau of Human Nutrition and Home Economics. This survey also covered a national sample of about households with distributions for families and single individuals by money- IO2 income levels. ( Bureau of Labor Statistics Bulletin tables and pp. and and pp. ) For use has been made of unpublished distributions prepared by the Research Division of the Office of Price Administration based on the National Resources Committee 's study " Consumer Incomes in the United States.33 x Adjustments for comparability of population coverage In each of these basic studies the results are presented in terms of national coverage with estimates showing the total number of family units in the population. The population weights used in expanding the sample data differ in coverage and are otherwise not on a comparable basis.2 They were therefore revised to insure comparability and now include the total number of families and single individuals at the end of each year ; that is on June and December and The revision of the original distributions ( which in turn were based on the largescale sample survey of consumer purchases and on income-tax statistics ) involved the following steps : ( ) Eliminating imputed items of income to give estimates by levels of money income ; ( ) Revising the " tail " of the distributions on the basis of Treasury income-tax tabulations not available when the NRG report was prepared ; ( ) Revising the distributions for single individuals on the basis of further analysis of incomes of occupational groups ; ( ) Adjusting the distributions to cover revised estimates of the total number of families and single consumers based on the Census ; and ( ) Adjusting the distributions below the " tail " to bring the total income for all family units up to the total derived from the Department of Commerce monthly series on income payments to individuals. The revisions were carried through separately for families and single individuals The studies for and were limited to families and single individuals in private households excluding those living in rooming houses hotels clubs labor camps and other types of quasi households. Both of these reports moreover underrepresent the number of single individuals in private households. The estimates for all three years differ in the treatment of the time period covered ; the figures apply to the population at the end of the year ( or the beginning of ) those for to the average for the 12-month period and those for to the yearly average with part-year families and individuals converted to a full-year-equivalent basis These estimates were based on the results of recent sample surveys by the Census Bureau on the decennial censuses of and and on monthly or semiannual estimates of the civilian noninstitutional population and the number of primary families in private households issued currently by the Census Bureau The definition of the family used in preparing the weights conforms to that used by the Census Bureau for family units of two or more persons ; individuals classified by the Census as one-person private families are included with other single individuals that is with those living as lodgers or paid help in private and quasi households. The estimates cover all persons in the continental population except inmates of institutions and Armed Forces personnel in military posts or overseas The resulting figures for the three years are as follows : Families and single individuals Year _ Families ( or more persons ) Single individuals The basic income distributions for each year were then adjusted to cover the revised population weights. For the revisions required in the OPA estimates were minor. For the two later years however the adjustments involved a substantial increase in the number of single consumers with some reduction in the number of families for and some increase for For lack of evidence to the contrary the changes were allocated by income level so as to maintain the original percentage distributions of family units.4 Adjustments of aggregate income covered The adjustments for population coverage resulted in some increase in the aggregate amount of income accounted for in the distributions for each year studied. Nevertheless the revised figures still fell short of the national totals of civilian noninstitutional money income derived from the personal-income series prepared by the Department of Commerce A further adjustment of the distributions was therefore required to place them on a more comparable basis with respect to income coverage. This adjustment also was necessarily made on an arbitrary basis by assuming that incomes at all levels were under-reported by the same percent. While there is evidence that some under-reporting is apt to occur at all income levels it is probable that the proportion tends to be greater at the higher levels In both the and the studies special measures were adopted to minimize this bias as fully as possible but with the information now at For ( and ) it was possible to handle the adjustment for families and single consumers separately. This procedure however was not possible for since the Federal Reserve estimates were available only for all family units combined Thus while the results for are probably fairly reliable the adjustment for involves some upward bias since the original distribution used to allocate the additional single consumers by income level was heavily weighted by families of two or more persons hand it is impossible to evaluate the success of these measures.5 Pending the completion of detailed analysis of these survey data and comparison with data from the income surveys of the Bureaus of the Census and Agricultural Economics and with income-tax returns and other statistical series it seems inadvisable to attempt differential adjustments by income levels The percentage expansion of the total amount of income at each income level was made for each year on the basis of the combined distributions for families and single consumers. For the expansion ( after adjustment for population coverage ) was percent for it was percent and for due to the refinements already made in the distributions it was only about percent Comparison of shares of income From these adjusted income-level figures the proportion of the total income going to each fifth of families and single individuals ranked in order of their cash income was estimated for each year. These percentages are shown below Families and single individuals grouped from lowest to Percentage of total civilian money income Lowest fifth Second fifth Third fifth Fourth fifth Highest fifth An average income for each fifth of the population may be obtained from these proportionate shares of income for each period. Comparisons of income among various years require a further adjustment however since the purchasing power of income changes from year to year altering the real value of money incomes. This was especially marked over the period we are considering. To adjust for changes in purchasing jgower the aggregates of income were raised in and to the price For methods of sampling at high income levels in see pp. Federal Reserve Bulletin June The adjustments made for refusal rates by income level and for mean incomes at higher levels in the study are described in Bureau of Labor Statistics bulletin pages through level of the year By applying the percentages shown in the table above to the aggregates expressed in dollars and dividing by the number of families in each fifth average family income in constant dollars for each fifth of thejpopulation was obtained. The aggregate money income of civilians for each period in current dollars and after adjustment for price change is shown below Aggregate money income of civilians Year Billions of dollars in current prices i Billions of dollars in prices Derived from the personal income series of the National Income Division Department of Commerce Eepresents money income of civilian noninstitutional population Adjusted for price changes according to the BLS consumer price index The estimates for are also presented in the form of a distribution of families and single individuals by money-income level in table page of the text Appendix B Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power CONTENTS I II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X XI XII XIII XIV XV XVI XVII XVIII XIX XX XXI XXII XXIII XXIV XXV XXVI XXVII XXVIII XXIX XXX Gross national product or expenditure National income by distributive shares Personal income Disposition of personal income Per capita disposable income in current dollars and first half of dollars Real disposable income food consumption and real farm income per capita Total consumer credit The labor force Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Average hourly earnings in selected industries Consumers5 price index Wholesale price index Index of prices paid and of prices received by farmers and parity ratio Industrial production index Physical production index and New construction activity Gross national product department store sales and residential construction Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Business inventories and sales Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Profits before and after taxes all private corporations Profits after taxes large private industrial corporations Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment and sales private manufacturing corporations by size classes Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private corporations excluding finance insurance and real estate Loans and investments of all commercial banks Adjusted deposits of all banks and currency outside banks Bond and common stock yields and commercial loan rates Public debt and guaranteed obligations of the United States Government outstanding XXXI. United States Government aid to foreign countries XXXII. United States exports including reexports by continents average and by quarters XXXIII. United States general imports by continents average and by quarters XXXIV. Production and exports of selected nonagricultural commodities and XXXV. Distribution of selected food supplies moving into consumption channels and XXXVI. Population by age groups selected years XXXVII. Changes in selected economic series since Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power TABLE I. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter V Gross national product GovernPersonal Gross priment purconsump- vate do- Net foreign chases of tion exmestic in- investment goods and penditures vestment Seasonally adjusted annual rates First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce IO9 TABLE II. National income by distributive shares [ Billions of dollars ] Proprietors ' and rental income Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Corporate profits Is Year or quarter I ? If fl8 * O G> O 1936___ _ _ _ l'.O Seasonally adjusted annual rates First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter National income is the total net income earned in production by individuals or businesses. The concept of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in excluding depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods Includes wages and salaries employer contributions for social insurance and other labor income Includes noncorporate inventory valuation adjustment * Federal and State income and excess-profits taxes Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce IIO TABLE III Personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Year or quarter 1930._ ProprieTotal Wage and Other tors ' and personal salary labor rental income receipts * income * income Dividends Personal interest income Transfer payments Seasonally adjusted annual rates First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter Total employer disbursements less employee contributions for social insurance Includes compensation for injuries employer contributions to private pension and welfare funds pay of military reservists not on full-time active duty ( pay for full-time active duty included in military wages and salaries ) directors ' fees jury and witness fees compensation of prison inmates Government payments to enemy prisoners of war marriage fees to justices of the peace and Merchant Marine war-risk life and injury claims * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce Ill T A B L E IV. Disposition of personal income Year or quarter Personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Less : Equals : Personal Disposable consumppersonal tion exincome penditures Billions of dollars _ _ l _ Equals : Personal saving Saving as percent of disposable income Seasonally adjusted annual rates First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter i i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily ^ add to totalsjtecause of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE V. Per capita disposable income in current dollars and first half of dollars Disposable personal income ( billions of dollars ) Year or quarter Consumers ' Population price index ( thousands ) i " 1st half of = _ Current dollars 1st half of dollars * j308 ] L ] ion Not adjusted for seasonal Seasonally adjusted annual rates variation Seasonally adjusted annual rates First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter.1947 First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth q u a r t e r Per capita disposable personal income ] ] ] L : L,285 Estimated population of continental United States including armed forces overseas ; annual data as of July and quarterly data as of middle of quarter Current dollars divided b y the consumers ' price index on the base first half of = to give a rough measure of changes in buying power of disposable income Estimates based on incomplete data * A small part of the increase m a y be seasonal * Interpolated from published data Sources : Department of Commerce ( disposable income and population ) and Department of Labor ( consumers ' price index ) TABLE VI. Real disposable income food consumption and real farm incorne9per capita [ = ] Net income Real disCivilian from farm posable1 food con-2 marketing to sumption persons on income ( per capita ) ( per capita ) farms ( per capita ) Year _ Computed from the deflated dollar figures in appendix B table V Based on the retail weight equivalent weighted by average retail prices for the base period Consumption is for total population ; civilian only beginning Realized net income of farm operators plus adjustments for inventory changes and wages to hired workers living on farms divided by farm population of the United States as of January was adjusted for changes in prices ^ paid by farmers for family maintenance and then expressed as an index Sources : Based on Department of Agriculture Department of Commerce and Department of Labor data TABLE VII.- Total consumer credit ( Estimated amounts outstanding ) [ Millions of dollars ] End of year or month 1929____ 1941___ Total consumer credit Instalment credit i Charge accounts Other consumer credit a ._. _ L,650 L764 January... February _ March April _ May June July August September October November December a Includes automobile and other sale credit and repair and modernization loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration Includes noninstalment single-payment loans of commercial banks and pawnbrokers and service credit * Preliminary estimate based on incomplete data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE VIII. The labor force ( Thousands of persons years of age and over ) Civilian labor force Year or month monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly average _ average _ average average average average average average average.. January February. _ March April May June July August September. October November. December. January February.. March April May June July August SeptemberOctober November. December.. Total labor force including armed forces Total civilian labor force Employment Total Nonagricultural Unemployment ' " NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Labor ( ) Department of Commerce ( ) Agricultural " " " TABLE IX. Jsumber of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments 1939-47l [ Thousands ] Manufacturing Year or month II monthly average._ monthly average.. monthly average.. monthly average.. monthly average.. monthly average. _ monthly average.. monthly average. _ monthly average a_ January February March April May June July August September. _ October November.. December.. January February March April May June.. July August September... October November8- i Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked or received pay during the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Proprietors self-employed persons domestic servants and personnel of the armed forces are excluded. Not comparable with estimates for nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force derived from data in appendix B table VIII because latter include self-employed proprietors and domestic servants and are based on population enumeration whereas estimates in this table are based on establishment reports Average of months s Preliminary Source : Department of Labor TABLE X. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Year or month monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly Bitu- Private Class I Hotels buildTele- WholeNon- minous ing con- steam phone sale Retail ( year Dura- durcoal railtrade trade round ) mining struc- roads Total able able tion goods goods average.. $ $ $ average- _ average average.. average.. average. average._ average.. average January February March April May June July August September October November December January February March April. May _ June July August September Octobers November $ ( ) $ $ ( ( ) ) $ ( ) ) $ $ ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips are not included Not available. New series beginning April ; includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees Annual average includes retroactive pay increases not included in the monthly averages * Average of months * Not available Preliminary NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining and for all employees in other industries Source : Department of Labor TABLE XL Average hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Year or month monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly DuraTotal able goods Nondurable goods Bituminous coal mining Private building construction average.... $ $ $ average average. average average average.,.. average average average * _ January February March _ April May June July August September October November December January. February--March.. April.. May June July August September OctoberNovember _ _ _ _ _ _ Class I steam Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels sale ( year rail- phone trade trade round ) roads $ $ ( ) CO $ $ ( ( ) 1.0Q3 L.015 ( ) $ ( ) C ) i Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips are not included * Not available. New series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees Annual average includes retroactive pay increases not included in the monthly averages * Average of months * Preliminary Not available NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining and for all employees in other industries Source : Department of Labor n8 TABLE XII. Consumers ' price index For moderate-income families in large cities [ = ] Year or month monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly average average _ averageaverage_ average _ averageaverage _ average _ average January February. _ March April May June July August September. October November. December. January February. _ March April May June July August September October November All items Apparel Rent Fuel electricity and ice House furnishings Miscellaneous Average of months * Not surveyed this month Source : Department of Labor Foods TABLE XIII. Wholesale price index [ = ] Other than farm products and foods Year or month monthly average monthly average monthly average monthly average monthly average monthly average monthly average monthly average monthly average January February March April May June July August September October November December January February March April May June July August September October November December i _ i Preliminary estimate based on weekly data for December Source : Department of Labor I2O TABLE XIV. Index of prices paid and of prices received by farmers and parity ratio [ = Prices paid ( including Prices reinterest ceived i and taxes ) Year orjnonth monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly Parity ratio a average average average average average average average average average January February March April May.. June July _._ August September October. November December -January February March April May June July August September October November December i August 1909-July = * Ratio of prices received to prices paid ( including interest and taxes ) Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE XV'. Industrial production index [ = seasonally adjusted ] monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly monthly Total Durable Nondurable Minerals ._- average. average._ average ~ average. average. average. average. average. average l July August September October November December January February March April May June July.. August September October November Manufactures Total industrial production Year or month i Average of months Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE XVI. Physical production index and Indexes = Industry Weight i average average Percentage change from to Total production.. Agriculture Minerals * Manufacturing ._ Construction Transportation Electric and gas utilities average Computed from the Department of Commerce data of national income. The weight factors are percentages of the national income for each industry to the total for the industries. The weight for construction has been adjusted to include force account and other construction done outside of the contract construction industry the weights for other industry groups to exclude such construction Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data Department of Agriculture index of farm output which measures the physical volume of farm production for human use * Federal Reserve index of mineral production Federal Reserve index of manufacturing production Department of Commerce value of new construction activity deflated by their index of construction costs and converted into relatives with as Department of Commerce index of transportation. The figure for is estimated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on the basis of transportation data The index of electric and gas utilities is based on the following series : electric power generated for public use as reported by the Federal Power Commission and gas produced for public use as reported by the American Gas Association. The two series are converted into relatives with the average for the period as The relative series are combined into an index of public utility production with electric power given a weight of and gas the respective percentages of the revenues by each of the utilities to the total revenues produced by both in the base year TABLE XVII. New construction activity [ Millions of dollars ] Private construction S " ear or quarter _ Total new construc- Total tion private _ First quarter Second quarter 3__ Third q u a r t e r Fourth quarter _ : First quarter3 Second quarter _. Third quarter 3..__ Fourth quarter3 Public construction By funds Residential building ( nonfarm ) Nonresidential building2 Public utility and farm Total public Federal State and local By types Military and federally financed industrial High- Other ways public Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures in the gross national product Excludes farm and public utility Not adjusted for seasonal variation * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because ofrounding Source : Departments of Commerce and Labor TABLE XVIII. Gross national product department store sales and residential construction [ = ] Gross national product i Department store sales Year Residential construction i Gross national product l Year _ ResidenDepartment store tial consales struction * Converted from the reported dollar figures to an index Converted from the reported base = Estimates based on incomplete data Sources : Department of Commerce ( gross national product residential construction ) National Housing and Home Finance Agency ( gross national product ) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( department store sales ) TABLE XIX. Business expenditures JOT new plant and equipment 48l [ Millions of dollars ] Transportation Year or quarter Total i Manufacturing Mining Railroad Other Electric and gas utilities Commercial and miscellaneous * Annual rates not adjusted for seasonal First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter F irst quarter I Excludes agriculture ' Includes trade service finance and communication Estimates for fourth quarter of and first quarter of based on anticipated capital expenditures of business NOTE. These figures do not agree with the totals included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce principally because the latter cover agricultural investment and also certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense. Figures for are Federal Reserve Board estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other data. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because figures are rounded to the nearest million Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE XX. Business inventories and sales ? Wholesale Manufacturing i Year or month Millions of dollars Ratio of inventories Millions of dollars Ratio Millions of dol- Ratio lars of inof invenventories Inventories Sales * to sales tories Sales * to sales Inventories Sales * average.. average. _ average.. average.6_ average January February March April May June July August September.. October November. __ December January February March April May __. June July August September October November <L Retail Inventories ( ) ) Not adjusted for seasonal variation Adjusted for seasonal variation s Book value end of month Total for month ' Average of months Preliminary Not available NOTE Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding. The inventoryfiguresin this table do not agree with the estimates of " change in business inventories " included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce. This table covers only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and shows inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce ( Office of Business Economics ) TABLE XXI. Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Millions of dollars Year or month ( total for month ) Stocks ( end of month ) average average average average average average average average average January February. _ March April May June July.. August September. October November- December. _ January February. _ March April May June July August September. October November Ratio of Ratio of Ratio of Outstand- stocks to orders to orders to ing orders stocks sales sales ( end of month ) ) C1 ) Not available Average of months a Preliminary estimate based on incomplete data NOTE. These figures represent retail sales stocks and outstanding orders as reported by a sample of of the larger department stores located in various cities throughout the country and are not estimates of total sales stocks and outstanding orders for all department stores in the United States Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE XXII. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Corporate profits after taxes Corporate profits before Year or quarter Corporate tax liability i 1943_ 1946_ Total Dividend payments Undistributed profits Seasonally adjusted annual rates First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter * Federal and state corporate income and excess profits taxes Minus million dollars s Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except estimate for fourth quarter of ) TABLE XXIII. Profits after taxes,1 large private industrial corporations N u m b e r of companies First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter ndustrial chemicals ther nondurables t i O iscellaneous services il producing and refining o i Federal and State income and excess-profits taxes NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ood beverages and tobacco ther durable goods o o 'A t h e r transportation equipment onferrous metals and products E n utomobiles otal Year or quarter on and steel [ Millions of dollars ] TABLE XXIV. Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment and to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry Katio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity Before Federal taxes Industry After Federal taxes Profits in cents per dollar of sales Before Federal taxes After Federal First Second First Second First Second First Second quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter ; quarter quarter quarter All private manufacturing corporations _ Food Tobacco manufactures.._ Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission T A B L E X X V R e l a t i o n of profits before and after taxes to investment and sales private facturing corporations by size classes Ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity Assets class Before Federal taxes After Federal taxes manu- Profits in cents per dollar of sales Before Federal taxes After Federal taxes First Second First Second First Second First Second Third quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter All private manufacturing corporations $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ and over Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE XXVI. Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private corporations excluding finance insurance and real estate Profits before taxes as percent of sales Industry Profits after taxes as percent of sales All private corporations excluding finance insurance and real estate _ -Mining _ _ Manufacturing Metal industries Other manufacturing __ Wholesale and retail trade Transportation. ___ Communication and public utilitiesAll other industries _._ First quarter Second Third quar- quarter ter First quarter Second Third quar- quarter ter Source : Department of Commerce TABLE XXVII. Loans and investments of all commercial banks [ Millions of dollars ] Investments End of month : June * : June _ : December : December : December : December : December : June : June _ _ _ Total loans and investments 40,6b8 Loans Total Complete end of year figures not available for years prior to Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System U.S Government Other securities TABLE XXVIII. Adjusted deposits of all banks and currrency outside banks [ Millions of dollars ] End of calendar year or month Total deposits U. S adjusted Government and deposits currency outside banks Other deposits and currency outside banks Demand deposits adjusted Total Currency outside banks Time : June December. : June November Beginning with December includes U. S. Treasurer 's time deposits open account Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U. S. Government less cash items in process of collection Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System Preliminary NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE XXIX. Bond and common stock yields and commercial loan rates [ Percent per annum ] U. S. Government security yields Year or quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter Dividend yields on common stock ( Moody 's ) Commercial loan rates issues stocks cities to Bonds months certificates of Long-term years and indebted- partially over tax-exempt taxable Aaa bonds Baa bonds issues issues issues Number average average average average average average average average average High gra de corporate bo ad yields ( Moody 's ) Tax-exempt prior to Mar. ; taxable thereafter Average of yields on all outstanding partially tax-exempt Government bonds due or callable after years from to ; after years from to ; and after years from No partially t ax-exempt bonds due or callable in years * Not available Sources : Treasury Department Moody 's Investors Service and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System I3O TABLE XXX. Public debt and guaranteed obligations of the U. S. Government outstanding * [ Billions of Dollars ] Public debt and guaranteed obligations Ownership of public debt and guaranteed obligations Interest-bearing public debt and guaranteed obligations ( par values ; * II End of calendar year Held by public Ill United States savings bonds series A-D E and F are included at current redemption values Includes interest-bearing debt and debt bearing no interest Excludes guaranteed securities held by the Treasury and securities guaranteed as to interest only * Includes insurance companies mutual savings banks savings and loan associations dealers and brokers and investments of foreign balances and international accounts in this country Includes matured public debt International Bank Monetary Fund United States savings stamps excess-profits-tax refund bonds and currency items Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department TABLE XXXI. United States Government aid to foreign countries [ Millions of dollars ] Type of aid A. Unilateral payments : Straight lend-lease XJNRRA Post-UNRRA -_ Civilian supplies for occupied territories Greek-Turkish aid Interim aid. _ Transfer to Philippines Other Government transfers.. Total unilateral payments. __ Less : Unilateral receipts Net unilateralpayments B Long-term loans and investments : Lend-lease credits Surplus property including ship sales Export-Import Bank United TTingrinTn loan Investment in International Bank Investment in International Monetary Fund _ Other First Second Third Fourth First Second Third Fourth quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter l Total long-term loans and investments Less : Repayments. > Net long-term loans and investments including Bank and Fund Less : Investments in International Bank and Fund Net long-term loans and investments excluding Bank and Fund Net unilateral payments and loans and investments excluding Bank and Fund I Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce T A B L E XXXII. United States exports including reexports by continents average and by quarters Total Period South North America America Europe Asia Oceania Africa Millions of dollars quarterly average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total quarterly average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Estimate based on incomplete data Not available NOTE. Exports in this table include merchandise shipped from the United States custom area with the exception of goods destined to United States armed forces abroad either for their own use or for distribution to civilians in occupied areas. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE XXXIII. United States general imports by continents average and by quarters Period Total South North America America Europe Asia Oceania Africa Millions of dollars quarterly average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total quarterly average First quarter. Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter i Estimate based on incomplete data * Not available NOTE. Imports in this table include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising or consumption channels plus commodities entered into bonded customs warehouse for storage Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE XXXIV. Production and exports of selected nonagricultural commodities and Exports as percent For do- For ex- of total mestic use port production Production Commodity and period Unit Total Agricultural machinery and implements : Million dollars.. do January-June ( annual rate ) _ _ _ -do do July-September ( annual rate ) Chemicals and related products : ._ do_1946 do January-June ( annual rate ) .....doJuly-September ( annual rate ) _. _ do Coal bituminous : Million short tons .....do January-June ( annual rate ) do July-September ( annual rate ) _.. d o Electrical machinery and apparatus : Million dollars do January-June ( annual rate ) .....do July-September ( annual r a t e ) .....do Freight cars : dollars do ....do January-June ( annual rate ) do July-September ( annual rate ) Lumber sawmill products : Million board feet- ....do January-June ( annual rate ) do July-September ( annual rate ) _ do Motor trucks : Thousand do January-June ( annual rate ) do July-September ( annual r a t e ) do Passenger cars : ___ Thousand. .....do January-June ( annual rate ) do July-September ( annual rate ) _ _ _ do Petroleum crude : Million barrels _ do .....do January-June ( annual rate ) July-September ( annual rate ) __. .....do Rolled steel products : short tons do January-June ( annual rate ) do July-September ( annual rate ) _ _ _ Wearing apparel : Million dollars. ._ do ....-do .._ January-June ( annual rate ) do July-September ( annual r a t e ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * ( ) ( ) Sales ; production data not available Not available Estimated value of shipments to United States railroads and to foreign markets * Eighty-nine percent of the cars exported during this period went to France as a result of an accumulation of 6deliveries against orders previously placed Factory sales are used to represent production. Exports are as reported by the Automotive Manufactures ' Association and include exports shipped as completed cars and parts for assembly aboard Barrels of gallons each Net shipments for sale ; production data not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE XXXV. Distribution of selected food supplies moving into consumption channels and Distribution of food supplies * Commodity and year Total i Million Million pounds pounds Meat ( carcass equivalent ) : _ _ Dairy products ( milk equivalent ) : _ Food fats and oils ( excluding butter ) : __ Canned fruit ( processed weight ) : pack year Million bushels Million bushels Million bushels Million dozen Million dozen Million dozen Million dozen _ ._ Fresh vegetables ( farm weight ) : __ Pounds Million bushels _ _ Million pounds Canned vegetables ( processed weight ) : pack year Million pounds ___ Fresh fruits ( farm weight ) : _ Exports Per capita and shipments as civilian percent of distri- total disbution tribution Exports Military Civilian and distri- distrishipments i bution bution _ Wheat ( grain equivalent ) : * Eggs ( fresh egg equivalent ) : Number of eggs Includes military civilian feeding programs in liberated and occupied areas both from current procurement and from surplus stock Preliminary estimates based on reports for the first months and forecasts for the balance of the year Actual weight except for margarine which is on a " fat content " basis * Excludes amounts used for animal feed industrial raw materials and seed. If these amounts were included percentages in last column would be ; ; Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE XXXVI. Population by age groups selected years [ Thousands of persons ] Age All ages Under years to years______ years and over_ _ _ Age unknown. _ estimate forecast forecast Medium High Medium High The total differs slightly from the independent estimate of published in " Current Population Reports Series P-25 No. " Estimate for and high forecasts for and assume high fertility low mortality and million net immigration in each 5-year period after July Medium forecasts assume medium fertility and mortality and no net immigration after July NOTE Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE XXXVII. Changes in selected economic series since [ = ] Source appendix B table number IIIV VI VII. VIII IX X XII XIII XIV XV. XVII XIX. XXII Economic series Gross national product _ Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment. Net foreign investment Government purchases of goods and services National income Compensation of employees Personal income. Disposable personal income Personal saving Per capita disposable income : Current dollars ..First half of dollars Civilian food consumption ( per capita ) Net income from farm marketings to persons on farms ( per capita ) Consumer credit outstanding end of year _ Labor force including armed forces.. Civilian labor force Employment Nonagricultural-Agricultural Unemployment Wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments Manufacturing.. Mining _ Construction _ _ _ Transportation and public utilities.. _ Trade Finance and service Federal State- and local government Average gross weekly earnings : Manufacturing Bituminous coal mining Private building construction ._ Wholesale trade Retail trade ._. Consumers ' price index : all items Foods Apparel ._._ Rent Wholesale price index : All commodities _ Farm products Foods _ Other than farm products and foods Prices paid by farmers ( including interest and taxes ) Prices received by farmers Parity ratio. _ _ Industrial production index : total _ Durable manufactures Nondurable manufactures Minerals New construction Private Residential. Nonresidential Public utility and farm _ Public Business expenditures for new plant and equipment Corporate profits before taxes Corporate tax liability Corporate profits after taxes Dividend payments Undistributed profits NOTE. For some series data are based on 11-month averages Sources : Data in indicated appendix B tables have been converted to the base = For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. C Price cents O I36