The Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS Together With a Report to the President THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS The Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS January Together With a Report to the President THE ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : Additional copies of this report are for sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing Office Washington D. C Price of single copy cents LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE Washington D. C. January The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SIRS : I am presenting herewith my Economic Report to the Congress as required under the Employment Act of In preparing this report I have had the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers members of the Cabinet and heads of independent agencies Together with this report I am transmitting a report the Annual Economic Review : January prepared for me by the Council of Economic Advisers in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully m Contents Page THE ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT The nature of the task The power of the American economy to perform the task The inflationary danger Principles for action All of us must plan All of us must serve Sacrifices must be shared fairly We must develop all our resources wisely We must work with our allies in the common cause Government economic policies Expansion of production Health services and education Economic stabilization International economic programs Summary of economic developments in ANNUAL ECONOMIC REVIEW JANUARY ( a report to the President by the Council of Economic Advisers ) To the Congress of the United States : We face enormously greater economic problems as I transmit this fifth annual Economic Report than at any time since the end of World War II Although our economic strength is now greater than ever before very large new burdens of long duration are now being imposed upon it The United States is pledged and determined along with other free peoples to check aggression and to advance freedom. Arrayed against the free world are large and menacing forces. The great manpower under the control of Soviet communism is,being driven with fanatic zeal to build up military and industrial strength. We invite disaster if we underestimate the forces working against us The economic strength of the free peoples of the world is however superior to that of their enemies. If the free nations mobilize and direct their strength properly they can support whatever military effort may be necessary to avert a general war or to win such a war if it comes. The resources are on our side. The only question is whether they will be used with speed and determination. The answer will depend upon unity of purpose and of action unity among the free nations unity here in the United States Unity is imperative on the economic front. On this front under the American system everybody is involved every businessman worker and farmer ; every banker and scientist and housewife ; every man and woman We can win our way through to ultimate triumph if we all pull together Decisive action essential to our safety should not be halted by controversy now It is in this spirit that I transmit this Economic Report to the Congress The Nature of the Task We must understand the nature of our defense effort here at home. Our job has three parts In the first place we must achieve a large and very rapid increase in our armed strength while helping to strengthen our allies. This means more trained men in uniform and more planes tanks ships and other military supplies. Second we must achieve as rapidly as possible an expansion of our capacity for producing military supplies. Thus must be substantially greater than would be required to achieve our present targets for armed strength ; it must be large enough to enable us to swing rapidly into full-scale war production if necessity should require. And third we must maintain and expand our basic economic strength important both to military production and to our civilian economy so that we can continue to grow stronger rather than weaker if it should prove necessary to continue a defense effort of great size for a number of years The first part of this task the primary military build-up imposes the major immediate burden on the economy For the fiscal years and combined new obligational authority enacted or anticipated for our primary national security programs for our military forces for economic and military aid to other free nations for atomic energy and stockpiling and for related purposes will probably total more than billion dollars. Actual expenditures on these programs in the fiscal year the last full year before the Korean outbreak totaled about billion dollars. At the present time they are running at an annual rate of somewhat more than billion dollars. By the end of this calendar year they should attain an annual rate between and billion dollars or from to billion dollars above the present rate. The actions we are taking should enable us within twelve months to expand this rate of expenditure very rapidly if necessity should require Current expenditures for these purposes now represent about percent of our total national output. By the end of this year this proportion may rise to as much as percent. This compares with the roughly percent of our total output that we were devoting to defense during the peak year of World War II. While the present program is thus very substantially short of the requirements imposed by full-scale war it nonetheless requires a major diversion of effort. Furthermore there will be a much more severe drain on some particular supply lines. By the end of the year our expanding defense programs including stockpiling may be absorbing up to a third or more of the total supply of some of our basic commodities such as copper aluminum and natural rubber. While direct defense requirements for steel may not total more than percent of total output the needed expansion of our essential industrial capacity will require a much greater diversion of steel from ordinary civilian uses In terms of manpower our present defense targets will require an increase of nearly one million men and women in the armed forces within a few months and probably not less than four million more in defense production by the end of the year. This means that an additional percent of our labor force and possibly much more will be required by direct defense needs by the end of the year These manpower needs will call both for increasing our labor force by reducing unemployment and drawing in women and older workers and for lengthening hours of work in essential industries. These manpower requirements can be met. There will be manpower shortages but they can be solved The second part of the job is to build up our capacity for producing military supplies our military production base. For example our present aircraft program calls for capacity to produce planes a year. Our present program for tanks calls for the capacity to produce tanks a year. We are not now placing orders for that many planes or tanks but we are getting ready to produce them if we need them There are many cases where our immediate production needs will require the diversion of plants now devoted to civilian production, but we can not be satisfied with this solution alone. We must increasingly create new capacity to meet defense production targets. This will give us more economic strength which means more power in reserve for any contingency The job is made easier because we still have substantial reserve plant and equipment as a result of the industrial reserve policy instituted at the close of World War II. It is a great program but we can meet it The third part of the job is to increase our basic industrial strength to build up our facilities for the production of steel aluminum power and other basic commodities and services. This ability should be brought to a level where it can carry the present defense burden without the necessity for irksome controls extending over a long period. This will also increase our ability to meet any requirements for a greater military effort In the case of steel for example we must raise the capacity of the industry from its present level of about million ingot tons a year by enough to support our defense effort and to sustain our civilian economy. The Council of Economic Advisers estimates that this will require an increase in capacity to about million ingot tons in the next three or four years This estimate is not necessarily final. But it suggests the kind of growth we are working for in our economy in the years immediately ahead To increase our steel supply we must also increase our supplies of iron ore. Output of the high-grade Lake Superior ore fields can be maintained at present levels for only a few years longer. Thereafter we shall have to rely more and more on lower-grade domestic ores and on imported supplies. Expansion of domestic plants for treating low-grade ores and of ore production facilities in Labrador and Venezuela together with related transportation facilities is essential Electric power is another field in which we must expand capacity promptly. At the present time electric power is in short supply in the Pacific Northwest in the Tennessee Valley area and in some other regions The supply is expected to become increasingly short throughout the country as demands will increase faster than the expansion of capacity now planned Reserves will fall more and more below safe and desirable margins. Already the reserve margin has practically disappeared in areas where the power shortage is most acute. Yet expansion of capacity now planned in atomic energy chemicals and aluminum and other metals related to the defense effort will impose an additional load of to 4J/2 million kilowatts on our power facilities In the face of this situation we should plan to increase our generating capacity by well over million kilowatts during the next three years. The major share of this expansion must come from private utility enterprises The large public hydroelectric projects take more time but I am recommending the development of additional public power capacity in the Pacific Northwest in the Tennessee Valley area at Niagara Falls along the St Lawrence River as a part of the seaway and power project and elsewhere to contribute needed additions to the power supply as quickly as they can be built These are but two examples of the need to build up our productive capacity. If we were now engaged in full-scale war we could not afford to devote manpower and materials to these longer-range programs. But to fail to do so under present circumstances would be short-sighted and potentially costly Action now is essential to make us stronger year by year in all of the components which enter into any military strength that we may need in future The Power of the American Economy To Perform the Task There is no question that our economy can sustain the great exertions outlined above and still remain strong and grow stronger. The past performance and present condition of the American economy make this plain In the ten years since this Nation decided that fascist aggression had to be stopped the growth of our economic power has been prodigious. Comparing with our total output in actual units of goods and services is more than percent higher. Farm production is up percent. The total labor supply has increased by million and civilian employment by million. In addition we have more and better tools and equipment. Steel capacity is up more than percent ; oil refining capacity up percent ; electric power capacity up percent. On our farms there are two or three times as many tractors trucks and power-driven machines Farm use of electric power has gone up three or four times It is sometimes thought that most of this economic growth occurred during World War II. True under the dire necessity of wartime we expanded with very great speed. But during the past five years we have added greatly to the productive strength attained before V-J Day. More than billion dollars ( in prices ) have been invested by private enterprise in plant and equipment. Total manufacturing capacity has increased by between and percent. Steel capacity is percent higher ; that of our chemical and machinery industries to percent higher. Civilian employment late in was million above the peak year of World War II and output per man-hour for the economy as a whole has advanced by about percent There has been very recent demonstration of our economic power and of our capacity for further growth. In the first half of the upsurge of business recovery from the mild recession of was swift and com- prehensive. This demonstrated the soundness of our economic structure In the second half of the year the pace of economic expansion became more rapid. Every part of the economy responded to the challenge of international developments. During these six months private investment in construction equipment and additions to inventory reached the record annual rate of billion dollars. Taking the year as a whole industrial production was percent higher than in and by June had exceeded the peak. The total output of goods and services during the year was percent higher in real terms than during the previous year. It is now running at an annual rate more than percent above the average for Civilian employment increased by about million from to and there were more people in civilian jobs at the peak of employment than ever before Our economic history shows that we have risen to our greatest heights in the face of our greatest dangers. From the beginning of World War II to the time of our peak effort we stepped up farm output by percent and industrial production by nearly percent. Our total national output rose by more than percent. If it had been necessary we could have done much more We may not be able to add to our production so rapidly in the years immediately ahead. We had more unused resources of manpower plant and materials in than we have now. There are now some relative shortages of raw materials. On the other hand as long as we avert a total war we can devote a larger part of our total resources to building up our economy than we did after Pearl Harbor The accompanying Annual Review by the Council of Economic Advisers estimates after careful examination of our economic resources that we can and should achieve an annual rate of total output more than percent above the current level by the end of this year. The estimates made by the Council at the start of concerning how much the economy could grow in real terms during the year were realized. I believe that this progress will continue. We must plan and work together to increase the total productive strength of our economy by at least percent within the next five years We have not reached and can not foresee reaching any final ceiling on our productive power. Throughout the years we have grown despite ups and downs and we will continue to grow. We have a growing population We have business initiative and daring. We have workers of great skill and energy. We have the ability to make practical use of new scientific discoveries and inventions. We have despite some shortages bountiful natural resources. Above all we have faith justified by accomplishment in our economic system This great vitality of our economy provides the answer to the question of whether we can sustain the burden of our defense program. In relative terms this burden at present is much less than it was in World War II At the peak of World War II we were devoting about percent of our national output to defense. By the end of this year we will be devoting about percent to defense. During World War II even when defense production was at its highest we maintained a strong economy. Civilians made sacrifices but they did not suffer Our total output today has reached approximately the peak. More important we are now maintaining this rate of production with much shorter hours and less strain upon facilities. Our productive potential is not as fully mobilized as at the height of World War II. If we approached the same degree of economic mobilization our total output would be very much greater and so would our output of defense items. Our contemplated defense program even if it were doubled would still be clearly within our capabilities The Inflationary Danger While it is clear that we have the productive ability to meet even far greater defense demands on our economy we must not be misled into thinking that we can make the change to a defense economy easily. It will require effort restraint and sacrifice by all of us The character of our economy must now be changed rapidly to meet the new challenge. Those types of production which support the expanding defense effort must be greatly enlarged. The part of our total national output going into defense should rise from percent to nearly percent during the year By the end of the year the expanding defense program may be absorbing one-third or more of some basic materials In some respects it will be harder to convert to defense production than it was in Then there were idle plants and men and materials which could be channeled into the defense effort. Since our economy has recently been running full blast the defense program will have to pull men and materials as well as plants away from existing peacetime uses. This will pull millions of people away from normal peacetime production Although we can increase production we can not do it quickly enough to expand the defense program and at the same time still have as much left over for other purposes. We must put heavy restraints upon nonessential business activity. During the past few years nearly percent of our growing national output has gone into consumption. This has led to higher standards of living which is the ultimate purpose of a peacetime economy. But the total supply of consumer goods can not be increased this year and many types of goods must be sharply curtailed. Yet the population will continue to grow ; new families will continue to be formed ; and more incomes for practically all groups will be generated by more production more employment and longer hours. The excess of consumer demand over available goods will rise by many billions of dollars This will cause intense and mounting inflationary pressures which must be counteracted During even before the defense expansion gathered speed inflation started to march. Wholesale prices rose almost 15/2 percent and passed the previous all-time peak in the second half of the year. Particular price increases were even more spectacular with chemicals rising by /2 percent and textiles by percent. The average price of goods to consumers rose over percent ; and there was over a 4l/z percent rise to a new all-time peak in the six months from June to December Incomes also started to rise sharply. During the year real weekly earnings in manufacturing after adjusting for changes in prices rose by percent Corporate profits before taxes rose by about billion dollars above the previous record year. Most types of income particularly in the second half of the year rose faster than production If inflation continues to gain cumulative force it will multiply the cost of the defense program. It will undermine production destroy confidence generate friction and economic strife impair the value of the dollar dissipate the value of savings and impose an intolerable burden upon fixed income groups. This must not happen To fight inflation demand must be held down until supplies can catch up This is why we must have a stringent stabilization program. It will mean sacrifices by everybody. But under the conditions now facing us restraints will serve the interest of all Principles for Action As we prepare ourselves for the stern task which confronts us we must keep in mind five basic principles. These are : ( ) all of us must plan ; ( ) all of us must serve ; ( ) sacrifices must be shared fairly ; ( ) we must develop all our resources wisely ; ( ) we must work with our allies in the common cause All of us must plan A defense emergency requires far more planning than is customary or desirable in normal peacetime. The military build-up is a planned effort The mobilization of industrial support for this military build-up is a planned effort. The industrial cutbacks and civilian restraints necessary to achieve military and economic mobilization are planned efforts. The major decisions as to how much goods and services must be left over for consumers to maintain a strong base for the whole undertaking also require planning In a defense emergency all of these problems are interrelated In these critical times it is recognized that Government must assume leadership in this planning. It has the prime responsibility for national security. It has access to the basic information. The most important operation toward this end is the broad programming of various major requirements ; the balancing of these requirements against supply ; and the development of policies to satisfy needs according to priority of purpose But the Government can not develop these basic plans alone. The necessary experience and know-how are to be found throughout our whole economic system. Through constant consultation these talents should be drawn into the whole planning effort. After the basic economic plans are outlined most of them will have to be carried out by businessmen workers and farmers. They will be able to carry out these plans better if they have had a chance to participate in creating them from the start These basic economic plans set general targets or goals. The details must be filled in by people all over the country. It may become necessary for the Government to indicate that longer hours of work are desirable But working arrangements are made between employers and employees The Government may indicate that more steel is needed. But steel production is in private hands. The Government may indicate that more cotton will be needed. But cotton is grown by farmers Businessmen always plan ; and now they must plan how they can best help to make their country stronger. Labor organizations always plan ; and now they must plan their contribution to the defense effort. Farmers also plan ; and they too must now plan to play their full role in the national security effort. Government plans can aid but can not substitute for this individual and group planning. To neglect this would be to undermine one of the greatest sources of our economic strength All of us must serve In a defense emergency all those on the home front should serve to the limit of their ability in the kind of work for which they are best fitted Businessmen should serve by employing their financial resources and managerial skills to produce the greatest possible amount of the goods which the Nation needs. In the period ahead businessmen will have responsibility for a much larger part of the investment program than during World War II when a very high percentage of investment in new capacity was made by the Government. Our ability to reach production goals will depend in large measure upon how effectively businessmen do their job Farmers should serve by increasing their output. They have less manpower than before World War II but far more machinery and fertilizer and far better scientific methods. They can also serve by making shifts in output which are responsive to the needs of the defense economy Workers should serve by helping to improve productivity. They should seek out jobs which are essential to the defense effort. They should cooperate by working longer hours wherever it will help the defense effort More people should seek work than in normal times Millions of others in addition to businessmen industrial workers and farmers are now called upon to do their jobs more efficiently and to readjust their efforts to the needs of national defense For all to serve in full measure it must be in a common cause and not primarily for personal gain. This does not mean that we should undermine the incentives which lead to more production. But the rewards for increased production can not be as great under a defense program as they are in normal peacetime. This is because most of the increased production must go into national defense and consequently can not be used to improve incomes or lift standards of living Each group and individual will be more willing to put forth greater effort if it appears clearly that everybody is doing the same. Businessmen workers and farmers will be willing to work harder to the extent that they feel that they are working harder to serve their country and not just to benefit somebody else. There should be a sense of equality of service in the defense program. Public policies must help to assure this Service by all is even more important than sacrifice because it is work and more work that increases production Sacrifices must be shared fairly No matter how efficiently we do our jobs all of us must make sacrifices Businessmen must make sacrifices. They must pay much higher taxes While profits should not be taxed to the extent which would jeopardize production or destroy incentives businessmen can not expect to retain profits on the scale which would be expected during normal peacetime prosperity They must also accept restraints and controls upon many of their business practices including price policy and the use of materials and manpower which are not customary in peacetime. They must be willing to withdraw from enterprises which are nonessential and wasteful during a national emergency Workers must make sacrifices. They must seek the jobs which need doing in the locations where these jobs must be done instead of the jobs which may be most pleasant in the locations which are most convenient They must accept restraints and controls upon wages designed to prevent the wage increases which would be attainable if more goods were being produced for wage earners to buy. While the right to bargain collectively will be preserved workers along with management must find ways to settle disputes without stopping essential production Farmers must make sacrifices. They should receive their fair share of available national income. But they can not expect to avoid their fair share of the cost of national defense. Over the past two decades farm standards of living have risen substantially and they needed to rise because farmers had lagged far behind others in sharing the national income. But that rate of progress can not be continued in these perilous times All economic groups must pay much higher taxes American families must make sacrifices. They can expect very sharp curtailments in the supply of durable equipment which brings convenience and entertainment to the home. They will have to make their household goods last longer their automobiles and appliances3 their linen and clothes. They must save a larger portion of their incomes. Many of them must postpone buying a new house These sacrifices will not prevent us from maintaining a strong and growing economy capable of supporting the current defense program or any greater program that we may need to undertake. On the contrary these sacrifices will make for a stronger nation by curbing inflation. They will make us stronger not only by augmenting our military strength but also by enabling us to increase the productive facilities which can lighten the economic burden in the long run It is essential that the sacrifices which are necessary in these critical times be shared fairly by all groups. Businessmen will be more cooperative in sacrificing peacetime profit objectives and paying more taxes if it is clear that this is not being done just so farmers and workers can have more income. Farmers will be more cooperative in sacrificing peacetime farm income objectives if it is clear that this is not being done just so workers can get more wages and businessmen can get more profits. Workers will be more cooperative in sacrificing peacetime wage objectives if it is clear that this is not being done just to provide more profits for business or more farm income. Professional people civil servants office workers and those living on fixed incomes ^ will be willing to accept their share of necessary sacrifices to the extent that it is clear that this is not being done just to provide for other people more profits or wages or farm income. All will be willing to make far more sacrifices for national defense and to keep our economy strong if the burden is shared on a fair and equitable basis We must develop all our resources wisely The rapid expansion of the defense program must be the first objective in all that we do. But military strength does not depend upon guns and armed forces alone. These forces must be equipped by our industry fed by our farms and supported by all the people. There must be a continuing balance between the build-up of military strength and the build-up of economic strength In a total war this balance would be very different from what it should be now. In a total war we would have total military mobilization accomplished by considerable depletion of other kinds of strength. In the current situation we must place considerable stress upon economic strength or run the danger of being weak at some future time if total military strength should then be required With these purposes in mind we must apportion materials and manpower carefully among military needs stockpiling and industrial needs. We must divide industrial supply carefully so as to expand in some areas while contracting in others. We must divide total civilian supply carefully between industry and consumers so that we do not weaken manpower while improving tools The handling of our natural resources is a vital aspect of this problem Many projects must be cancelled or deferred but those necessary for defense and essential civilian needs must go forward. If we allow our agricultural and range lands and our forests to deteriorate and if we misuse critically needed minerals and supplies of water we shall become weaker each year instead of stronger. If we do not expand the use of some of these resources as for example through carefully selected power developments we can not expect to reach the full potential of our industrial strength. We can cut down enough on the private and public use of materials and manpower for nonessentials to accomplish these essential projects Our human resources are our main economic strength. When we finally win in the contest between freedom and slavery it will not be primarily because of our superior technology. It will be primarily because we value human beings and because the free man can outproduce the oppressed man No danger could be greater than to concentrate so blindly upon building up our military strength that we neglected and impoverished the ultimate sources of that strength. Three examples will illustrate this principle First we can not afford in the immediate future to devote as large a part of our resources to the improvement of health services and facilities as we had planned to do in normal peacetime. But we can not maintain a sound base for whatever military mobilization may be needed in the months or years ahead if we let sickness and inadequate health standards continue to take their heavy toll. We must devote somewhat more of our resources toward improving the health of the general public. Whether the children of today will be the soldiers or civilians of tomorrow they must grow to a strong and healthy maturity Second we can not in the immediate future find the materials and manpower to build as many new schools and provide as many new teachers as we had planned to do in prosperous peacetime. But whether the youth of today is to become a soldier or a civilian citizen tomorrow he must receive the general education for citizenship and the technical training which a modern army a modern factory and a modern farm all require Third we can not expect in the immediate future to achieve all of the expansion of social security which we had planned for in prosperous peacetime. But some of the hazards which social security is designed to guard against are increased by the mobilization effort. Increased protection against these hazards will make the mobilization effort more effective. In addition the expansion of some contributory social security programs can be an important factor in meeting the stabilization problems we will face during this period because their immediate effect would be anti-inflationary In these three matters we should give vigorous attention to meeting human needs in such a way as to increase our economic and military strength A strong America must be strong throughout We must work with our allies in the common cause To meet the present danger we must help to strengthen our allies and they must help to strengthen us II The effort must be made by the community of free nations working together and contributing their common strength in accordance with their ability to do so. As the single most powerful member of the community of free nations our country has the special responsibility of leadership We must help other free nations to do their share effectively In two world wars this country has been spared the ravages of war on its own soil. Partly as a consequence the United States has grown stronger while some of the other free nations have become relatively weaker. Under these circumstances it would be wrong for us to shrink from bearing a larger part of the burden now. We are able to bear it. We must bear it Since the Korean outbreak we have sharply shifted the emphasis in our economic assistance programs toward supporting the defense programs of the free countries associated with us and we have greatly enlarged our military assistance program There is no water-tight distinction between military assistance and economic assistance. Our friends abroad need both. For their military efforts to be strong their economies must be strong. When we contribute to their military strength we leave more of their own resources free to improve their economic strength. When we contribute to their economic strength we leave more of their own resources free to build up their military strength. The relationship between the two types of assistance should be determined realistically on grounds of efficiency and not by arbitrary labels The programs of economic assistance thus far undertaken have acWed greatly to the strength of other nations friendly to us nations believing in freedom and justice. This gain could be dissipated if the military build-up which they must now undertake should weaken their economies The close connection between a nation 's economy and its military efforts makes it impossible for peoples to be allies on one front and strangers on other fronts. When we join together for military purposes we must also cooperate for economic purposes. When we consider jointly the distribution of armed forces we must consider cooperatively the use of strategic economic assets In this whole process of cooperation the strongest must do the most but all must do their part. While our resources are great they are not unlimited As we make a portion of our resources available for use by others we expect them to use this aid well and efficiently in the common purpose. In addition our aid will enable them in many cases to increase their production for their use and ours of materials which we do not have or do not have in sufficient quantity Government Economic Policies The actions of the Government are being redirected to meet the overriding demands of national security. The Budget I shall transmit next week provides only for urgent needs for Government activities and services in this defense period. Many Government programs are being sharply curtailed The departments and agencies of Government are moving rapidly ahead with their part in the defense effort and deferring wherever possible any work which is not immediately necessary The same principle should guide the Congress in enacting legislation at this time. We must all put first things first Certain immediate tasks will confront the Congress at this session as it enacts the legislation necessary to carry us forward. I mentioned these briefly in my Message on the State of the Union earlier this week. Some of them are discussed more fully in this Economic Report and in the Budget Message to follow. In a number of cases however details are still being worked out and I shall transmit recommendations in later special messages The first priority of course attaches to the support of our own military services and of our combined efforts with other free countries to build up the strength of the free world. In both cases we are concentrating on the urgent task of preparing stronger defenses against aggression. At the same time we are building a foundation for continuous growth in the ability of free men in our country and elsewhere to advance the cause of freedom Toward these ends the economic policies of the Government should now be directed Expansion of production Industrial production. Under the Defense Production Act enacted last September we have taken the first essential steps to give priority to defense requirements out of current industrial production. In the field of priorities and allocations where Government action has already been vigorous steps have already been taken ( a ) to insure that defense requirements for production materials and facilities are met on schedule ; ( b ) to distribute the remaining available supply of critical materials and products equitably among other users after defense requirements have been satisfied ; ( c ) to provide materials for needed expansion of productive capacities ; and ( d ) to promote conservation of scarce materials and the development of substitutes. The commodities affected have included aluminum cobalt cadmium copper nickel rubber steel tin zinc and other basic materials Selective rather than general curtailment is now being put into effect and a comprehensive materials control plan is being prepared for use when necessary. Priorities and allocations powers will have to be renewed by the Congress this year if our production control program is to be continued It is of course essential that this be done In placing orders the Defense Department and the other agencies concerned are adjusting contracting and subcontracting policies to broaden the supply base and to bring in more small producers. Procurement is being related more closely to geographic availability of manpower materials and equipment resources. Procurement cost-price policies are being centered upon efficiency problems. Greater uniformity of standards is being developed for all procurement activities In planning and carrying out the military procurement program, the Department of Defense is giving major emphasis to obtaining productive capacity broad enough to support a much larger military procurement program than the one now under way. Thus the Department is spreading orders among as many contractors as practicable and tooling-up plants with reserve capacity so that military procurement can be further enlarged on short notice if necessary In addition we have begun the work of obtaining increased plant capacity in key industries among them steel and aluminum. Two main types of assistance are now being furnished by the Government to help private industry expand : accelerated amortization under the new tax laws and long-term Government loans under the Defense Production Act. These aids will help to secure much of the needed expansion Under the authorization of the Defense Production Act Government agencies have received requests for direct loans totaling more than million dollars and are processing requests for accelerated amortization involving outlays for plant expansions totaling nearly billion dollars. Of those on which approval has already been recommended from the steel industry alone represent capital outlays of more than } billion dollars Our loan program for expansion of productive capacity and supplies will soon require more funds than have so far been made available. The program will of course need to be continued in operation beyond June the current expiration date. In addition our present aid programs will need to be backed up by legislative authority for direct government construction of industrial facilities in those special cases where private enterprise can not undertake the job even with the government assistance available These and other aspects of our economic mobilization laws are now under review by the Director of Defense Mobilization. After he has completed his investigations detailed recommendations will be made to the Congress for appropriate revision of the Defense Production Act and other related statutes In addition to our efforts to expand industrial capacity steps are being taken to increase production of essential raw materials both here and abroad. Through financial aids for exploration and development and long-term expansion loans authorized under the Defense Production Act and through our stockpiling and foreign economic aid programs we are stepping up the production and procurement of critical materials both at home and abroad Iron ore constitutes one of our most serious potential shortages. As the Annual Economic Review points out we should be receiving large shipments from the new Venezuela and Labrador developments by or This is urgently needed to meet the expected decline in ore production from the Lake Superior region. But to avoid extremely high-cost transportation and hence high-cost steel operations we should start at once on the St. Lawrence Seaway and Power Project so that imported iron ore can be shipped efficiently by water to the great steel producing centers of the Middle West The St. Lawrence project is vital also to bring in a new source of power for industry in the Northeast. We must have more power in this and other areas if we are not to place sharp limits on our industrial capacity Agricultural production. Our farms are no less involved in the production effort than our factories and mines. The demand for farm products has increased greatly since the Korean outbreak. Military needs for cotton and wool have risen sharply. Military food requirements are also rising as more men come into military service. There has been an exceptionally high civilian demand for meats and many other foods and this is expected to continue In the face of these rising demands we now have low supplies of cotton and wool. Our food supplies while entirely adequate for the time being will clearly have to be increased. The Government is moving now to help meet the need for increased production especially of cotton corn wheat wool and livestock. Acreage allotments and marketing quotas have been set aside. Price supports at per cent of parity have been announced for cotton and wheat for the crop year. Every effort is being made to bring the new cotton crop to a level per cent above that of last year Our farms are now more mechanized than ever before. To get out the increased crops they will need a steady supply of farm machinery and spare parts. Fertilizers will be equally necessary to meet expanding production goals. Our farmers are using much more fertilizer than before the war and will need still more to get the yields that we are after. Many of the things the farmers need will be in short supply. Farm and industry requirements will have to be balanced very carefully. But we will do our best to see to it that the essential farm needs are met Manpower. We can not produce in industry or agriculture without the trained workers to do the job. As the defense production job speeds up we will have to be increasingly careful about the distribution and use of the skilled labor we have available. We will have to train more and more new workers who are not now in the labor force. Major emphasis should be upon training and recruitment of unmarried women and married women without young children. Support should be extended to nursery schools as an aid to mothers who want jobs Additional shifts and longer hours in some defense industries are being encouraged. Industry hiring standards are being reviewed to provide suitable jobs for more workers. Arrangements are under study to protect the pension and seniority rights of workers who shift to defense jobs Health education rehabilitation and training programs are being reshaped to concentrate upon problems of defense workers. Existing housing com- munity facilities and service programs are being modified and construction is being shifted to defense areas We are already setting up voluntary labor-management committees to work with the United States Employment Service in the principal defense areas. These committees will help to shift workers into essential industries and will gain cooperation in installing the most efficient hiring practices and promoting the best use of skilled workers on the job. To provide better protection of workers who leave their communities to take defense jobs in other States the unemployment insurance system should be improved It is now quite clear that just as in World War II we will need special legislation to provide housing and community facilities and services for defense workers in areas where adequate quarters are not now available We will need to encourage private construction of rental housing in these areas. We will need publicly financed construction of housing and related facilities where private enterprise is unable to handle the job. We will need additional aid to community facilities and services in defense production centers. The Housing and Home Finance Administrator has submitted recommendations for legislation to accomplish these purposes. I hope that prompt action will be taken by the Congress Health services and education It is clear that we can not neglect the education and health of our people without the most serious results for a long-run defense effort. Obviously we will not now have available the resources to build or staff as many schools and clinics and hospitals in as many places as we hoped to do in normal times. But the quality of essential services must be maintained and improved as fast as can be managed. This is imperative for the success of the defense job It is not enough to train people as workers or as soldiers. They have to be healthy enough to get a job and do it effectively. Right now sickness is keeping about a million workers off the job every day. Right now failure to meet health standards is making about a quarter of our young men unavailable for military service. During World War II about six million men were rejected by the armed services for physical or mental disabilities We can not afford this waste of manpower our most vital resource. As a first step, we must obtain more doctors more dentists and more nurses The growing needs of the armed forces piled on top of civilian needs threaten the most dangerous shortages unless prompt action is taken by the Congress At the same time we must expand our local public health services. They are essential to our civil defenses and to the maintenance of safe health standards in our growing production centers As we move into a period when we will have an urgent need for all our trained men and women we must face the fact that nothing can make up for faulty basic education in our primary and secondary schools. This is as true for the men in military service as for the factory worker or the farm hand Our public school system faces the greatest crisis in its history. More than ever before we need positive action by the Federal Government to help the States meet their educational tasks. We simply can not afford to let overcrowding or lack of equipment or staff impair the basic education of our young people Under legislation passed last year the Federal Government is stepping up its aid to school districts overburdened as a result of Federal activities. But special aid of this type to particular school districts will not come anywhere near meeting the general crisis which exists. Therefore it is vital that the Congress act now to give the States general aid for school maintenance and operation Economic stabilization The Government has been moving ahead in several ways to stabilize the cost of living and hold down inflation Taxation. We should make it the first principle of economic and fiscal policy in these times to maintain a balanced budget and to finance the cost of national defense on a " pay-as-we-go " basis The Congress is to be commended upon the successful completion of two vitally important pieces of tax legislation since the middle of the calendar year But it was commonly acknowledged that these were only the first steps. We must now as rapidly as possible take the next step and it must be a very big step in view of the size of the new defense funds which have necessarily been appropriated and the required additions to these funds which will be set forth more fully in the Budget Message. Legislation should be enacted at this session of the Congress to increase taxes by very much more than they were increased by the last two major tax bills which the Congress enacted These new taxes are required to finance the defense effort ; and to help keep total spending within the capacity of current production so that inflation does not reduce the purchasing power of the defense budget reduce the real value of people 's savings generate speculative buying and hoarding and impede essential production. The real economic cost of this defense effort is that we must work harder reduce consumption and forego improvements in farm business and household equipment. This cost can not be put off into the future. It must be paid by the people now one way or another and it should be paid through taxation in the manner consciously determined by the Congress and not by the uncontrolled and inequitable incidence of inflation The new tax increases now required must press harder upon every source of available revenue. Corporations should pay much higher taxes Individuals should pay much higher taxes. Excise taxes should be higher and more extensive. Many loopholes in the tax laws should be closed In the near future after further consultation with legislative leaders new tax proposals will be transmitted to the Congress Taxation must be supplemented by greatly increased saving. Every dollar saved means a dollar less of inflationary price pressure. The alternative to saving is not buying more goods now because more goods are not now available. The saving will give a nest egg with which to buy the goods at a later time when they again become plentiful. The alternatives to more saving are either more taxes or inflation Savings help most in the defense effort and do the most to hold down inflation when they are invested in Government bonds. The Treasury will continue its policy of reducing the amount of debt held by banks and placing the maximum proportion of Government securities in the hands of the public particularly individuals. The savings bond program supports this goal and encourages saving Credit controls. Controls over business and consumer credit also help hold down inflation Regulations W and X issued by the Federal Reserve Board have established higher down payments and shorter repayment periods for those who buy durable goods and new one- and two-family houses on credit. Multifamily housing is now being brought under Regulation X. As the detailed requirements for the defense program and other vital purposes become clearer it may be necessary to make further changes in these regulations These regulations are well suited to help deal with moderate reductions in supply. If circumstances force acute reductions more direct measures will be needed to assure equitable distribution. In the meantime the authority to control housing credit through Regulation X should be enlarged by the Congress to include credit for the purchase of existing homes exempt under the present law The Federal Reserve Board has also taken steps to restrain excessive bank lending by raising bank reserve requirements and allowing short-term interest rates to rise Price and wage controls. We must use direct controls as well as these tax and credit measures in order to deal with the problem of inflation In the case of prices and wages considerable work has been done. In addition to the mandatory order affecting automobile prices substantial progress has already been made through negotiations towards securing effective price stabilization in such basic materials as steel copper lead zinc and certain basic industrial chemicals. Negotiations to secure effective price stabilization are under way with producers of other basic products. A number of regulations for mandatory action are in preparation We must achieve general stability as rapidly as possible and hold it for the duration of the present emergency. This will require the broad exten- sion of price and wage controls to hold down the upward spiral. The staffs to apply broader controls are now being rapidly gathered In the case of prices, the general policy must be to hold the price line with utmost vigor as the instances are rare indeed where further price increases are needed either to stimulate production or to provide adequate profit incentives. In these rare cases some price adjustments subsequent to stabilization may become necessary to stimulate vital production It is my confident belief that price adjustments after stabilization ^ will not be only in an upward direction. In many industrial lines extensive additional production made possible in many instances by military orders added to civilian orders will result in lower costs which can be passed on both to civilian buyers and to the Defense Department To prevent excessive speculation in farm products and wide fluctuations in their prices the Department of Agriculture should be granted authority to control speculative trading and to strengthen its regulation of commodity exchanges Price and wage stabilization must both be undertaken because of the economic connection between prices and wages. It follows from this that neither price action nor wage action can be decided upon in isolation. The decisions must be reconciled. They must be subject to central direction But it does not follow that prices and wages are precisely similar or can be treated identically. Prices are only one factor in the incomes of business which may rise or fall independently of prices. But wages are the very livelihood of millions of families. This makes wage stabilization the more difficult part of the task. But it must be undertaken if prices are to be stabilized A more rapid rise of total wages available for spending than of the production of goods which workers can buy will not make more goods available but rather will add to inflationary pressures. Since the amount of goods available for consumers can not be increased in the near future and many types of goods must be severely contracted the objective should be to limit correspondingly total spending of wages. Strong tax and savings programs are required but stabilization of wage rates is also necessary. This is particularly necessary because even with no wage rate increases there will be an expanding volume of total wages. Hundreds of thousands of new workers will be employed and hours of work will be longer. Moreover there are a few kinds of situations where adjustments in wage rates will be necessary and desirable. But this should be done only upon a clear showing of necessity in exceptional circumstances. The predominant general rule should be to achieve stable wage rates until the flow of consumer goods can be increased It would be impossible to achieve lasting wage stabilization without holding the line on the cost of living. This makes it all the more important to stabilize the price level. Unless this line is held it will not be practical to avoid some " cost of living adjustments " in wages in some cases. However there are many groups which could not be protected in this way. And to extend such adjustments without limitation even in all those cases where it could be done would add to the process of wages chasing prices and prices chasing wages. The only way out of this dilemma is to stabilize the cost of living and to do it quickly Wage stabilization also involves the problem of incentives. Without incentives it would be harder to sustain longer hours of work in defense industries and to spur on workers toward their participation in efforts to improve productivity. As we look forward to years of constantly increasing effort to strengthen our economy this problem of incentives can not be overlooked. Yet the peacetime increases in wages which normally provide incentives would under current conditions add to inflationary forces. Consideration should be given to the suggestion that where some wage adjustments become necessary over the long pull to provide incentives ^ the increased potential spending power should be diverted from the actual spending stream until inflationary pressures become less serious. Various constructive proposals may be developed to obtain this deferred effect Wage adjustments related to increased social security contributions would be one method. Other effective savings programs should also be considered I firmly believe that effective wage stabilization must draw heavily upon the experience and viewpoint of workers and employers with practical experience. That is the principle underlying the Wage Stabilization Board The Board is to be commended for its policy of consultation with representatives of labor management and the public. I earnestly trust that a sound and fair wage stabilization policy will quickly result. Such a policy will provide the best foundation for effective wage stabilization in detail. The principles which I have outlined can be the starting point for a wage stabilization policy which will receive the cooperation of those who would be affected and which will serve the best interests of the Nation in this emergency In the interest of economic stabilization all groups should consider what they receive before taxation. Of course heavier taxes will make it harder for everybody. But for any group to seek to adjust its income upward to counteract the higher taxes which the defense program is making necessary would tend to relieve that group from its share in the cost of achieving national security I am sure that every group will be willing to accept the necessary sacrifices in this emergency if the whole stabilization program is fair and equitable. Effective price and wage controls much higher taxes on business profits along with many other restrictions which will affect the whole population are all aspects of a comprehensive stabilization program in which everyone will do his part It is already plain that the present rent control law has been made obsolete in the light of the necessary curtailment in the rate of housing construction and the current inflationary pressures. Since rents are such a key element in the cost of living I recommend that the Congress extend and strengthen the rent control law International economic programs Our program of military and economic aid for the strengthening of the community of free nations including our programs for underdeveloped areas are of vital importance. They are closely related to other aspects of our foreign economic policy. The defense program increases the importance of strategic raw materials and we are already working with other free nations to increase the supply of these materials and to distribute them fairly. We should take cooperative action with the free nations to make sure that critical materials are used to strengthen the common defense of freedom and are not diverted to other purposes. In a short time I shall send to the Congress detailed recommendations on our international economic programs Use of export controls and allocations will enable the United States to carry out more effectively its part of international allocations agreements and to distribute more efficiently other commodities in short supply The power to control exports now scheduled to expire June 30th should be extended International trade policies should be adjusted to joint requirements While the defense effort will require a wide increase in trade controls a large part of the world 's trade will continue to be conducted in normal channels. The common defense objective can be furthered by the reduction of tariffs quotas and other trade barriers. To this end the Trade Agreements Act should be extended our customs laws and procedures should be simplified and the import tax on copper should again be waived Summary of Economic Developments in By June the economy had almost fully recovered from the mild recession of the previous year. Employment and production were high and prices were rising. The anticipated expansion of our defense program following the Korean outbreak led to still further increases in employment and production. It created strong inflationary pressures In this situation many economic indicators reached record highs and most of them are still rising. Higher employment longer hours of work and overtime payments raised wages and salaries and swelled the already high demand of consumers. On all fronts strong demand raised prices and in some shortage areas the price advance was rapid. Increased volume at higher prices boosted business profits. The obvious need for greater productive capacity stimulated business investment. Rising living costs and high business profits led to increasingly successful efforts to obtain wage increases The record levels of employment production and business investment have demonstrated the vigor of our economy. But the spiraling rise in prices wages and profits is a warning that inflation endangers our economic prospects and our defense efforts Civilian employment averaged almost million persons in compared with million in The gain in nonagricultural employment was about million but farm jobs declined by about thousand Employment increased steadily throughout the year except for a small seasonal drop in the fall months. At the end of the year employment was at an all-time record for December Unemployment after reaching a peak of million persons in February dropped markedly through most of the year. It reached a low of million in October and then rose slightly in the last two months of the year At the end of only percent of the labor force was unemployed This is near a practical minimum for a peacetime economy but is not irreducible under present conditions Production of goods and services as a whole in was percent greater than in This was a record for any postwar year and apparently was close to the record reached in World War II. In the fourth quarter of total production was percent higher than for the year The physical production of goods alone ( not including services ) was percent greater than in despite a percent drop in agricultural output. Industrial production increased percent. Gains were especially marked in the case of durable goods. More steel was produced in than in any previous year. The automobile industry operated at a record rate during most of the year. Electric power rose percent over Construction measured in physical terms reached an all-time high and averaged percent above Prices moved upward throughout the pace of the advance increasing sharply after the Korean developments at midyear Wholesale prices in December were at an all-time high percent above the June level and percent above December The price increases were not limited to a few commodities nor to a few groups. For a few weeks after the Korean outbreak farm and food prices rose sharply The rise in industrial prices while at first less spectacular was steady and persistent. At times the violent gyrations in prices of imported raw materials have been in the spotlight. But now the rise in wholesale prices has been quite general affecting all major categories of goods Consumers ' prices rose over percent during the major part of the rise occurring in the latter half of the year. They ended the year at a record level. Rising living costs absorbed a considerable part of the gains in consumer incomes Wages and salaries and other labor income rose continuously in reflecting wage rate increases longer hours of work and increased employment. By the fourth quarter they had reached a record high of billion dollars percent above the level a year earlier. Weekly earnings in all manufacturing industries rose from $ in November to $ in November a gain of percent CHART I PEFVENTAGE CHANGES IN SEIJECTED ECONOMIC INDICATORS PERC ENT PER CENT LABOR FORCED mm ^ ^ ^ \ Wmf ^ UNEMPLOYMENT TOTAL ( INCLUDING CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT ARMED FORCES ) TO ' : 1st TO 2nd I960 * N ^ B ' ~ ~ f HALF OF PRODUCTION " Mfiffifflft \ tmmmtffi ' ' ' ' ' ' ' " \ wxwwmfo % AftRIDI LTURAL ^ TOTAL GOODS AND SERVICES- ^ INDUSTRIAL INCOME : PERSONAL DISPOSABLE ^ ^ ^ F RM ( AFTER TAXES i H CORPORATE PROFITS AFTER TAXES PROPRIETORS ' PRICES- * ' r ALL COMMODITIES ! INDUSTRIAL PRonnrTc 4/ \ C NS WHOLESALE J/ NO r ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION / 6R 3SS NATIONAL PRODUCT IN PRICES * / ON LY AVAILABLE ANNUALLY / AL L COMMODITIES OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS SOUR CE : APPENDIX TABLE A _j i ALL ITEMS i ^ J f JMERS * Wage increases were widespread and substantial in the second half of the year being accelerated by a continued rise in the cost of living and by expectations of wage and price controls Profits of American business before taxes exceeded all records in reaching billion dollars or percent above the level of They attained a peak annual rate of billion dollars in the fourth quarter The previous peak rate was billion in the third quarter of The higher profits reflected increased output greater sales and higher prices Corporate profits after taxes and net incomes of unincorporated business also made new records. The net income of farm proprietors rose in the latter half of the year. By the fourth quarter it was percent above the fourth quarter of although percent below the postwar peak in the second quarter of Money and credit expanded with the growth of the Nation 's output and the rise in prices. Many components of business and consumer debt reached new highs The housing boom stepped up the growth in residential mortgage debt from an percent increase during to percent during Consumer instalment credit increased percent in the first nine months of compared to a rise of percent in the same period of Government policies helped restrain the rate of consumer credit expansion during the last quarter of the year Total privately-held bank deposits and currency increased by billion dollars reaching billion by the end of the year Personal income at an annual rate of billion dollars in the final quarter of was percent greater than a year earlier and more than percent above the second quarter of Although the annual rate of personal taxes increased by over billion dollars from the first half to the second half of the year personal income after taxes rose by billion. The rise in prices partly offset this increase but there was a gain of about percent in consumer purchasing power Consumption expenditures in the second half of the year far surpassed those of any previous period nearing an annual rate of billion dollars The increase was especially marked in the purchase of durable goods. A substantial part of the increased consumer expenditures was a reflection of higher prices Personal net saving dropped from a rate of percent of disposable income in the first half of the year to a rate of percent in the third quarter reflecting the first wave of post-Korean buying. Then it rose to percent in the final quarter Private domestic investment in construction equipment and additions to inventory rose very sharply increasing percent from the first half of to the second half and increasing percent from the second half of to the second half of In the second half of this investment reached an all-time record of billion dollars at a seasonally adjusted annual rate. The increase during was most marked in the case of producers ' durable equipment The investment trend was already upward before the Korean attack led to an expansion of the defense program and to a rapid further rise in investment. Private and Government surveys indicate that business plans to spend more for plant and equipment in than in The resumption of inventory accumulation during the first half of was a factor contributing to business recovery. Economic developments made it difficult for business to build up inventories immediately after midyear ; the strong demand forced some reduction in the third quarter. But in the fourth quarter inventory accumulation was marked The use of capital funds by nonfinancial corporations was almost billion dollars above Three-fifths of these funds were obtained internally from retained earnings and depreciation allowances Construction put in place in was percent higher than for the year and greater than in any previous year. The sharpest increase was in housing. A peak of new dwelling units was started in May and approximately that level was maintained through August. In the fourth quarter starts fell sharply partly as a result of credit restrictions International developments greatly stimulated domestic demand and production but the pressure of foreign purchases lessened. Exports in were nearly billion dollars less than in The surplus of exports over imports fell from billion dollars in to an annual rate of billion in the first half of An increase in our imports after we decided to speed up the rebuilding of our defenses brought this annual rate down to the probably transitory level of million in the second half Both the volume and prices of imports increased substantially. In our export surplus was less than our foreign aid but this aid declined substantially from the level Government transactions showed a close balance between receipts and expenditures for the year as a whole. Gash receipts increased while expenditures fell in the second half of After a cash deficit of billion dollars ( annual rate ) in the first half there was a surplus of billion in the second half. But the effect upon business operations of the anticipated increase in the military program more than offset any counterinflationary impact of the cash surplus An increase of billion dollars in Federal cash receipts from calendar year to calendar year was due to higher economic activity to increased employment tax rates and to higher withholding tax rates on individuals in the closing months of the year. Collections from corporate income taxes will increase substantially this year reflecting high profits in and increased tax rates HARRY S. TRUMAN JANUARY The Annual Economic Review January A Report to the President By the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Washington, D. C. January The PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits a report the Annual Economic Review : January in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully ff Chairman Contents Page I. THE BROAD FEATURES OF Recovery from the business recession The period of partial mobilization The period of intensified mobilization II. GUIDES FROM THE PAST Conversion from peace to war Magnitudes of expansion Sources of expansion Shifts in resource use Inflationary pressures The relevance of World War II experience Conversion from war to a peacetime economy The general pattern of developments Labor participation and business investment Incomes and demand The implications of our current prosperity I I I THE MAGNITUDE OF THE TASK AHEAD The general nature of the task The size of the national security build-up Expanding production to meet the strain Increased labor participation Expansion of productive facilities Obstacles to expansion Production goals for the end of Impact on civilian supplies Inflationary pressures How much defense can our economy support ? IV. ECONOMIC POLICIES FOR DEFENSE Three requisites for economic mobilization The need for comprehensive programming The need for speed The need for public support Maximizing our productive strength Industrial expansion Basic resources Manpower Adjustment of agricultural production IV. ECONOMIC POLICIES FOR DEFENSE Continued Promotion of economic stability Mobilizing our financial resources Taxation Debt management General credit policy Selective credit controls Materials controls Policy for profits prices and wages International economic policy Economic aid to foreign countries Control of commodities in world trade Commercial and financial policies V. DETAILS OF ECONOMIC TRENDS IN Employment and production Employment Unemployment Production Prices wages and profits Prices Wages Profits Money and credit The flow of goods and purchasing power Personal income consumption expenditures and saving Business investment and finance International transactions Government transactions Summary : The Nation 's Economic Budget page APPENDIXES A. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT PRODUCTION AND PURCHASING POWER B. THE DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME AND SAVING IN THE UNITED STATES C. THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET I. The Broad Features of T HE AMERICAN ECONOMY at the end of presented a far different picture from that which would have been projected from trends at the start of the year. Twice there occurred the sharply defined changes in direction r speed which come from the shock of armed conflict The outlook for and the appropriate national policies will rest to a greater extent than for some years past on Federal activity stemming largely from international developments. Whatever occurs however will start from the economy at the close of and the policies to be followed should make full use of the experience already gained The economic history of divides into three distinct parts : the period of recovery from the recession of ; the period of expansion of the defense program following the Korean outbreak on June ; and the more intense period following the beginning of major Chinese hostilities in late November RECOVERY FROM THE BUSINESS RECESSION The hesitant business recovery which began in August grew into a vigorous and sustained upward movement early in Industrial production increased more than percent from February to June and by then surpassed the postwar record level established in Employment followed a parallel course. It furnished sufficient jobs not only to absorb more than one-fourth of the million who were without work in February but also to match increases in a labor force which rose to new levels The final part of this Review discloses in detail the degree to which each important factor in the economy supported the rapid recovery to a high prosperity level in June. Personal incomes enlarged by the veterans ' insurance refund of billion dollars and by increasing wage payments fed a growing volume of consumers ' expenditures. Residential construction starts which had declined less than seasonally during the winter sprang upward in March beyond the peak month of other postwar years and proceeded at an unprecedented pace throughout the second quarter. Investment in new plant and equipment after a larger than seasonal decline in the first quarter expanded briskly in the second quarter. Businessmen both reflected and contributed to the ebullience by indicating their purpose to undertake still greater programs of plant expansion This rising level of business activity in the early months of was not based upon transitory causes which might have been expected to terminate expansion toward midyear. The payment of the veterans ' dividend which some observers overstressed contributed to the recovery but was not the basic factor in recovery. Nor did the upward movement have the ephemeral quality of an inventory boom. Producers and merchants were cautious about accepting the bounding market as a firm foundation for a reversal of their inventory policies. Manufacturing inventories ( seasonally adjusted ) did not exceed the September level until May and the increase in value from January to June was only percent. The increase in value of retail inventories during the same period was percent In both cases inventories were expanded less rapidly than sales Rising prices have often accompanied sustained periods of business expansion following recessions. They were not to be interpreted as a portent of coming inflation when the price rise was within the moderate limits recorded during the first half of It was not until the end of April that the weekly wholesale price index began to mount with any vigor The total rise from in the first week in January to in the last week in June was about percent. The index of industrial prices rose less than percent during the same period. The volatile index of wholesale prices of farm and food products opened the year near the lowest point since and these prices increased more during the first half-year than the wholesale prices of manufactured goods. The slower-moving index of consumers ' prices rose only percent The changes in money supply and in bank credit during the first half of were moderate. The increase in the privately-held money supply was inconsequential and the addition of billion dollars to the loans of all commercial banks was a rise of only percent. There was however an increase of percent in outstanding instalment credit. Nearly all of this occurred in the second quarter indicating one point in the economy where an inflationary potential might be developing. Residential mortgage credit was also rising rapidly This rapid business recovery brought a speedy change in the fiscal condition of the Government. Treasury revenue from excise taxes and from taxes upon the wages of the growing body of employed workers began to expand. Improving conditions also reduced demands upon the Treasury for the farm-price-support program and for unemployment insurance benefits. In combination these shifts resulted in a small budget surplus in the first half of the year THE PERIOD OF PARTIAL MOBILIZATION The shock of the initial involvement in Korea fell upon an economy which was experiencing a high level of prosperity with few slack resources or signs that the boom forces were leveling off. There was prompt and universal recognition by the American people that a great defense effort must be made. This meant that there would be imposed upon an extended economy military demands for goods and for manpower which had to be met by diverting factors of production from civilian uses The first result took the form of those mass movements which occasionally upset economic analysis based solely upon statistical data or assuming a regular pattern of economic behavior. There was a rush by consumers to buy fantastic quantities of certain goods even though such goods were being produced under conditions which assured the continuance of ample supplies for many months. Local stocks of sugar were exhausted ; merchants were forced to limit purchases of nylon stockings ; household linens flowed out of the shops and into the homes ; automobile tires were eagerly seized ; meat was crowded into deep-freeze units. Such movements however shortlived they may be continue to influence the economy long after the originating incident has disappeared Although the supply situation did not warrant such panic buying consumers were not wholly irrational. The goods they bought were important household commodities the limitations upon which had been most sharply felt during the days of World War II shortages. The buying did not represent any flight from the dollar ; rather it was an effort to anticipate the needs of the future. Such buying would probably soon subside and sales would settle down when consumers found ample supplies in the shops and began to use up what they had bought beyond their immediate needs The outburst of consumer buying was neither sufficiently great nor sustained to require Government intervention to prevent demoralization of markets. Nevertheless it had lasting effects upon economic conditions The consumers ' price index made the unusually large jump of percent between June and July as retail food prices moved upward. The rise in consumers ' prices was followed by a round of wage adjustments many of them voluntary that before the end of the year gave wage increases to millions of workers in manufacturing and other nonagricultural industries The July bulge also caused merchants to flood manufacturers with orders for goods to replenish inventories which had been held at conservative levels. ( See chart ) Manufacturers in turn entered the markets for raw materials with large demands. Speculative buying of futures at rising price levels began in the commodity exchanges. The upward pressures on raw material prices became a persistant inflationary factor throughout the second half-year While the heavy buying of nondurable goods was running its course a more enduring trend of buying appeared in the markets for consumers ' durable goods especially automobiles and household appliances. Incidental to this there were heavy liquidations of personal savings and an accelerated growth of instalment credit. Instalment credit continued to increase rapidly until action was taken to curb it Building operations were at a very high level when the Korean blow was struck. Then every builder began frantically to search out and buy all CHART MANUFACTURERS ' SALES AND ORDERS New orders ran well ahead of sales in the latter part of I960. The accumulation of order backlogs was especially rapid in the durable lines BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I960 J'NOT ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE materials needed for the completion of his operations most of which he would normally have purchased as the work progressed. The multiplied demand for building materials drove the regular market prices upward rapidly and generated irregular markets in which commodities exchanged hands at still higher prices. This excited buying eventually subsided. But it left its mark in the continuance of much higher prices of building materials generally although lumber prices declined temporarily Other business investment was immediately affected by the booming markets and by the expectation that a greatly enlarged defense program would assure their continuance. Expenditures for new plant and equipment in the third quarter were substantially larger than those in the second quarter while plans were hastily enlarged for'far greater expansion in the fourth quarter of and in The effect upon additional investment in inventories was immediate. Between July and October manufacturing and retail inventories increased billion dollars The financing of new business investment by bank loans is a normal process in our economic structure. It has contributed greatly to our economic growth ^ but may at times lead to difficulty by contributing to inflation. In the four-month period July to October the loans of all commercial banks increased more than billion dollars or percent The central bank authorities became concerned over inflationary dangers and in the latter part of August increased discount rates at the Federal Reserve Banks and initiated open-market operations to make it less attractive to the banking system and other lenders to sell Government securities for the purpose of expanding loans. The responsibility of the Federal Reserve to support the operations of the Treasury in refunding large maturing issues of securities limited the use of the general central banking instruments of credit restraint and business loans of banks and other lenders continued to increase to new high records under the pressure of the strong inflationary forces in the economy The fiscal operations of Government did not contribute to inflationary forces in the third quarter of the year except insofar as anticipations influenced the plans and conduct of consumers workers and businessmen. The third quarter is one of relatively low revenue receipts by the Treasury but there was a modest budget surplus in that period of Budget expenditures for the Defense Department were less than in the third quarter of and were slow in rising despite large increases in appropriations Government contracts to purchase have economic effects long before payments are ultimately made by the Treasury. But even these effects were limited since the business world received far fewer orders than it had been led to anticipate from speculations in the daily press and trade publications The force which directly sustained the rapid advance in economic activity during the third quarter was civilian demand buttressed by rising civilian income but without any extraordinary increment from Government sources Producers were making goods for civilians and not for defense when they pushed up the industrial production index percent between July and August and continued to carry it forward although less rapidly during the next two months The effect of the Korean outbreak and of the resulting burst of buying by consumers and by business firms was a sharp rise in the prices of industrial raw materials farm products and foods. Many of these prices became more stable by the end of July. But a general advance of the index of wholesale prices of industrial products continued although with decreasing rapidity until Thanksgiving Day when they were percent above the level of the last week in June. Retail prices advanced more slowly but this was merely a postponement of inflation since the retail price level ultimately reflects earlier changes in wholesale prices In considering at midyear appropriate domestic economic policies to meet the new situation assumptions had to be made about the size and character of the defense program. The assumption then adopted was that the defense program would move forward in stages with defense expenditure reaching a peak rate in two years. It followed that for the first twelve months the diversion of productive resources would not require drastic readjustment of the civilian economy. The initial program of the President to stabilize the economy was based upon this hypothesis The principal legislation requested and enacted to deal with the new outlook included additional military appropriations higher taxes and increased control powers. Additional appropriations of more than billion dollars for building up the armed forces increasing military assistance to Europe and enlarging stockpiles were requested in the course of the summer and were approved. The President in his first legislative proposal in July recommended an increase in taxes of billion dollars. In response to this request the Congress enacted a tax measure imposing additional rates on individuals and corporations to add about billion dollars to the annual revenue. In November the President recommended an excess profits tax and signified his purpose to request broader tax legislation in January The principal powers requested by the President in recommending the enactment of the Defense Production Act of were to allocate materials and limit their use to limit credit to consumers and for new construction and to furnish direct and indirect financial assistance to business expansion. Following the passage of the Defense Production Act of including authority to control prices and wages official action was centered upon establishing selective controls. These have the great advantage of striking directly at the point where it is desirable to apply restraint. The Federal Reserve Board moved immediately to require larger down payments upon automobiles and other consumers ' durable goods than those in many instalment contracts and to shorten the period for full payment A month later the Board tightened its requirements. The affected goods were largely those in the manufacture of which it is necessary to use raw materials required for the defense program The Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Housing and Home Finance Administrator established regulations requiring larger down payments and shorter periods of amortization in the construction and sales of new houses The Secretary of Commerce promulgated rules limiting exports of specific commodities in short supply which were either directly required in defense production or were of great importance to the domestic economy. The National Production Administrator prohibited the use of building materials in structures for amusement and for a few other purposes. One of the first orders of the Administrator prohibited the accumulation of excess inventories of certain essential commodities. Vigor was shown in the exercise of authority to establish priorities. A basic regulation established priorities for purchases for defense. Such regulations however have the defect that they take a part of an inadequate supply and leave all other users to battle more furiously for the remainder. To remedy this defect with respect to some important scarce raw materials. orders were issued to limit the amount which manufacturers might use in their operations Evaluation of the group of controls established during the five months following the attack in Korea runs into the difficulty that causal relations are very hard to establish in the economic world. Of some controls. such as those restricting exports it may be said with confidence that they had positive effect in reducing the total demand for certain goods. Of others such as the regulation of the terms of instalment credit it can be said that the expansion of instalment credit was virtually halted. But one can not know how far this was caused by the tighter credit terms and how far it was due to other influences affecting the purposes of consumers Price increases of raw materials and commodities at wholesale which got under way in the summer of were checked near the end of the third quarter. For six weeks before the blow from China the wholesale price index advanced very slowly. The course of prices of basic raw materials changed from an upward rush to a series of fluctuations. Wages in contrast continued to rise as new contracts were signed in many industries A large number of these contracts included provisions for adjustment of wages to further changes in the cost of living THE PERIOD OF INTENSIFIED MOBILIZATION The initiation of heavy hostilities by China in late November blasted the hope that the Korean campaign could be brought quickly to a close The support of China by the Soviet Union disclosed dangers of incalculable magnitude and made necessary a vigorous increase in the speed and size of defense preparations The most important of the immediate changes in the Government defense program was an increase of almost percent in the draft calls ordered by the Department of Defense for January and succeeding months. The plan for procurement for the armed services required substantial upward revision Additional funds were requested of the Congress in December to finance the initial phase of the revised procurement program and were provided There was no great change in the placement and scheduling of orders before the end of Industrial production in December remained close to the level established during October and November. Employment when seasonal adjustment is made for the customary additions to the labor force and jobs incident to the holiday trade was likewise steady. Yet national income and consumers ' income continued to rise under the impact of rising prices and rising wages Wholesale prices of industrial products which had moved slowly for nearly two months immediately pressed upward at the same fast rate at which they had advanced in July and August. In the four weeks following the Chinese intervention the index rose more than in the preceding eight weeks and more than in the four weeks following the Korea attack Wholesale prices of farm and food products after a sharp rise in the first week in December were stable for two weeks and then bounded upward again The market conditions under which wholesale prices advanced rapidly in December were very different from those of July and August. Christmas buying by consumers was little if any greater in unit volume than in Wholesale price rises in December seem to have been very largely the result of two factors : first an effort by sellers to increase prices before they could be frozen by price controls and second the evaluation by businessmen of the pressure on prices which would flow from an accelerated defense program and a continuing upward trend of money incomes. An inflationary spiral of rising costs of production rising prices rising wage rates and still again rising costs was soon under way. ( See chart ) This new impetus to inflationary forces in December was not related to any deficit financing by the Treasury. A substantial budget surplus and a larger cash surplus was accumulated during the month. This rounded out a period of five months over which there was a net surplus and a calendar year in which the Budget was close to a balance. Bank credit on the other hand continued to add to the inflationary pressure at an accelerating rate. Outstanding business loans of commercial banks in leading cities which had expanded at an average weekly rate of million dollars since the end of June increased more than million dollars in the three weeks following the China attack The important positive measures taken by Government during December to stabilize the economy were quick action upon a corporate excess profits tax bill which was made ready for final enactment before January ; an extension of the rent control act ; an order of the Federal Reserve Board increasing member bank reserve requirements ; additional allocation and limitation orders by the National Production Administrator affecting specific materials and in some cases specific uses ; and an order establishing a Government monopoly in importing rubber Other measures were preparatory. The President issued a proclamation on December declaring a national emergency and immediately thereafter established the Office of Defense Mobilization to which he assigned control and direction of the exercise of the powers given to the President by the Defense Production Act. Before the end of the month the Director of the new agency was coordinating the plans and operations of the several government offices under his jurisdiction The Economic Stabilization Administrator hastened the work of organizing a staff to administer price and wage controls the need for which promised to be far greater under the accelerated defense program than before. When the major automobile companies increased prices on their CHART WHOLESALE PRICES Wholesale prices after a moderate advance in the 1st half of I960 rose rapidly and on a wide front in the 2nd half of the year to new record levels. During the year farm prices scored the largest increases with food and industrial prices not far behind PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF A V E R A G E * FARM PRODUCTS BOTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS ( INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS ) I i ' ' ' i I i i I960 PERCENTAGE CHANGES DECREASE ALL INCREASE DECEMBER TO JUNE ^ X ^ ^ --v : ^ T ^ : : : : : : : : : ; : ; A- ^ ^ : ; >V ; >v : v.v ^ '- ; 'l J U N E I960 TO ^ : ^ : : ^ // ^ : J : l : ; ^ \ ^ ^ ; ^ ^ : : ^ DECEMBER I960 COMMODITIES | PRE-KOREAN PEAK TO DECEMBER FARM PRODUCTS FOODS OTHER T H A N F A R M P R O D U C T S A N D FOODS ( INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS ) SOURCE : ' DEPARTMENT OF LABOR new models the Administrator issued his first mandatory order fixing prices at the December level until March This was followed by an order in compliance with the statute prohibiting wage increases for the same period. These orders had limited effect upon the inflationary forces that were affecting wholesale prices and the cost of living But they were in a sense preparatory to much more extended action. The Administrator scheduled a series of conferences with producers of a number of basic industrial commodities to consider means of holding down prices of their products until his organization was prepared to administer more extensive price and wage controls. This procedure closely followed the early course of action to control prices in The precedent was further adopted in appeals to businessmen to follow voluntarily a price policy which the Administrator outlined in a formal statement At the end of the national economy was subject to forces of inflation far more powerful than those which arose following the original outbreak in Korea. Originally the advance in prices which had slowed down during the mid-autumn was accelerated under pressures which promised to continue until curbed by positive action. The outlook is that to these pressures there will soon be added the direct effect of the rapidly expanding military program with its increasing draft upon productive resources which have thus far continued to serve civilian needs Clearly it will be necessary to resort to more direct action than has thus far been taken to prevent inflation from continuing its destructive spiral The policies now needed are treated more extensively in a later part of this Review II. Guides From the Past T HE ECONOMY at the end of is the foundation on which we must build for the task ahead. But this economy was not built in a day ; and the experience of more than one year can contribute much to our understanding of the job to be done. The five years between and witnessed a gigantic conversion from peace to war. The work immediately before us now measured by defense goals already defined is of smaller magnitude. These goals are not based upon the prospect of inevitable total war ; they are a part rather of our continuing efforts to achieve a durable peace. Nonetheless as the Nation now embarks upon a program for conversion to defense it would be folly to ignore an experience into which so much effort was poured only a few short years ago The record of economic development between the cessation of hostilities in and is also of large significance today. That record exceeded expectation in reconverting from war to peace without the prolonged dislocation of postwar periods in earlier times. The managerial and labor skills the private financial mechanisms and the public policies which smoothed and accelerated this transition are national assets which should embolden us now as we face an even harder task. Moreover these five years have brought our economy to unprecedented levels of strength judged by every index of business activity and by all of the human and other resources which enter into our total power. We are far abler than a decade ago to assume the heavy burdens now confronting us. Yet the very fact that our resources are now being more fully used than they were in makes more difficult in some respects the problem of redirecting a large part of our resources to national defense Thus the history of the past decade in war and in peace should encourage and guide us in the months and years ahead. If we evaluate this experience carefully it can contribute immensely to the shaping of policies for the future CONVERSION FROM PEACE TO WAR Magnitudes of expansion The first major United States defense appropriation was requested in June at the time of the fall of France. The estimates presented to the Congress in January were described by the President as a budget for " total defense. " The total of defense spending authority requested by that time was billion dollars or nearly percent of the total national output of the preceding twelve months. During the following year billion dollars were added bringing the total to billion dollars over a period of months in terms of the prices then prevailing. In prices this was roughly equivalent to about billion dollars. The budget presented in January one month after Pearl Harbor was called " a budget for a Nation at war in a world at war. " From that date forward the only limitations on our war efforts were the intensity of our purpose the skill of our planning and our physical capabilities. The dollars were made available as rapidly as they could be used The results were stupendous. The dollars were used to train feed house and clothe million men in uniform and to provide them and the armed forces of our allies with munitions of war. Victory was the final measure of success. The economic dimensions of this effort however were shown by the growth of Federal war expenditures. The rate was nearly 2l/z times the second half of rate and the rate in was over times the rate. Total war expenditures in were billion dollars or nearly times greater than the rate during the second half of These comparisons are all stated at the price level in order to make them more meaningful Expenditures for munitions production more than doubled in and in were 3/2 times their level. In they stood at about billion dollars ( in prices ) or more than times the annual rate in the second half of This outlay represented production of aircraft tanks ( nearly had been produced in ) more than ships and nearly million tons of aircraft bombs. It supported the landings on the Normandy beaches and on the Pacific islands and made good the tremendous attrition of full-scale combat. Had necessity dictated it could have been still further increased But understanding of what took place would be superficial if one looked at the military effort alone. Behind this effort was a build-up of the economic strength which underlies striking power. This build-up was ample in scope and unparalleled in size. Total national production in was about percent greater than in ( See appendix table A-10. ) In it increased by nearly percent again. In the peak year of war production total national output was about percent above the level. The surge of industrial output was even greater. The index of industrial production rose percent in above the previous year and rose a further percent in It reached its peak in In that year and again in it stood about percent above the level. Agricultural output increased nearly percent between and despite a substantial reduction in the farm labor force and continued shortages of many farm supplies. The rise in total output not only supplied the primary military effort. It was also sufficient to service vital industrial expansion and actually to achieve some general improvement in the basic consumption standard of those employed at home. In short a CHART CHANGES IN PRODUCTION & EMPLOYMENT TOTAL PRODUCTION OF GOODS AND SERVICES ^ ( BILLIONS OF DOLLARS PRICES ) INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION ( PERCENT OF AVERAGE ) AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION ( PERCENT OF AVERAGE ) CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT ( MILLIONS OF PERSONS ) GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT SOURCES : VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AGENCIES major productive effort enabled us to grow stronger not only on one vital front but on several vital fronts. This conclusion is clear even though there are statistical difficulties in comparing peacetime output with war output. ( See charts and ) Sources of expansion The mainspring of this growth was an economy which possessed great power and resiliency. Although total production rose by percent between and the level from which it started was very high by the standards of any other country in the world. The years of common action to combat depression and to help those groups and areas which had been hardest hit had built new sources of strength into the economic structure From onward the basic sources of expansion were three : the absorption of unemployed manpower and other idle resources into production ; the expansion of productive capacity through enlarging plant and facilities ; and the recruitment of new workers for example more women into the labor force. Each of these three sources played a major role in the final result CHART TOTAL OUTPUT Total production of goods and services in reached a peak about percent above the level. In it was about percent higher than in PERCENT OF PERCENT OF .INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION I I I I I I ^ INDEX OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT BASED ON PRICES SOURCES : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS ; BASED ON DATA FROM BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE,AND DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE They operated concurrently and their contributions to the expansion of output can not be separately measured Between and the total number of people in the armed forces and civilian employment combined rose by million or about percent Of this increase million went into the armed forces and million were drawn into civilian employment. To supply this increase million or well over half came from the increased participation of the population in the labor force and normal growth while million were absorbed from the pool of unemployed which existed in Thus the expansion of the labor force was more important than the reduction of unemployment in meeting our manpower needs From the standpoint of timing the major increases in civilian employment came during the years The largest growth in the armed forces occurred during the next two years particularly during the twelvemonth period from mid-1942 to mid-1943 when million men or over percent of the total increase were put in uniform. This timing eased the job of preparing for all-out war production The enlargement of labor effort did not come only from increases in the number of workers. Between and average working hours in manufacturing industries rose from to hours a week or by about percent. In construction they rose from to or nearly percent ; and in bituminous coal mining they rose from to or nearly percent This tremendous increase in labor input was devoted largely to the production of finished munitions civilian goods and essential supporting services. A substantial fraction however especially up to mid-1943 was devoted to enlargement of plant and facilities for the production of munitions and basic materials. During the five-year period from mid-1940 to mid-1945 investment in industrial and industrial-service facilities totalled nearly billion dollars ( in prices ) or nearly ^ percent of total national output. Of this total over billion dollars worth were put in place in alone the peak year. This represented nearly percent of total national output The great emphasis in this investment program was on facilities for the production of ordnance aircraft ships and chemicals ( including synthetic rubber ) These categories alone accounted for almost percent of the total outlays for war industry facilities during the five-year period. The factory space devoted to aircraft production was increased 13-fold from January to March Other very large programs were undertaken for the expansion of basic capacity in metals and metal products machinery and electrical equipment and petroleum and coal products ; these categories accounted for another percent of the total. Rough estimates indicate that between and the end of the total capacity of all manufacturing industries was increased by as much as percent. In individual industries the increase in capacity was percent for steel over percent for nonelectrical machinery and to percent for chemicals and electrical machinery Electric generating capacity increased by more than one-fourth. In an even shorter period aluminum capacity increased nearly six-fold. In a number of less essential industries there was little or no increase in capacity and there were serious lags in maintenance and modernization As shown in chart these expansions of capacity supported very large increases in output. Between and steel production rose by nearly one-fourth ; power output by about one-half ; and aluminum production nearly quadrupled Direct Government financing played a major role in the World War II expansion program. Nearly percent of the total war industrial facilities of the period were built with public funds. The major reason for this was that such a high proportion of the facilities constituted special types needed for direct war materiel output offering only limited prospects of economical CHART GROWTH IN PRODUCTION ALUMINUM STEEL THOUSANDS OF SHORT TONS I MILLIONS OF SHORT TONS I fc ^ ^ ^ ^ j I ELECTRIC POWER-17 BITUMINOUS COAL BILLIONS OF KILOWATT HOURS T i l l MILLIONS OF SHORT TONS w/mt/M I w///////mmm& I I % PETROLEUM ' ! FOOD BILLIONS OF BARRELS &M % M % \ | PERCENT OF AVERAGE I VMrn ^ mzMa j -'FOURTH QUARTER RATE SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF INTERIOR AMERICAN IRON AND STEEL INSTITUTE FEDERAL POWER COMMISSION AND DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE postwar use. The facilities built for ordnance aircraft, and shipbuilding for example accounting in all for a little over half of total public and private outlays were more than percent Government-financed. In the expansion of basic industries such as steel and machine tools Government and private industry put up about equal shares while the transport and utility expansions were financed predominantly from private sources Policies were developed to support expansion in ways which were orderly least disruptive of community life and most compatible with our enterprise system. Recruitment and training programs special transportation arrangements day nurseries special arrangements for part-time work these and related policies were devised to secure maximum participation in the labor force. Investment policies including direct Federal loans loan guarantees and accelerated amortization were devised to secure maximum participation by private business in the needed expansion of capacity Shifts in resource use Despite the great increase in total output between and it was not possible merely to superimpose the war program on our civilian economy. Massive shifts in the use of resources were required. The size and difficulty of these shifts were only partially indicated by changes in the broad components of the labor force or of total national output because many shifts were within major components and virtually all major segments of the economy showed some expansion In Federal defense expenditures absorbed about percent of the total national output of billion dollars ( all of these figures are based on computations in terms of prices ) In the first quarter of the percentage was about ; in the first quarter of it was about ; and in the first quarter of it was over percent or close to the wartime peak In the peak war year war outlays absorbed about percent of a total output of nearly billion dollars. Civilian consumption in the aggregate rose somewhat in every war year except being nearly percent higher in than in Per capita food consumption grew considerably although the more equitable distribution meant declines in consumption for many. Nonetheless there were marked and unfavorable changes in the range and quality of available consumer goods which can not be adequately accounted for in the statistics. Furthermore there were many individuals and families whose tax payments rose substantially more than income and whose standards of living declined markedly. As a proportion of total output consumption declined from about percent in to about percent in War demand for particular types of materials facilities and skilled manpower was great enough to require the virtual elimination of production of a number of durable consumer goods. Total production of all consumer durable goods was cut by about one-half between and From relatively small quantities at the beginning of direct military consumption of steel rose to more than percent of total supply in and of copper and aluminum to two-thirds or more On the manpower side only agricultural employment and domestic service showed major and steady declines between and falling by nearly million. Construction employment rose by nearly a million almost doubling between and and then was cut back even more as the expansion of facilities was sharply contracted. All other major areas of employment remained fairly stable or showed increases throughout the five-year period. By far the major increase was in the metals metal-working and other durable-goods industries chiefly devoted to munitions production. Employment in the durable-goods industries expanded from million in to million in This was equivalent to nearly percent of the total increase in nonagricultural wage and salary workers between and ( See chart ) CHART NONAGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT MILLIONS OF PERSONS MILLIONS OF PERSONS FvEj >LOY VIE NT OTHER ; < GOVERNMENT ! ' i1I Mff.ti '/// V/A TURI NJG ' x/y> ^ SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND DEPARTMENT OF LABOR Inflationary pressures These very great increases in employment working hours and production generated similarly large increases in incomes even with adjustment for increases in prices and wage rates. Disposable personal income ( in prices ) rose by nearly percent or roughly billion dollars between and ; income before taxes rose even more. ( See table ) During the same period the supply of consumer goods and services increased by less than percent for while total production expanded by percent or nearly billion dollars Federal war expenditures absorbed the whole of the increase and the declines in private investment and net foreign investment were not sufficient to permit a greater expansion of consumption The inflationary pressure caused by incomes rising so much faster than civilian supplies was only partially counteracted by taxation. With government expenditures rising much faster than revenues and with restricted civilian supplies there was necessarily a very great increase in personal savings. They rose from about percent of disposable personal income in to nearly percent in In private saving both personal and business totalled more than billion dollars ( in terms of prices ) TABLE Production and private income and expenditure and [ Billions of dollars prices ] Item Production : Total production of goods and services ( gross national product ) Total war production _ Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Total private domestic expenditures Total excess of private income ( { ) or expenditures ( ) Income and expenditures : Disposable personal income Retained business receipts i Total retained private income * For definition see appendix table C-3 Source : Based on data in appendix table A-10 At no time during the war period however were taxes and funds earmarked for savings sufficient to offset inflationary pressures. Between and the index of consumer prices rose by percent and the index of wholesale prices by nearly one-third. The bulk of these increases occurred before the inauguration of general price control in but strong upward pressures nonetheless persisted making the task of maintaining stable prices one of continuing difficulty. Furthermore when the war ended and controls were removed the very large volume of liquid savings accumulated during the war was a major inflationary factor in the reconversion period The relevance of World War II experience This resume of World War II experience has points of relevance to the large though different defense effort now being undertaken. It indicates that the economic aspects of mobilization whether partial or complete are not confined solely to servicing the military front. Policies must be directed toward achieving that balance between strength on the home front and strength on the fighting front which provides the greatest total strength in terms of the strategy of the contest. The resume underscores the importance of expanding production. But it also shows clearly that a magnificent increase in production could not avert the necessity for cutbacks and reallocations of manpower materials and equipment to new purposes. And although the Nation started its defense effort at a time when there were many slack resources this did not prevent the rapid gathering of inflationary forces To meet these problems many and varied policies were adopted and made effective. Government expenditures financial aids and tax incentives contributed to the rapid expansion of total output. By the end of they were setting the pattern of final demand for over percent of national output and largely guided the necessary shifts in manpower Direct allocations of materials and prohibition of nonessential uses assured the availability of resources to meet these primary needs. Increased tax rates savings campaigns and rationing helped to restrain the pressure of civilian incomes on limited supplies. Direct price control and wage stabilization gave necessary support to these policies and at the same time kept the remaining pressures from breaking out of bounds. It is a major question however whether inflationary pressures could have been contained successfully over a longer period without higher taxation It is of high significance that even with this necessary intensification of public controls and centralized action the great records of wartime production were achieved in large measure without destroying and in fact by enlivening the dynamic initiative of enterprise all over the country. This not only helped us to win the war ; it also left us in a strong position to move forward when hostilities ceased The value of this experience is not lessened because the problems we now face are somewhat different from those which confronted us after Experience is useful not only in dealing with identical situations but also in dealing with new variations. Besides there are numerous important points of similarity between what we must now do and what we did after That experience should be studied and drawn upon now More detailed reference to its pertinence will be undertaken in the policy section of this Review CHART CHANGES IN PRODUCTION & EMPLOYMENT SINCE TOTAL PRODUCTION OF GOODS AND SERVICES'17 ( BILLIONS OF DOLLARS PRICES ) INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION ( PERCENT OF AVERAGE ) I960 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION ( PERCENT OF AVERAGE ) I960 CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT ( MILLIONS OF PERSONS ) I960 ^ ANNUAL RATE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ^ SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AGENCIES CONVERSION FROM WAR TO A PEACETIME ECONOMY In the Midyear Economic Review of last July the Council undertook an analysis of developments during the preceding five years. This survey outlined the unparalleled height of peacetime productive power to which the American economy had ascended. The survey also revealed new magnitudes and modes of private economic behavior and public policy which suggested new limitations on the applicability of traditional cycle analysis The mildness of the business recession and the speed and vigor of the recovery led the Council to suggest that new factors of stability had been built into the structure of our system and that this would contribute to further dynamic growth The tasks now confronting the Nation suggest a further appraisal of these five years in a somewhat different perspective. The economic situation now is vastly different from what it was in when we began so vigorously to build up military strength and to adjust the rest of our economy to this primary task. In consequence the Nation is now in a novel situation as it faces a defense emergency. This in turn has great bearing upon what we now need to do and upon the speed and facility with which we can adjust to the accomplishment of new goals and the assumption of new burdens The general pattern of developments The dominant feature of the beginning of the reconversion period was a precipitate decline in war expenditures. From their peak of about billion dollars in ( in prices ) these expenditures dropped to only about billion dollars in or by more than percent. They declined still further in Despite this drastic contraction of the major single segment of demand the total output of the economy fell by only about percent between and By the end of after the moderate setback in total output stood close to the level. ( See chart ) Industrial production weighted so heavily during the war by munitions output has varied much more sharply than total output. From a peak of the index of industrial production fell to in ; or by nearly percent. Since except for the setback the index has climbed steadily and by the end of was within percent of its wartime peak year. ( See chart ) Except for the industries which had concentrated on munitions production virtually all types of industrial output at the end of were substantially above wartime peaks. In view of the record of expansion and modernization of industrial facilities during the postwar years basic industrial capacity is now well above the level Agricultural production as a whole did not decline at all from its wartime levels and in both and was well above those levels Furthermore there were substantial shifts in types of farm output toward higher-value livestock products more nearly in accord with the pattern of consumer demands at high levels of incomes The physical volume of total new construction in was more than percent above its wartime peak Thus in some areas of basic importance to long-term economic growth and to the steady improvement of living standards production in was substantially above its wartime levels. Even though total output was probably no greater it was attained with far less strenuous utilization of plant and manpower. The capacity to produce was much greater The pattern of output in was predominantly adjusted to the needs of a prosperous peacetime economy. Total civilian consumption was onethird above the level. It absorbed about percent of aggregate production compared with about percent in ( See chart ) Residential construction in totalled billion dollars or nearly ten times the level ( in terms of prices ) About * /2 million new passenger cars or billion dollars worth were produced in compared with practically none in A completely new product television CHART INDUSTRIAL OUTPUT Total industrial output rose about percent from to the wartime peak in when it was very heavily weighted by munitions production During although below the wartime peak it was percent above the level and was rising rapidly POINTS IN TOTAL INDEX POINTS IN TOTAL INDEX AVERAGE FOR TOTAL = TOTAL INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION 'DURABLE MANUFACTURES ^ ' " V ' ^ * ' * ' ' " ' " c " SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM CHART CHANGING SHARES IN NATIONAL OUTPUT The record of the past decade shows the growth and changing pattern of the economy under the impact of World War IE the conversion to peacetime and the postwar resumption of expansion. Real consumption has expanded steadily to new all-time highs while total output in I960 was only moderately below the wartime peak BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS PRICES TOTAL GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT \ \ f GOVERNMENT PURCHASES OF GOODS AND SERVICES \ * S '4 * * '4 * * " * PERCENT OF PERCENT OF TOTAL TOTAL PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES : U GROSS PRIVATE DOMESTIC INVESTMENT AND NET FOREIGN INVESTMENT. SEE UPPER PART OF CHART FOR DOLLAR VOLUME OF EACH ITEM SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS was being produced at a rate in the neighborhood of billion dollars a year Throughout the civilian economy new peacetime records were being established Labor participation and business investment Between and the total labor force ( including the armed forces ) declined from to million or by about million. Over this same period the decline in the armed forces was about million. Thus there was an increase of about million in the civilian labor force although many women and older people left the labor force and many veterans resumed their education instead of looking for jobs. After both the total labor force and the civilian labor force steadily increased. By late in the total labor force was close to the World War II peak year The civilian labor force was higher than in by well over million or more than percent ; and civilian employment was also higher by more than million or more than percent Throughout most of the postwar period with the exception of and the first half of unemployment was little if any above what might be regarded as a normal peacetime average between and 2J/2 million or 3J/2 to percent of the labor force. This level of unemployment however was substantially above the average of or percent of the labor force Average weekly working hours however have declined substantially. In manufacturing they fell from their peak of to in or by about percent. After that they remained between and In other industries declines of smaller magnitude took place. The eight-hour day and the five-day week became widely established as an acceptable balance between work and leisure under going wage rates and aggregate demand for labor. Thus there was a substantial decline in the intensity of labor effort during the postwar period measured by degree of participation in the labor force by women and older people by volume of unemployment in relation to the total labor force and by length of the work week With continuing high employment and intensive investment in modernization and expansion of productive facilities there has almost certainly been a substantial improvement in productivity. Although statistical measurements in this field are necessarily lacking in precision it seems likely that output per man-hour for the economy as a whole has increased by at least percent during the past five years Business investment has been a major cause of this rise in productivity Outlays during the postwar years for nonfarm plant and equipment have totalled over billion dollars or percent of total national output. ( See chart ) These expenditures rose substantially in every year until when there was a slight drop and again increased sharply in the second half of This very large volume of investment was devoted not only to the CHART NONFARM PLANT AND EQUIPMENT OUTLAYS The total physical volume of private and public facilities investmen t rea : hed a wartime peak in which was equalled in by priv ate investment alone. Government outlays for productive fac lities accounted for a large share of the total from to I94Zi Priv ate outlays in I960 were percent of the wartime peak fo r toteJl outlays and percent above BILL | ONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF OOLl ARS PRICES * w ~ * * : HTTP * JJ T ~ ~ < " ' * " * ; _ PU BLI ; : L r10 ^ * i ^ ; | ^ L ^ j 'v i * ; PR IVAT E * >j ' i " ' ; -i I- * PUI PO RTION OF THE TOTAL SOUFICES : COUNCrL OF 'ECONOMIC ADVISERS ; BASED ON DATA FROM DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE SECU RITtES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION AND BOAiRD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEOJERAL RESERVE SYSTEM. enlargement of plant and equipment but also to extensive modernization programs. These activities have established a base for further increases in productivity and have greatly enlarged our capabilities for the tasks ahead Steelmaking capacity is about percent greater now than it was at the end of despite the retirement of much obsolete capacity just after the war. Capacity for refining petroleum has increased about percent in the same interval and electric utility generating capacity has risen nearly percent. Much more rapid growth has occurred in some important industries such as chemicals and electrical machinery which are estimated now to have capacities about two-thirds larger than at the end of the war Changes in the production of individual basic industries have differed markedly. ( See chart ) Output of crude petroleum at the end of was more than percent above the level ; of electric power more than percent ; and of steel nearly Aluminum production however was moderately below the wartime peak and coal production had fallen nearly percent Some estimates indicate that the over-all capacity of private manufacturing industry increased about percent between the end of and the end of compared with percent during the period In absolute terms the expansion was probably larger in the five postwar years than during the war Since the Federal Reserve Board index of manufacturing production is only now approaching the peak registered during the war it might appear that present capacity could support very much more than the present level of output. But these possibilities should not be overrated in the face of the mobilization task before us. The over-all estimate of expansion of capacity during refers to the pattern of output of the past few years and is less relevant to the considerably different pattern of output needed in the build-up of economic mobilization. Moreover a significant part of the reported postwar increase in private industrial capacity for production of civilian-type goods did not represent a net addition to total capacity ; it was secured by reconversion of war facilities. Finally some existing capacity of the less essential types may not be fully utilized in the next few years as manpower and materials are necessarily diverted elsewhere Incomes and demand In the years from to the volume and pattern of private demand again became the main influence upon the volume and pattern of production. This was true although by prewar standards government programs remained large. Civilian consumption and private investment accounted for about percent of total national output in compared with about percent in The deficiencies accumulated during a decade of depression and incomplete recovery followed by five years of war and the new wants generated by high employment and high incomes were tremendous. These high incomes together with more than billion dollars of wartime liquid savings gave an additional impetus to an economy released from the needs of war comparable to the impetus imparted by the great volume of defense appropriations from onward. As peacetime incomes and consumer spending continued to rise business adjusted its investment plans to what were gradually recognized as permanently greater markets The expanding scope of business investment in productive facilities has already been outlined. The production of housing and durable goods for consumers was even greater. The still larger output of nondurable goods and services showed a slight but steady upward trend despite the increasing absorption of consumer savings and incomes by housing and durable goods By total consumer expenditures together with residential construction amounted to about billion dollars or in the neighborhood of percent above the level During residential construction and output of durable consumer goods together totalled roughly billion dollars ( in prices ) or percent of total national output over the whole period. Some million passenger cars were produced ^ and the total number of passenger cars on the road rose from about million at the end of to about million by the end of Between * /2 and million new housing units were put up raising the total stock of housing by nearly the same amount The high and rising level of total production was necessarily accompanied by high and rising incomes. Both in the aggregate and in composition the output available to consumers after was much more nearly in accord with the demand arising from those incomes than it had been during the war. By the first half of there were reasonable grounds for believing that we could look forward to a period of orderly economic expansion True there had been considerable periods of time between and which were characterized by strong inflationary pressures notably after the hasty abandonment of controls in This inflationary experience stemmed from many causes. But particularly it indicated that financing too large a proportion of a war burden through borrowing and too small a portion through taxation leads to dangerously excessive purchasing power in the postwar period when the cashing-in of wartime savings adds to the purchasing power generated by current production There were times when the consequences of these inflationary pressures seemed to threaten a major and sustained economic reversal. But even when the first manifestations of deflation appeared in the underlying factors of strength appeared to be predominant. Many stabilizing factors both private and public had been developed to make the economy more shock-resistant. The Council accordingly urged business to move ahead confidently with its investment planning and did not advocate the sharp shift in Government policies which a more pessimistic appraisal of the situation would have called for. The recovery in the first half of before CHART CHANGES IN PRODUCTION SINCE ALUMINUM STEEL I/ THOUSANDS OF SHORT TONS I MILLIONS OF SHORT TONS I I | ! | t I i ELECTRIC POWER / BITUMINOUS COAL MILLIONS OF SHORT TONS BILLIONS OF KILOWATT HOURS I ! | j l i l t i PETROLEUM i/ FOOD BILLIONS OF BARRELS t PERCENT OF AVERAGE | ] I I/ I960- ANNUAL RATE END OF YEAR SOURCES.- DEPARTMENT OF INTERIOR AMERICAN IRON AND STEEL INSTITUTE FEDERAL POWER COMMISSION AND DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE the stimulating effect of the developments in Korea was vigorous and extensive The implications of our current prosperity Having reviewed five years of war and five years of peacetime prosperity the central question arises : What economic strength actual and potential do we now have to throw into the scales on the side of human freedom ? This question may be approached first of all by comparing our economic situation now with our situation in when we commenced in earnest to serve as the arsenal of democracy We now stand at the close of a decade of intensive economic growth while in we were just emerging from ten years of depression and partial recovery. Our total national output in real terms is more than percent higher than it was ten years ago. Our industrial output is percent higher. Our agricultural production is percent higher. Our labor force is larger by more than million people and the actual number at work and consequently absorbing training and skill is nearly million higher. ( See chart ) Production in the durable goods industries from which the bulk of munitions output comes has increased more than percent. Steel capacity is about million ingot tons compared with about million at the end of ; aluminum capacity is about 2l/<z times as great ; electric power capacity has expanded by percent ; and oil refining capacity by percent. Actual production in certain of these industries has expanded even more : steel by more than percent power by about percent and petroleum by about percent. ( See chart ) We have percent more freight cars and nearly percent more trucks in service and both these types of transport equipment have improved markedly in effective carrying capacity. Stocks of consumer durable goods are substantially greater in proportion to the population. At the same time however it must be recognized that with respect to certain natural resources such as high-grade iron ore copper sulphur mercury and high-grade saw timber we are not in so favorable a position as we were ten years ago CHART CHANGES IN PRODUCTION & EMPLOYMENT SINCE TOTAL PRODUCTION OF GOODS AND SERVICES ^ ( BILLIONS OF DOLLARS PRICES ) INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION ( PERCENT OF AVERAGE ) AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION ( PERCENT OF AVERAGE ) CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT ( MILLIONS OF PERSONS ) I960 -'GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT ^ ANNUAL RATE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCES : VARIOUS GOVERNMENT AGENCIES CHART GROWTH IN PRODUCTION SINCE STEEL17 ALUMINUM T H O U S A N D S OF SHORT TONS BILLIONS OF KILOWATT HOURS BITUMINOUS COAL ELECTRIC POWER ^ O MILLIONS OF SHORT TONS MILLIONS OF SHORT TONS PETROLEUM- BILLIONS OF BARRELS O FOOD PERCENT OF AVERAGE SO ^ 1950-ANNUAL RATE END OF YEAR 2/ FOURTH QUARTER RATE SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF INTERIOR AMERICAN IRON AND STEEL INSTITUTE FEDERAL POWER COMMISSION AND DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE By almost every available measurement our current productive strength has far surpassed that of a decade ago. Total per capita output of consumption goods in was roughly percent higher than in ; in the case of consumer durables alone per capita output was probably about three-fourths higher We are also far better equipped than ten years ago in our supply of many of the facilities for maintaining our national security or for fighting if we must. We have a substantial reserve of plants and equipment for increased production of military items. The privately-owned United States merchant fleet now totals about vessels of about million dead-weight tons compared with a tonnage of about million at the beginning of In addition there are Government-owned vessels most of which are in the national defense reserve fleet. Our military bases and training facilities are far greater than in These provide a source of greater immediate strength ; in addition they mean that the resources which we had to devote to the expansion of such facilities during the period after are now free for other uses Not only is our economy enormously stronger than ten years ago but on top of this we are in an excellent position to expand our strength. It is true that we have fewer unutilized resources of manpower and basic industrial plant than in ; but this disadvantage if it be called that is at least partially compensated for by the fact that present plans do not call for so gigantic a military build-up as was undertaken successfully 'during World War II. Thus we have a larger proportion of our resources available as well as larger absolute amounts to devote to the further build-up of our economic strength in the years ahead Moreover there is still substantial slack in our economy when measured against the efforts which we should now exert. In addition to the roughly to persons per year who will be arriving at working age through normal population growth we can increase the effective strength of the civilian working force substantially by recruiting and training more secondary workers and by lengthening the work week by several hours without jeopardizing health or morale More important than manpower in which we can not exceed in number the forces arrayed against us we have reserves of technology and inventiveness which have been the major sources of our superior industrial strength throughout this century. No one can calculate precisely how much we can add to production through the further practical application of already achieved scientific knowledge and already demonstrated ingenuity. But no one can doubt that our resources in this direction are enormous if we use them to the full in the factory and on the farm We expanded total output by about percent during the war years between and Expansion by about percent over the next five years which would represent a less intensive effort although starting from a period of less slack would give us the supplies for both an enormous defense effort and a strong supporting economy if these supplies were distributed efficiently according to priority of need. We could do far better than this with an intensified effort on all fronts So much for our assets. Yet it can not be denied that the conversion to defense problems is in some respects more complicated than in This is because we are now so much closer to the full utilization of our currently available productive capacity than we were ten years ago. For example it was easier in some respects after to bring unemployed people into defense work than it will be in the months ahead to shift them from peacetime employment to defense work ( although even here the skilled and currently employed worker will almost certainly prove more productive than one who had been idle for a long time ) The slack in the economy for a substantial period of time after meant that the step-up of over-all production resulted in a widespread improvement in living standards especially among those who had been partially or completely idle. On the contrary now because of the fullness of the living standards which we have recently been enjoying the vast increase in the defense " take " will certainly mean for a considerable period of time the abandonment of yearly gains to which the population had rightfully been accustomed in an expanding peacetime economy. Further there will be need for sacrifice of some benefits now enjoyed as well as of others that had been held in prospect. In short we must now make a sharp and drastic switch from some types of highly rewarding activity to other types of activity. This is more difficult in some ways and calls for more drastic policies of some types than the drawing of idle resources of plant and manpower into defense production But despite all this one salient fact remains of transcendent importance : Our total resources and productive power are far more adequate to serve whatever task may confront us than they were in The expanding defense program now getting under way will require sacrifices of goods and services by the people measured against what they have recently been enjoying. But a defense program of this size or considerably greater size would still leave the people with a higher general standard of living than they had before World War II or during the course of that war. If under these circumstances the fact that we have less slack in the economy than in is used to support the argument that we consequently can less afford to meet whatever burdens our national security may require that would be tantamount to saying that the great prosperity and economic strength which we have achieved is a handicap rather than an asset A few years ago it was said correctly that the Soviet Union would gain immensely if there should be a depression in the United States. Such an event would have weakened us immeasurably. It would be a grim irony indeed if our prosperity had made us weaker for the tasks ahead than if we were in a recession or mild depression. It is true that we must now show the courage and vigor to convert employed strength to new purposes instead of drawing upon unemployed strength. But our prosperity could be a liability rather than an asset only if we had become soft and fat in becoming prosperous. That has happened to other civilizations before ; but we can not afford to let it happen to the United States. We must beat many of our plowshares into swords ; but let us start with the confident realization that we have more real power than ever before to do so Part III. The Magnitude of the Task Ahead THE GENERAL NATURE OF THE TASK I N the array of our enemies included the two greatest industrial nations in Europe and the Far East. In winning the war against them some people say that we may have overestimated their economic potential and consequently their military strength. But even if this be true it is of small significance compared with the gains we derived in setting our production targets from not underestimating our opponents It is true that at the present time the aggressor nations do not even approximate the actual and potential industrial strength of the United States alone and far less of the United States and the free nations associated with us. Steel capacity is often cited as a vivid illustration. The current capacity of the Soviet Union and its satellites is estimated to be about to million tons. That of the United States is about million ; and that of Western Europe about million. Undoubtedly measured by many other indexes as well and by skilled manpower and technical know-how our margin of current superiority is large But the economic strength of the Soviet Union is both great and increasing. It is concentrated upon building up those sectors of the economy which support military effort. Toward this end the Soviet Union is willing and able to compress and degrade the people 's living standards below levels conceivable in this country. Technical ability has been revealed to do new and difficult things. And because the Soviet Union demobilized to a far lesser extent than did the Western Nations at the close of World War II its present striking power is formidable Confronted by this threat the general nature of our economic task in support of our primary defense build-up is three-fold. In the first place and of first priority our economy must provide the manpower and materials to achieve a large and very rapid increase in the immediate military capabilities of ourselves and to aid in building up the strength of our allies Second we must achieve as rapidly as feasible an expansion of our industrial mobilization base sufficently large to enable us to swing rapidly into full-scale war production if necessity should require. And third really as a corollary of the other two propositions we must service our industries and our civilian population with enough goods and services not to maintain them in peacetime grooves but at least to maintain them strong enough to support quickly or in the indeterminate future any intensification of the military effort which circumstances may demand These three objectives can not all be fully served. Consequently the allocation of great but nonetheless limited resources among these three purposes is the task of economic and military mobilization whether partial or complete. This task is in some respects more difficult than in a total war because the outbreak of hostilities of that kind removes some of the imponderables from the scene. In the current situation these imponderables still remain. We do not know whether the ultimate test will come or when it will come if it comes. Yet in apportioning our total resources among these three purposes there must be some guiding strategy as to which among various contingencies should be given most weight. This is true because the apportionment of our resources which would be best on one hypothesis would not be best on another. While we must retain enough flexibility to adjust our strategy rapidly if conditions change there is no such thing as getting fully ready for a variety of conflicting hypotheses The initial hypothesis must result from an appraisal of the international situation which in turn governs the speed and scope of the primary military build-up. That must be determined by those directly responsible for international and military policy subject of course to the President and the Congress While that basic military determination in the very nature of things can never be complete or final its status at any particular time provides the frame of reference within which economic policies must be formulated In this framework the effects of the military effort must be analyzed and programs formulated for the best use of resources to mesh our economic strength with imperative military needs The size and scope of the primary military build-up which provides the central frame of reference for economic analysis and programs has now been determined at least for the time being. This permits the Council to turn to an examination of the economic aspects of the new job before the nation THE SIZE OF THE NATIONAL SECURITY BUILD-UP New obligational authority already granted or anticipated for national security programs at the time of the President 's Budget Message this January will probably total much closer to than to billion dollars for the fiscal years and combined. The amounts for each of the two fiscal years will probably be roughly equal. These funds are intended to achieve as rapidly as possible a virtual doubling of our strength on the ground and in the air and an increase of more than one-half in our naval strength The funds are intended also to provide military and economic aid to friendly nations abroad ; to enlarge the atomic energy programs ; to expand our industrial mobilization base ; and for stockpiling and other purposes The very large volume of obligational authority already granted or in CHART NATIONAL SECURITY EXPENDITURES AS PERCENT OF GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT PERCENT OF 6.N.P PERCENT OF 6.N.R PRICES TOTAL NATIONAL SECURITY EXPENDITURES ECONOMIC AND MILITARY AID TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES U. S. ARMED FORCES AND RELATED PROGRAMS J0 A LARGE PART OF THE ECONOMIC AND MILITARY AID TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES IN WAS LEND-LEASE /'ANNUAL RATE SEASONALLY ADJUSTED SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS ; BASED ON DATA FROM BUREAU OF THE BUDGET prospect has already had a major impact upon the economy far more than would be indicated by the moderate increase in expenditures which has so far occurred. Expenditures however are the most useful indication of the size and speed of the continuing procurement effort and of the proportion of total output going to defense Federal expenditures on all these national security programs totalled about billion dollars in the fiscal year the last full year before the Korean outbreak. At the present time they are running at an annual rate of somewhat more than billion dollars and by the end of the calendar year they should attain an annual rate between and billion dollars or from to billion above the rate a year earlier. The procurement effort twelve months from now should enable this volume of expenditures to be expanded very rapidly if necessary. In addition to these direct Federal expenditures there will be major investment programs by private industry to build or convert the facilities necessary for defense production These dollar figures represent present plans. Depending on events it may become necessary to increase them substantially. Attainment of present plans would mean that between the end of calendar and the end of calendar the proportion of total national output devoted to expenditures on national security programs would increase from less than percent to possibly as much as percent. This compares with an increase from about percent in the last quarter of to percent by the last quarter of and to about percent by the fourth quarter of In terms of relation to total output or absolute increases in defense expenditures the acceleration of effort now under way is substantially below that achieved in the first year after Pearl Harbor. ( See chart ) This effort will nonetheless impose a substantial strain on manpower materials and facilities. In terms of manpower the present target is to increase the total strength of the armed forces by nearly million men within a few months. Procurement objectives have so far been scheduled in detail sufficient only to permit the roughest appraisal of the total number of administrative and industrial workers that may be required. But this total is unlikely to be less than million persons by the end of this year and may well be considerably more. Thus the minimum manpower now estimated to be required by the additions to our national security programs totals about million or nearly percent of the average labor force ; and this total may be very much increased. A considerable proportion of this additional personnel must of course be drawn from other industries Because military procurement schedules have not yet been developed in full detail and because of the need to relate purchases of basic materials for the strategic stockpile not only to our own military procurement and essential civilian need but also to those of friendly nations abroad assessment of the probable drain on basic materials over the coming twelve months is very difficult at the present time. In the case of steel for which there is no stockpile objective and where supplies are far less tight internationally than they are for a number of other basic materials the direct requirements of national security programs as presently known are unlikely to exceed percent of total supply by the end of this year. Indirect needs for the expansion of essential industrial and transportation facilities however will increase this percentage substantially. In the case of materials like copper aluminum rubber and wool however national security requirements are likely to be substantially greater ranging up to one-fourth one-third or more of total supplies The direct requirements of our national security programs do not of course include the total additional burdens that will be thrown on the economy by our present needs. There must be an expansion of productive facilities not only for the production of munitions but also for the production of basic industrial materials and services. The creation of an industrial mobilization base which would on the one hand be adequate for a very rapid expansion to all-out military production if that should become necessary and on the other hand support a long-continuing effort of the present size without impairing our strength is a task which is as challenging as the direct defense effort itself. The size and character of this task is discussed in the following section EXPANDING PRODUCTION To MEET THE STRAIN In earlier Reviews the Council has stressed that even in peacetime the effective operation of the American economy is based on continued growth ; and that when growth does not occur it is because of undesirable influences which threaten stability as well. These influences require corrective action in ordinary peacetime and the principle of growth is even more applicable in times like these when we urgently need every bit of our strength The basic sources of our capacity to grow are two : manpower and productive facilities. In neither case is sheer quantity the only consideration Training quality and the skill with which manpower and facilities are organized to achieve our objectives are also vitally important in the job ahead Increased labor participation The size of the present targets for national security programs is not sufficiently great to call for an all-out labor effort of the peak World War II magnitude nor to give absolute guides as to the extent to which we should seek to draw into the labor force additional people beyond those who would enter on the basis of normal population growth. Nor is the extent to which we should rely on lengthened working hours as an alternative to expansion of numbers determined in the present situation. If however our national security programs are to be fulfilled and if in addition we are to increase our productive strength and maintain civilian consumption at reasonable levels it is clear that a labor input substantially above the level of the past few years will be required In the present situation it appears generally desirable to place greater emphasis on increased numbers rather than on lengthened working hours This would mean a larger trained working force should full mobilization be forced upon us and would forestall the fatigue and lowered productivity that come from working many extra hours over prolonged periods. But at least in the case of highly skilled labor in important industries it is clear that longer hours will be required in order to produce essential goods The balance which will in fact be struck among these two sources of increased labor effort and the degree to which the total labor effort will in fact be increased over the coming year can not be forecast nor influenced by government policy with precision It is useful however to examine alternatives as a basis for appraising our productive capabilities. An average increase for example of hours in weekly working hours throughout the economy which would be feasible could lay the basis for an increase in total output in the neighborhood of percent apart from any changes in productivity. Likewise an CHART LABOR FORCE UTILIZATION The total labor force in I960 was within percent of the peak year in World WarH when over II million men were in the armed forces Total civilian employment however was percent above the wartime peak year MILLIONS OF PERSONS * MILLIONS OF PERSONS * TOTAL LABOR FORCE A larger percentage of the population is in the labor force today than in ; however it is considerably lower than the prevailing rate during World WarE PERCENT PARTICIPATION RATE TOTAL LABOR FORCE AS PERCENT OF NONINSTITUTIONAL POPULATION * r L I * I4 Y E A R S OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE I _L I I J_ -Do increase of million persons in civilian employment would permit an expansion of output by roughly percent. A substantial fraction of such an increase could come from a reduction in unemployment and from the normal annual growth of to in the labor force. Changes such as these in the intensity of labor participation in production would still be substantially below the wartime peaks. Average weekly working hours in were The average labor force participation rate then was percent compared with percent in and with the roughly percent for the end of implied above The lengthening of working hours and rapid expansion of civilian employment together with conversion difficulties would tend to have an unfavorable impact on productivity. Such evidence as is available however suggests that there would probably still be some rise in over-all productivity although perhaps at a somewhat lower rate than in past peacetime periods. ( See chart ) Expansion of productive facilities As a result of the programs to expand capacity during World War II and during the postwar period and because our present defense production targets are smaller than those of World War II we find ourselves in facing a quite different set of needs for facilities expansion than was the case in While the creation of an adequate industrial mobilizaton base will call for a considerable amount of new and enlarged capacity to produce munitions that type of investment will probably be substantially smaller than in the years when we had to build up our munitions capacity from scratch. Short of total war investment of other types should remain on a much higher level than during World War II. This is necessary if we are to carry a very heavy burden of primary defense for an indefinitely long period and at the same time maintain our productive capital for necessary growth of output The high desirability of expanding general industrial strength for the long pull however should not prevent us from putting first things first For some time to come we can not afford unrestrained and indiscriminate use of resources for investment any more than for consumption. Over the coming year the prospective shortages of materials skilled manpower and specialized facilities call for a selective pattern of investment giving major emphasis in addition to munitions facilities to the expansion of capacity for the production of those basic industrial materials and services which are of crucial importance both to a wartime economy and to an expanding peacetime economy. Where expansion programs require several years to complete it is even more important to start at once The steel and electric power industries present two outstanding examples of the problem under discussion Iron and steel. The determination of objectives for the expansion of iron and steel production illustrates the extent to which economic issues turn on the general strategy of the national defense program. For example if total war in were regarded as inevitable it would probably be an inefficient use of resources to start further substantial increases in steel capacity now. It would be better under that assumption to use the available steel for making weapons instead of for building more capacity ; and to rely on enormous cutbacks in civilian use of steel to release enough steel for war purposes But our primary defense strategy does not now rest on the inevitability of a total war in or in any other year. On the contrary that strategy rests on a sufficiently rapid build-up of military strength substantially short of total mobilization to deter aggression while at the same time creating an industrial mobilization base which would facilitate rapid achievement of maximum military effort if that should become necessary. This strategy which contemplates a substantially increased military burden of indefinite duration must also allow for the servicing of industrial and consumer needs at a considerably higher level than would be permissible in an all-out war emergency The principal drain on resources involved in an expansion of steelmaking capacity is the use of steel itself. If the quick adjustability of our economy to full-scale mobilization in case of need would of necessity be impaired by plowing some steel back into expansion of steelmaking facilities such expansion would be at best risky. But if the necessary steel can be borrowed from uses not essential to mobilization there is a strong case for the expansion of capacity. If we do become involved in a major conflict it seems certain that a larger steel capacity would stand us in greater stead than the equivalent amount of steel in the form of additional automobiles or commercial buildings The prospective steel requirements for munitions production and essential industrial uses are not so large as to call for elimination of so many of the major ordinary peacetime uses as was the case during World War II While we shall have to reduce drastically the production of automobiles and other consumer durable goods over the next several years and similarly curtail less essential types of public and private investment in construction and equipment we still shall be able to devote sizable quantities of steel to such uses. The cost of a steel expansion program is a slightly greater reduction of such types of output over the next few years. On the other hand the consequences of not expanding capacity adequately would be the indefinite prolongation of a serious steel shortage requiring elaborate and irksome controls The rate at which we ought to expand steel capacity can not be precisely determined. In part it must depend on the maximum rate at which iron ore supply can be assured a problem discussed below. It depends also on the balance between major types of steel consumption notably public and private investment and consumer durables production and other activities which we should like to achieve. The cost in terms of resources of the expansion of capacity must also be considered. We should not propose as an objective the meeting of all demands for steel four or five years hence on an unrestricted basis even if we could determine just how much steel that would take. It would be an extravagant use of resources to build up a capacity capable of eliminating in short order the backlogs of steel demand which will have been incurred in the next few years in addition to meeting the long-run normal demand. In the type of long-run economic situation we must contemplate all resources will be scarce ; for the present we should attempt only to bring steel production up to the point where it will not be a principal deterrent to economic expansion nor require the indefinite continuation of comprehensive controls Our analysis indicates that we should aim to bring steel capacity up to about million ingot tons within or years or sooner if feasible. This takes account of such considerations as the increase in aggregate production we should be able to achieve ; the amount of output that would be available for other uses ; the probable use of steel in defense production ; and the rate at which it would be feasible and desirable given the probable volume of future demand to increase stocks of goods and equipment in the hands of consumers business and government. Some types of requirements notably steel for automobile production are projected at rates somewhat below ; while other types like industrial machinery exceed the level The cost of the additional blast furnaces steel furnaces and finishing facilities would total about to 2l/z billion dollars in terms of present prices This amounts to about percent of total business plant and equipment expenditures in The finished steel requirements for the expansion would total to million tons or l/ $ to J4 as much steel as was used in automobile production in or two to three weeks ' output of the steel industry at the present rate of production. The copper requirements would represent about percent of current annual supply and aluminum requirements to percent. An expansion of steel capacity from the present million tons to million therefore does not appear to involve any drain on our resources which we could not fairly easily offset by moderate further curtailment in some less essential uses over the next few years. The steel industry has already made application for accelerated amortization on approximately this amount of expansion A much more difficult and pressing problem than expanding steel capacity itself is that of maintaining and expanding the supply of iron ore without which steelmaking facilities are useless There is first the immediate need for more ore-carrying boats on the Great Lakes. Stocks of ore at lower Lake points are so dangerously low that some blast-furnace shutdowns may occur this winter and next. Several of the necessary boats are already under construction and additional ones should be started as rapidly as the ways are vacated. In view of prospective shifts in ore sources these vessels should be convertible for use on the salt water of the lower St. Lawrence River Recent estimates indicate that we shall also be hard pressed for several years at least to mine and import enough iron ore to keep our expanding steel industry operating near capacity. In our ore consumption was about million long tons. A steelmaking capacity of about million tons would call for about million long tons of ore a year to keep it busy. Output of the Lake Superior mines can be maintained at present levels for only a few years longer. Thereafter supplies from that source will fall off fairly rapidly and we shall have to rely more and more on imports ( principally from Venezuela and Labrador and to a much lesser degree from Chile Brazil and Liberia ) and on refined low-grade ores such as taconite. The St. Lawrence seaway project must be begun immediately if imported iron ore is to be economically available in quantity in our inland steel centers by when the flow of Mesabi ore will almost certainly have begun to dwindle Electric power. The case for accelerated expansion of electric power capacity is even more compelling than in the case of steel and iron ore Present supply falls even more seriously below the demands that would arise in a full-scale war and any major curtailment of less essential civilian uses is more difficult than in the case of steel The over-all national power generation capacity under average hydroelectric conditions was about million kilowatts at the end of representing an increase of almost percent during the year. The reserve margin came up to about percent of load in having been restored during the past few years from a dangerously low level. According to recent estimates of planned public and private expansion about 5/2 million kilowatts of new capacity will be added during each of the next three years representing a somewhat faster rate of expansion than has prevailed since the end of World War II. The annual rate of investment outlays involved will approach billion dollars covering generating equipment and also new and enlarged transmission and distribution facilities At the present time electric power is in short supply in the Pacific Northwest in the Tennessee Valley area and some other regions. The supply is expected to become increasingly tight throughout the country as demands will increase faster than the expansion of capacity now planned. Reserves will fall more and more below safe and desirable margins. Already the reserve margin has practically disappeared in the areas where the power shortage is most acute. Expansion of programs in atomic energy chemicals aluminum and other metals related to the defense effort will impose an additional load of to % million kilowatts on our power facilities In the face of this situation government policies must be adjusted to the need to make capital materials and workers available to the utility enterprises to which we must look for the major expansion of electric power capacity. Public hydro-electric projects take more time but devel922781 opment of additional public power capacity in the Pacific Northwest in the Tennessee Valley area at Niagara Falls along the international section of the St. Lawrence River as a part of the seaway and power project and elsewhere can provide more than million additional kilowatts of capacity within or years Relationship between military and industrial planning. The foregoing effort to specify investment and expansion needs is sketchy. More precision will emerge through the more comprehensive study and planning now under way as to the general size and major classifications of investment and capacity expansion. This will result in programs compatible with maximizing our total strength by achieving the wisest allocation of our resources between military and civilian use and among various segments of the civilian economy. This more comprehensive industrial planning is linked with the current effort to develop primary military requirements in more detail For only to the extent that these primary requirements emerge can the rest of the economy be most effectively enlisted in their support Obstacles to expansion The preceding discussions of labor effort and investment in productive facilities have necessarily taken little account of the bottlenecks in individual materials in key facilities and in skilled manpower that will certainly occur over the coming twelve months. These and other difficulties of a conversion period will tend to slow down the rapidity of expansion. Such bottlenecks could become serious in the case of individual items and in individual localities. There is no way however in which to measure in broad terms their impact on production. Nor does the experience of World War II or the present size of military plans offer any basis for believing that individual bottlenecks will become of such general importance as to impede the broad expansion of output Production goals for the end of Under the Employment Act of the Council is called upon to define " needed levels of production " for the economy as a whole as a primary guide to economic policy. This we have done each year. In the face of current circumstances and problems we feel that maximum production for should bring an annual rate of output of about billion dollars at prices by the end of the year. While this rate of growth is much higher than the average rate of growth sustainable in more normal times it is not above the reach of our resources as we now should use them The total increase would be about billion dollars or about percent above the annual rate at the end of Roughly billion dollars of this total gain could be expected to come from increases in employment and working hours and the remainder from increases in productivity. The degree to which over-all productivity is likely to increase during a period of conversion with major shifts in type of output and with many new workers being brought into the labor force is necessarily uncertain. The amount here assumed is somewhat lower than appears to have occurred in past peacetime periods IMPACT ON CIVILIAN SUPPLIES Even with the large increase in total output which has been estimated as attainable the expanding defense program will have a major impact upon consumption and living standards. If the total output and national security programs discussed in the preceding section are realized some reduction in total per capita consumption may take place and very sharp cuts in the production of individual items of consumption will be required at a time when total employment and working hours had increased substantially Defense needs for basic materials and skilled manpower can be expected to force particularly sharp cutbacks in some areas. Production of passenger cars and other metal-using durable goods may well have to be cut by percentages ranging from one-third to well over one-half below the record levels of the second half of It will be impossible from the viewpoint both of total resources and particular supplies. to avoid sharp cutbacks in many types of private investment in order to service the defense program. Already steps have been taken to cut back investment sharply in certain less essential areas During this year housing will have to be cut back substantially and less essential types of construction by much more. These cutbacks and others which must follow should lead to a considerably lower level of total investment in than in In short both consumption and general investment must be restrained to service the primary defense program more rapidly than total output can be expanded. The pattern of investment in must be very selective so that cutbacks in less essential areas can be combined with the maintenance and in some cases expansion of investment required for the achievement of an adequate mobilization base. If private judgment and Government policies are used with sufficient skill to effectuate this balanced realignment of investment even a larger defense effort in future years would be more bearable. Thus the problem of mobilizing our economic strength for the long pull rests very heavily upon the programming and execution of realistic investment goals geared to priority of needs. Allocations tax programs and various incentives should be shaped to the nature of this problem INFLATIONARY PRESSURES The expansion of our total national output with selective emphasis upon vital lines of production will help to ease the immediate burden of our enlarged defense objectives. In the longer run production and more production is the most fundamental economic remedy But production alone will not be enough to solve immediate problems In the course of this year as already indicated national security programs will increase their take of the total output of the economy from about percent to possibly as much as percent. The increase will be much greater in the case of particular types of materials skilled manpower and facilities. Since it is manifestly impossible to increase production at this rate and according to this pattern there must be a large-scale diversion of resources from less essential uses to those having the highest priority. The total volume of goods available for private consumption and investment must be cut. This gives rise to major problems of materials control and to intense inflationary pressures While the supply of goods that buyers want will be cut back consumer and business incomes will be sharply rising. During the course of there will be a general expansion of income resulting from the increase in production required to meet our defense objectives. Longer working hours and more employment will result in an equivalent expansion in wage and salary income even without allowing for overtime pay upgrading and wage and salary increases. Gross farm income will also rise as production increases apart from any allowance for upward price movements as will corporate profits. While even under the current tax structure increased taxes will absorb some of the increase in incomes generated disposable personal incomes would without prompt and substantial new tax action increase much more than the supply of consumable goods Further increasing the dangers arising from the pressure of expanding incomes against limited civilian supplies is the fact that consumers already have more than billion dollars in liquid assets which can in large measure at their discretion be thrown into the markets for goods ; and corporations have almost as high a volume of liquid assets as at the end of the war. Actual and anticipated shortages of particular materials and goods and concern about continuing price rises will unless counteracted greatly reinforce the desire to spend money and to acquire tangible goods These facts would represent a very seriously inflationary prospect for the coming year even if the past six months had been a period of reasonable economic stability. Yet the economy is now and has been for some time in the throes of a serious inflation. Between June and December of this general inflation raised wholesale prices percent and consumer prices by about 4l/ % percent. Average hourly earnings rose about percent between June and November and corporate profits before taxes were about percent higher in the fourth quarter than in the second. The rise in consumer prices occurred despite a generally adequate supply of consumer goods Price rises in considerable measure speculative spread out from the primary commodity markets through the cost structure generally communicating upward price tendencies to a wide variety of products. Wage increases were granted in many industries in amounts substantially above the rise in the consumer price index. Neither the increase in primary commodity prices nor the wage increases of have fully worked themselves out through the price structure of intermediate and final commodities ; and many classes of workers have been left behind in the wage advances of the past six months If price and wage increases such as have characterized the last six months were permitted to continue consumers would be induced to draw heavily on their holdings of liquid assets either to protect their standard of living and the real value of their savings or for speculative reasons The ability and incentives of business concerns to enter such a movement to convert liquid assets into goods would be even greater This leads to the conclusion which will be amplified in the policy section of this Review that anti-inflation weapons must be employed more widely and more rapidly than in the period from to The measures now being planned and put into effect by the Economic Stabilization Agency are a reflection of the urgency of the task The main reason for the seriousness of the inflationary problem however is not that we are now weaker but rather that we are now stronger than we were then. Being more fully prosperous now we have less room to undertake new burdens without generating inflationary pressures. If we were unwilling to convert the strength underlying this greater prosperity to meet the new challenge now confronting us that strength would become a liability rather than an asset. But if we are willing to channel that strength of tools and manpower and skills we shall find ourselves now better able than ever before and far more able than in to measure up to the responsibilities imposed upon us by world events How MUCH DEFENSE CAN OUR ECONOMY SUPPORT ? While a defense effort of the size now under way will sharply alter the character of the functioning economy there can be no question that this effort to achieve national security is well within the power of our resources and our skills. It is a far smaller effort than we have made in the past with far fewer resources and skills ; and it is a far smaller effort than we could safely and effectively make in the future if our national safety should so require. It is an effort of a magnitude which will involve sacrifices and restraints and changes in customary ways on the part of all of the people These changes may be great when measured against the habits of peacetime But they are mild indeed when measured against the issues at stake or against what the American people have done in their earlier history at times when the national interest has taken clear and universal precedence over personal pursuits Deep as some of the needed cuts may appear they could hardly be described as austerity. Per capita consumption at the end of would be far greater perhaps by more than one-fourth than in and even further above ( See chart ) By the standards of any other country CHART PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES PRICES TOTAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I960 PER CAPITA CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES DOLLARS SOURCE : COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS in the world such consumption levels could only be described as luxurious Moreover consumers are currently better stocked with household equipment and automobiles than ever before. At the present time there is one automobile for every persons in the United States compared with a ratio of one to in Our housing standards though far from being fully satisfactory are substantially better than at the beginning of World War II Although over-all consumption levels will be high many individuals and families will suffer much sharper cuts in their standards of living than would be indicated by the aggregate figures ; and the general range of consumption goods will be much more restricted than in recent years and less in accord with consumer wants. This is the necessary meaning of higher taxes and restrictions on the use of basic materials The defense program will impose many restraints upon economic activity as well as upon personal consumption. But the restraints upon consumption will require sacrifice not real hardship and the restraints upon business activity will have no results justifying the complaint that the program is beyond the capacity of our economy The expanding defense effort which has thus far been defined may of course have to be greatly expanded in future or level off. Later on this Review will make some reference to the economic consequences of a larger defense effort. At this point suffice it to say that a leveling off of the rate to be reached at the end of the calendar year would impose in succeeding years lesser and not greater strains upon the economy. This is because the economy would gradually " build up " to meet the new burden By way of rough illustration if the labor and investment efforts which will be essential to accomplish the targets for are achieved and maintained total national production at an annual rate should rise by about percent within five years. This would bring us about billion dollars above the current level which would be enough to absorb a yearly defense effort at the levels to be reached at the end of this year to maintain and expand our productive plant and at the same time to bring per capita consumption for a growing population at least up to the level achieved in Under current international conditions however economic analysis can not stop short with an appraisal of the impact of the present defense targets It must also help to appraise what the economy can sustain and support in terms of its actual and potential resources and to shed light upon what variations in this program whether upward or downward would still be compatible with the maintenance of the strong economy required to support the military effort This further responsibility is particularly apparent at a time when there is an entirely appropriate debate throughout the nation on this very question of what our economy can afford to do. The viewpoint is sometimes expressed that if the military build-up should advance above some stated size it would within a few years " bleed our economy white/ ' and thus accomplish through our own actions the purposes of the Soviet Union On this point we can draw upon our own experience in World War II We devoted as much as percent of our total output to defense purposes and far from wrecking our economy we continued to build its basic productive capacity. The consequences were revealed when hostilities ended In the light of this the American people can certainly not take the position that the allocation of as much as percent of our much larger resources to national security will reach or even near the limits of what we can do if necessity demands. Economies have not been wrecked because the people decided to do with fewer new pleasure cars and elaborate mechanical amusements or wear their topcoats for longer or get healthier by eating less This point is so important that the illustration needs to be made more concrete. Let us suppose that by the end of the calendar year international conditions made it desirable for us as a nation to be devoting percent of our total output to national defense. It should be feasible with increasing efforts to expand total output by the end of by close to percent or roughly billion dollars above the present level. At this level of production the allocation of one-fourth of our total output to national security if this should become necessary would by no means be inconsistent with maintaining our fundamental economic strength and productive power. Marked changes in the composition of output would be required but nonetheless it would permit the maintenance of satisfactory standards of living although production of housing and many types of consumer goods would have to be more sharply restricted than presently contemplated. However a large number of families and individuals would undergo a more marked reduction in living standards than would be indicated by the over-all figures To achieve these results if this should become necessary would require harder efforts and more sacrifices than we are now being called upon to make. But this larger effort if it should prove imperative would neither wreck nor bankrupt the American economy. It would still represent a much smaller effort than was achieved during World War II. Hours of work would not be as long ; the percentage of the population of working age serving in the labor force would be smaller ; and the output of civilian durable goods and of housing would be restricted to a much smaller degree An effort of this size would still leave us with enough resources to improve and enlarge our industrial capacity and to maintain reasonable standards in education health and housing. The over-all level of consumption would be lower than the peak level but it would still represent a high standard of living. Even on a per capita basis the level of consumption by the end of under these assumptions would be far higher than in Much of the discussion of " what our economy can stand " has involved a misuse of economic analysis and has led to dangerously erroneous conclusions. Every economy even the most powerful has ultimate limits upon what it can support ; but in the case of our economy these ultimate limits are not threatened The tests now confronting us are not so much tests of our economy as they are tests of our moral fiber and cohesiveness as a nation. They are tests not so much of our material capacity as of our courage and vision We have what it takes to purchase reasonable security in a troubled world but we can not buy it cheaply. The way to protect ourselves is to build up our strength ; and there are no bargain price tags on aircraft tanks or guns. Giving up other things will be involved because we can not have our cake and eat it too. But we must stop eating so much cake when the aggressors are arming so many divisions IV. Economic Policies for Defense THREE REQUISITES FOR ECONOMIC MOBILIZATION T HERE are three indispensable requirements for an efficient economic mobilization whether partial or total. The first need is for a thoroughly comprehensive and unified programming operation to balance competing requirements against available supplies. Such programming is essential to all policy whether designed to direct resources to the highest priority uses or to avoid disruptive inflation. The second need is for utmost speed in accomplishing defined objectives. The third need is to conduct the economic mobilization program with a determination and fairness which elicit general support from a public kept fully informed of the nature of the program and its implications The need for comprehensive programming Economic mobilization means a vast and rapid shift in the use of our resources to which every policy must be attuned. This shift is executed throughout the economic system. But in the very nature of a defense emergency the Government must outline the basic needs and project the major policies to satisfy them. The essentiality of a complete and always current programming operation does not depend upon " full mobilization. " The importance of a clear definition of what needs to be done does not depend upon how much needs to be done. In some respects partial mobilization requires an even greater clarification of objectives than full mobilization The definition of all major requirements necessarily draws its frame of reference from the primary military program because it is the military build-up which is at the core of the whole effort. More and more precision should be sought as rapidly as feasible in the definition of what our primary defense goals are at any particular time. And for the purposes of economic adjustment to these primary goals requirements in terms of manpower and materials are obviously more important than requirements in terms of dollars. This emphasis is not inconsistent with realization that primary military objectives must remain reasonably fluid and that for security and other reasons they can not be revealed in full even where they have become crystallized But it would be dangerous to assume that all other aspects of economic programming can be delayed until primary military programming reaches any particular point. There is an interrelationship between the two which requires to a considerable degree that they move forward simultaneously towards ever-improving clarification. Nor is it true that the other aspects of economic programming consist solely in saying that whatever is not taken for military purposes is available for other uses. These other uses must in turn be subjected to constant programming because some of them promote our security and others do not. Our security in the long run depends upon how we divide available resources between maintenance and improvement of our national plant and tools on the one hand and ultimate consumer needs on the other. Within the industrial structure it depends upon what kind of activities we carry forward vigorously and what kind we cut back. Above all there should be a balance of how much we seek to achieve through cutbacks and restraints as against how much we seek to achieve through expansion of total production The early experience during World War II afforded eloquent proof that the greatest obstacle to over-all efficiency was the slowness in developing a useful and comprehensive programming operation and locating it ultimately at one point of authority. The Council now urges that the first steps already taken in this direction be carried as quickly as practicable to their logical conclusion. This does not mean that detailed operations can not be parcelled out ; but it does mean that the ultimate " budgeting " of our resources for defense should be centralized. Budgeting which is a process of reconciliation of competing requirements can not be done in several separate places The need for speed Speed is of the essence in economic mobilization. This sound principle should not be confused with the question of the size of targets. Speed does not mean for example that we should as rapidly as possible achieve total mobilization ; that is a matter of grand strategy. Nor does it mean that mobilization should not proceed in an orderly fashion with speed concentrated first on the earlier steps and later on the subsequent steps of the program. But speed does mean that decisions as to targets should be reached as quickly as possible and that every effort should be made to attain whatever targets are decided upon as rapidly as the basic program calls for In economic mobilization tardiness has a cumulative effect because of the interrelationship among all the parts. Delay at one point generates even more delay at succeeding points. Indecision at one point promotes apathy at another. As an apt illustration there may be debate as to when the Government should apply price controls over a given commodity. But once the Government has announced or intimated that it is going to do so delay in accomplishing the result can only add fuel to inflation speculation and an enervating let-down on the part of the general public. Conversely demonstrated celerity at one point awakens others more fully to the urgency of the situation and consequently accelerates their own necessary actions Since our nation is now undertaking to catch up with the mobilized military strength of the aggressors every day is precious The need for public support The necessary concentration during a defense period of more authority and responsibility in the Government than is customary in peacetime should not blind us to the fact that nationwide understanding and cooperation must be achieved. The very severity of the departure from customary methods and from the level of peacetime enjoyment of goods and services makes such public understanding even more essential The whole American people should consider the extent of this departure from normalcy as it affects our economy and our economic problems The objective of maintaining maximum employment production and purchasing power established by the Congress in the Employment Act of should be considered today in the light of circumstances very different from those of peacetime. In the months to come there will be no general problem of unemployment but instead one of encouraging the entry of more men and women into a labor force too small to meet all our national needs. There will be no problem of inducing the expansion of purchasing power but instead one of restraining the growth and the use of purchasing power. Maximum production will be even more vital than in peacetime. But the major problem here will not be to devise national economic policies to furnish incentives markets or capital to private enterprise in general but instead to channel our limited resources of manpower and of materials into lines of production which are most essential In the first months after the outbreak in Korea it was perhaps justifiable in the formulation of national programs to give considerable weight to maintaining our standards of living or even pushing them forward. It was also hoped that we might progress although at a slower pace with national policies of long-range social and economic value. It is still necessary to seek balance between these longer-range objectives and the requirements of national security remembering that many of these objectives themselves are essential to defense. But in a national emergency the weight to be given to the defense program grows vastly. The weight to be given to other objectives becomes correspondingly smaller The new effort will call for sacrifices not limited to those matters which the citizen himself directs such as the buying of goods the settlement of wages and the making and saving of profits. During the past generation our people have greatly expanded the role of their Government toward adding to the supply of services which in our civilization make up a substantial part of the requirements of comfortable living. The needs of the American family for education for highways for libraries and for many health services have been largely reflected in community action. We have steadily enlarged the responsibility of the State for the conservation and development of natural resources as sources of future goods and services The demand for sacrifice now falls upon many of these operations of Government each of which may compete with defense requirements Each of these operations must justify itself thoroughly under present conditions before money manpower or scarce materials may properly be allocated to it Next to the primary need to meet defense requirements the policies and programs of greatest importance at this time are those which counteract or curb inflationary forces and those which assist the expansion of productive capacity. The trend of the economy at the end of the year was highly inflationary despite the progressive imposition of controls of an increasingly rigorous character. The accelerated defense program will now intensify these inflationary forces. The people must now choose between permitting serious inflation to proceed and accepting sterner restrictions The American people are realistic enough to accept and help to implement these restraints. But by the same token they are realistic enough to be slow in doing so unless they know what greater purposes will be served by the surrender or suspension of the lesser but nonetheless important purposes toward which they were oriented before the defense emergency Moreover the Government can only to a limited extent even in an emergency tell the people what to do ; for the most part it must ask for their action and their cooperation. And their cooperation will be given most enthusiastically if they feel that the burden is being shared equitably by all MAXIMIZING OUR PRODUCTIVE STRENGTH This Review has constantly reiterated that production is at the heart of our economic strength. Only by more total production year by year can we generate the enormous power which we will need. This is not negated by the necessity to cut back sharply some lines of production for the ultimate purpose even of these cutbacks is to get more vital production elsewhere and to enlarge the total. We have also indicated why accent on production may be even more vital for the long hard pull which now seems to confront us than in the event of total hostilities. And we have taken a resolute stand against the proposition that there is but little new productive potential within the economy although we were near maximum production by peacetime standards in The American economy has not reached an absolute ceiling prohibiting further progress The following discussion of production problems is somewhat general This is in part because a general economic staff like the Council can highlight problems but must leave detailed decisions and execution to operating agencies. It is also in part because many precise decisions on the allocation of our resources for various productive purposes must await the further development of a comprehensive programming and priority operation Industrial expansion Selective industrial expansion. The need to devote a substantial portion of our resources to the primary military build-up limits our ability to expand productive facilities of all types. The expansion for the time being must be highly selective but it is nonetheless urgent. While highly selective it should be on a broader base than during World War II. This is true because we are not so short now as we were then of certain critical facilities ; and also because in the absence of total war we can justifiably put more emphasis upon the development of general strength for the long pull Legislation enacted after the Korean outbreak authorizes the use of many of the same types of Government stimuli to selective private expansion which proved useful and essential in World War II Up to the end of applications had been filed for the accelerated amortization privilege covering billion dollars of plant and equipment investment. Accelerated amortization had been approved by the National Security Resources Board in cases on a total of billion dollars of outlays or about three-fourths of the total investment contemplated under these applications Under the direct Government loan provision of the Defense Production Act applications had been filed by the end of the year for million dollars of loans ; two loans had been granted for a total of about million dollars At the end of after the initial three months of operations under the loan guarantee program authorized by the Defense Production Act the Federal Reserve Banks had received a total of applications for this type of assistance totaling million dollars. All of these requests were for working capital for firms supplying the Defense Departments directly Fifty-eight applications had been approved for a total of million dollars while the remainder were pending Private enterprise and funds can and should play a larger part in plant and equipment investment than was the case in World War II. The expansion program now needed places much less emphasis on temporary needs for war materiel facilities than the World War II program. During the next few years at least the major part of facilities investment must go into expansion of basic industrial capacity which will remain useful when peacetime conditions return. Private industry is currently in a much better financial position than it was at the outset of World War II to carry this load In most cases the role of the Government should be limited to a programming of basic needs which will provide industry with a full consciousness of priorities of purpose and to such controls over materials as will enable high-priority industrial expansion projects to get what they need to do the job. Government financial assistance and incentives should be centered upon projects required in the national interest which because of type location or other special cost factors do not offer a prospect of reasonable long-term returns to private investment The incentives offered to private investors can be based on proper economic considerations only if the Government has possible recourse to the alternative of direct construction. This was demonstrated in World War II The effectiveness of Government policies for encouraging crucial types of expansion should be improved by legislation empowering the Government to finance and construct facilities itself in special cases where reasonable available inducements to private investors are insufficient It is becoming increasingly important that we develop and apply standards of security dispersal regarding the location of new plants. In the present situation very little can be done to alter the location of existing industrial plants and associated community facilities or to affect plant expansion which is mainly a rounding-out of present facilities. New locations certainly those aided by the Government should be established with security in mind. Decentralization may be promoted locally within the commuting radius of metropolitan and industrial centers or may involve the establishment of new plants in small or medium-sized cities beyond this radius. There is also the broad decentralization which stems from plans to .develop regional economic strength The economic effects of the first type of decentralization are more localized and involve mainly labor supply transportation and communications a variety of community and industrial facilities and housing Wherever possible expenses of such decentralization should be borne privately ; in some cases governmental aid will be necessary The large regional type of decentralization affects the whole economic location patern of the Nation. It is desirable that new industry important to security be located on the basis of careful consideration of the kind of defense and industrial expansion which each region can best support in view of cost and market as well as defense considerations Electric power. The electric power outlook as discussed earlier in this Review indicates a serious shortage of power especially in some regions The further development of power at Niagara Falls would bring in about a million and a quarter kilowatts of very low-cost generating capacity by The St. Lawrence seaway and power project would mean an additional kilowatts of installed capacity which will be needed in the area within a few years. A speeding-up of public power projects in the Pacific Northwest plus the starting of several new ones could add about kilowatts in a region of critical shortage by The TVA program is being expanded greatly so that some million additional kilowatts should be available in that region by the end of These projects should be carried forward promptly to meet the inevitable loads of defense production and other essential uses Increases in public power capacity will be much smaller than the increases in private power which now are expected to total almost million kilowatts over the next three years and probably will have to be stepped up. Necessary supplies of critical materials will have to be made available if these power expansions are to be realized Atomic energy. In terms of human resources the atomic energy enterprise constitutes one of the largest bodies of scientific and technical personnel in the country today. In terms of plant and equipment it represents one of our largest specialized productive assets ranking with the plant investment of the nation 's leading industrial enterprises. Recently industry has shown an increasing interest in participating on a profit and risk basis in developing nuclear power. The Atomic Energy Commission has received exploratory proposals from industry looking toward the development of dual-purpose nuclear reactors designed to produce power for private use and fissionable material for sale to the Government. If such development should appear technically and economically feasible a number of new questions would be raised relating to such matters as pricing patents and the coordination of the private and public roles These questions would become the joint concern of the Congress the President and the Atomic Energy Commission as provided by the Atomic Energy Act It is too early to calculate the contributions which this source of energy may add to our general productive strength. But certainly in time their contribution will be significant. This is another reason why in the future as in the past we may expect technological developments to add even more than increases in manpower utilization to the productive power of the United States Basic resources The prospect of a rapid build-up in national defense during the next few years followed by an indefinitely long period during which we must maintain and improve our defenses emphasizes sharply the need for maximizing the productive capacity of our natural resources and the services our transportation system can yield both for the short run and the long run. In a very real sense the long-run strength of the economy for peace or for war will be measured by the availability of natural resources their quality and the care with which we handle them. At this time when the more strictly civilian expenditures of Government must be held in check it is essential that we be highly selective in our minerals soil forestry transportation and water programs. While they must be affected by our lack of resources to do all the things which are important those which are most essential should be included in the program for industrial expansion This calls for intense planning to get the most efficient utilization of available facilities. It also warns us that if we are not to be penny wise and pound foolish we may need to make some highly selective additions to these facilities despite the additional strain upon resources and to be even more ruthless in slashing nonessentials. Roads for example range all the way from essential feeder lines for military and industrial mobilization to roads which add only to the pleasure or convenience of the peregrinating public Minerals. In contrast to our stronger position now than before World War II with respect to manpower and plant and equipment we are less well off with respect to domestic supplies of the major strategic minerals Net imports in metal equivalent expressed as a percent of total U. S consumption increased from to by percent for iron ore percent for bauxite percent for zinc and percent for lead For copper we moved from net exports equal to percent of U. S consumption in to a net import position of percent. This points conclusively to the need for developing for these metals new sources which are as safe as possible from enemy attack Both private and public policies should be directed toward assuring additional supplies of iron ore as quickly as possible. Private companies are going ahead with the Labrador and Venezuela developments so that by or the steel industry will be getting large tonnages of iron ore from these sources. The St. Lawrence seaway and power project should be started immediately to make additional iron ore available in quantity in the great steel centers of Pittsburgh and the Great Lakes area. Demands on construction materials and manpower for this project would not be large during the next year and a half. If we move swiftly the seaway could be in operation for the season when Lake Superior ore production is expected to be falling off. Increased emphasis should also be given to research into technological methods for refining and using low-grade ores such as the taconites of the Lake Superior region Military and stockpile programs require large amounts of aluminum copper and many other metals. running in certain instances to a large percentage of total supply. Selective capacity expansion programs should be carefully related to the supplies of ores electric power and transport facilities which can be made available. Strenuous efforts should continue to be exerted to increase our imports of certain minerals and metals without harming friendly nations. Careful use of technical and capital assistance can lead to substantial increases in imports of some strategic minerals Discoveries of new petroleum reserves have been keeping pace with increased production during recent years but we can not expect this to continue indefinitely. Prudence requires that we encourage imports of petroleum and petroleum products especially from nearby sources while at the same time giving our full assistance to the development of foreign oil fields to supply friendly nations as well as ourselves. In addition processes for the production of synthetic liquid fuels from oil shale and coal are rapidly approaching the point where they can be developed privately Land and water conservation and development. The pattern of expenditure in these areas which should be followed in the next few years is influ922781 * enced greatly by the time schedule of the defense program. The rapid build-up of defense expenditures with the accompanying draft upon materials and other productive resources will bring the defense part of the national effort to a peak within two years under present plans. Thereafter if widespread warfare does not occur and as general production increases more of our productive resources would be available for civilian needs and for long-range programs of national development. This would give a hue of good fortune to a backlog of internal development projects which are now well advanced in construction and having been suspended or continued at minimum pace will then be ready for immediate resumption on a speedy schedule In economizing on natural resources programs we must be selective in what we curtail and what we allow to proceed. During the period of defense build-up it will be necessary to curtail progress on certain development projects and programs for flood control navigation irrigation and rural electrification. However those uncompleted projects which will yield substantial amounts of hydroelectric power or municipal and industrial water supply needed for defense should be brought to completion as soon as feasible. Other developmental projects now well under way and whose benefits can be made available within about the next year and a half in general should be completed so that the substantial investments already made can be utilized. Other projects whether started or only planned which will make substantial additions to productive capacity should receive careful consideration In this period of selective curtailment of resource development programs it is important for defense that a variety of basic-data gathering survey investigation and experimental activities be continued in the various river basins and other regions. Increasing pressures on our forest range and agricultural land resources resulting from the defense program require adequate land management and conservation programs as basic supports for both military and industrial strength Manpower The objective of full employment takes on new and broader meaning as a result of the defense program. Our manpower resources are a vital factor limiting the ultimate expansion of our mobilization effort. It therefore becomes even more important to make full use of persons normally in the labor force. This means that unemployment and underemployment should be reduced to a minimum. To this point our objectives remain the same as they were prior to the defense program In addition however defense requirements now make it essential for us to take steps to assure that the members of the civilian labor force are employed in ways in which they can individually contribute most to the total defense program. It means that every effort must be made to use the highest skills which each worker possesses since the high quality of our labor force is a prime advantage The demands of the defense program mean not only that we must use our normal work force fully and efficiently but also that we must expand the labor force by calling upon persons who do not normally seek employment. It is especially vital to secure complete public understanding of our manpower needs and active community cooperation Expanding the labor force. In expanding the labor force the most important source is women especially nonworking married women who do not have the responsibility of caring for young children. Women who work in defense jobs and who have children should be assisted by means of nursery schools and other child care and community facilities to care for their families and their homes Another important group is the aged ; they should be encouraged to join the labor force by stepped-up recruiting efforts and by a relaxation of those hiring standards which bar older workers from jobs which they are capable of performing. In the present state of partial but long-sustained mobilization we do not believe that teenagers should be encouraged to leave school and join the civilian labor force. We should carry on our vocational rehabilitation work to enable a large number of disabled men and women to become employable ; we should train older women younger persons not in school and others. Vigorous programs should assist members of minority groups to be utilized to the maximum of their capacities In addition to recruiting additional workers we should utilize all of our present workers. It should be possible to gain about a million more workers by a reduction in the present level of unemployment. Moreover there are about a million part-time workers who are willing and able to accept fulltime jobs Longer hours. Some selective increases in the work week are needed immediately. In certain defense industries where it is necessary to expand production without waiting for expanded capacity additional shifts should be instituted. In other defense industries shortages of critical skills indicate the need for longer hours for skilled workers. There is not yet a clear and urgent need for adopting a general increase in the work week for the economy as a whole. We should be ready to adopt such an increase as soon as it is needed and in the meantime effort should be concentrated upon expanding the present labor force so that we will have more workers with experience and training Improved utilization of the work force. Attracting workers to the jobs where they are now most needed is at the heart of an effective manpower program. Basic responsibility for this problem must continue to be borne by informed workers in their individual employment decisions. But these decisions must be guided and supported by more positive governmental action First there should be further development of the management-labor committees now being established in many of the more acute labor market areas These can help to provide essential local cooperation. Second arrange- merits will be necessary to remove the impediments to voluntary transfers of workers from less essential to essential activities and protect workers affected by the curtailments in nonessential production. Such arrangements should safeguard seniority and pension rights and offer better protection on a broader basis during conversion unemployment. Third we must make certain that workers are most productively utilized while on the job. Here employers must assume basic responsibility for necessary training and upgrading for taking all possible steps to improve the supervision mechanization and other factors contributory to maximum productivity and restrict their hiring to the absolute minimum needed to meet production goals. The Government should encourage and facilitate these actions Health ^ education and security. One of the thorniest questions confronting the whole defense effort is how to reappraise and redirect the public services whose necessary growth was resumed after World War II and for which further growth had been appropriately planned before the defense emergency In education for example we can not remedy the shortage of school buildings at the pace which seemed eminently desirable a year ago. On the other hand there is a high priority for promoting education and training in the health professions. Also the vocational education program which complements within-industry training must be redirected toward greater emphasis on training for defense jobs. General education which modern elementary and high school training affords no less than specialized skills is essential to the maintenance of a vital citizenry whether in the civilian labor force or in the military. It would be wasteful beyond description by any test. to deprive those not yet of military age of decent opportunities for such training and to force them by lack of equipment or staffing into the streets instead of the schools. This would hardly make them more serviceable in the event that an even larger military establishment should become essential by the time they will have reached the age of service In the case of health it is obvious that widespread deficiencies in health care do not make for maximum national strength at any time. Obviously we do not now have resources to build as many hospitals in as many places as we would like to do. On the other hand certain features of health progress are now more vital than before and should be accelerated. Federal aid should be extended to local health units with special emphasis on units in the more rapidly growing defense areas. As a part of a community facilities and housing program for rapidly growing defense areas adequate health facilities and services as well as schools will be necessary In the case of social security there are types of expansion wrlich would constitute an immediate drain upon our resources and which are less urgent by the test of national priorities than they seemed a year ago. But other types of social security expansion such as old-age and survivor insurance may be undertaken without an immediate drain upon our resources and in fact over the next few years would be anti-inflationary by collecting more funds than they disbursed. Moreover since the fight against inflation will make it necessary to reduce the incentives which flow from wage increases available for spending some incentives may be substituted by granting some wage increases where necessary but withholding them from the purchasing power stream by social security deductions which are a form of compulsory saving. In any event even without increases in wage rates there will be an enormous increase in total wages earned through additions to the labor force and through longer working hours at a time when it will be impossible to increase the supply of consumer goods. Increased social security deductions might provide one highly useful approach to this inflationary problem Because many of these services now under discussion are public rather than private in their nature it may seem easier to curtail them than to curtail nonessential private activity and spending. But in a national emergency the question of who spends the dollar while not unimportant should be subordinated to the larger question of what use of resources will do most to maximize our total strength. Nonessential Government outlays should by all means be cut ; but essential public outlays should have priority over nonessential private demand. This whole problem calls for a kind of " budgeting " process more discriminating than that practiced in peacetime In terms of the over-all programming of requirements and needs upon which the Council has placed so much stress the amount of materials manpower and money which we can and should devote to education to health services and to other factors in human efficiency and morale should be carefully and constantly weighed Housing and community facilities. The World War II experience brought into sharp focus the close relationship between industrial production and sufficient housing of adequate quality. Despite the nearly million new nonfarm housing units which have been built since we have not yet caught up with the requirements of a nation of our population incomes and living standards. This was illustrated by the unprecedented and rising level of house construction in The defense emergency requires that we now set aside the praiseworthy targets for an even larger number and more varied types of housing which were projected last year and earlier. If the housing goals set forth in connection with the recent credit restrictions do not need to be reduced they will permit a level of housing output at least sufficient to keep up with new family formations and even to allow some reduction of overcrowding In areas of defense expansion on the other hand the housing supply will need to be enlarged considerably. The emphasis should be upon rental housing serving the needs of middle- and lower-income families along with necessary community facilities. While private industry should be encouraged to do as large a part of this job as it can the experience in World War II makes it clear that publicly-financed housing must serve a larger portion of this type of need than in ordinary times. More easily than privately-financed housing such housing can be developed on a rental rather than a sale basis and is more suited to migrating defense workers Such housing is also more easily susceptible to occupancy standards And such housing can save somewhat more by way of critical materials because its utility after the defense period need not be taken so largely into consideration and because it may even be built on a temporary or mobile basis if necessary although previous experience casts some doubt upon large-scale resort to temporary housing in the current situation. Previous experience also demonstrates that wherever possible such housing should be built by local agencies with Federal aid when needed rather than by direct Federal construction. The latter method has always seemed superficially to promise greater speed ; but actually it has usually proved slower because of the high degree of interdependence among housing structures the selection of sites and municipal and other services which can not be provided by the Federal Government The scheduling of housing for defense workers needs to be integrated more closely with other aspects of the defense program. In addition the general determination of what volume of total housing can be permitted in the near future throughout the country will be made most wisely in the framework of the complete resource programming operation which the Council has identified as a first need of the whole defense effort Housing is so essential to our general strength that decisions affecting housing should rest upon the general strategy of the relative emphasis being placed upon immediate military needs and long-range economic strength Adjustment of agricultural production The defense situation has significantly changed the farm outlook. Surpluses which seemed difficult last June present few problems today. While our agricultural policy continues to encourage abundance of farm products in general it is now concentrated on specific items which are in short supply The demand for farm products has increased markedly in recent months Military needs for cotton and wool have greatly enlarged the markets for these products. In addition there is an exceptionally strong consumer demand for meats and many other foods. Coupled with these high demands we have low supplies of cotton and wool although fairly liberal stocks of foods. And we will need to maintain large stocks of food and feed as an insurance against unpredictable demands and against the hazards of weather In World War II our food and fiber needs were met by a great increase in agricultural production. Total output of farm commodities increased by almost percent from to This was made possible by good weather by the rapid adoption of hybrid corn and by using much more fertilizer and machinery. Since the war output has remained at high levels despite gradual reduction in the number of persons working on farms It will doubtless be more difficult to increase farm output in the future than it was after Yet substantial gains are feasible. Programs are being readjusted to help bring about the highest possible total output and especially to encourage the production of the most needed commodities such as cotton wool corn and livestock products. In the case of cotton there will be no acreage allotments or marketing quotas and every effort is being made to produce a crop of million bales or percent more than the crop. On January it was announced that there will be no acreage allotments for wheat and corn in In the case of cotton and wheat prices will be supported at percent of parity. On the other hand there are now no supports on potatoes or on eggs Farmers are using less manpower than before the war. But they are using three times as many tractors twice the number of trucks two and one-half times as much fertilizer and two to three times as much electric power and power-driven machinery. The increased use of steel in the defense programs and possibly the increased use of nitrogen in explosives make it difficult to avoid some bottlenecks in food production. But our experience with this problem in World War II indicates that these bottlenecks can be kept at a minimum by the careful scheduling of requirements and by appropriate measures of allocation Although using less manpower farmers are more dependent on skilled labor than in prewar times. This could rapidly become a difficult problem if the defense program continues to expand. For the present it is less serious than the problem of assuring needed materials and facilities PROMOTION OF ECONOMIC STABILITY The diversion of large amounts of resources to the defense effort tends powerfully to upset the economy by causing inflation dislocating production and employment and distorting the distribution of essential goods among the population. Such instabilities if not brought under control would undermine production and the whole defense effort by imposing hardships and inequities on the home front. The vigorous promotion of economic stability thus supports our basic production effort just as expansion of production buttresses economic stabilization Inflation is the principal threat to economic stability. Earlier in this review we depicted the enormous inflationary forces which grow out of the expanding defense program and which have already begun to march even before that program has gotten into high gear. The control of inflation is much more difficult than the expansion of production. The release of productive effort is gratifying in itself. The preponderant bulk of American production and production expansion will come through private initiative with no more than general guidance from government. But the imposition of harsh restraints goes against the grain and requires all of us to do things we would very much rather not do. The reasons for a mighty productive effort are more or less self-explanatory ; but to succeed with controls requires a constant effort toward the enlargement of public understanding There are three main ranges of controls available : ( ) the indirect controls such as tax and credit measures which absorb or restrict the growth of excess purchasing power ; ( ) direct controls over production and distribution such as allocations and limitation orders which distribute resources among necessary purposes ; and ( ) direct price and wage controls which are designed to suppress the price-wage spiral All three of these types of control are now clearly needed. In effective combination they can provide a sound platform of economic stability upon which an abundant and balanced production program can build. Each is necessary to the other two and must be supported by the other two ; in large measure they are complements not alternatives. This will be clearer if we examine their interrelations Allocations and limitation orders help to place goods where they are most needed. An inevitable result is to reduce the supply available for other uses. But allocations and limitation orders do not reduce consumer demand. If nothing else is done prices will rise and some consumers may fail to receive essential supplies. Accordingly it is necessary to make use of taxes and other financial measures which reduce total purchasing power and thereby reduce civilian demand for scarce supplies. These measures can be aided further by imposing selective credit restrictions and specific excise taxes to curtail civilian demand for those products which are scarce because materials or plants are concentrated on defense production Even the most rigorous tax program designed to keep disposable incomes in line with available production requires the assistance of price and wage controls. If tax increases were followed by compensatory price and wage increases the effects of the tax program in holding down spending would be largely nullified. Moreover tax increases may be inadequate to check spending if there is a large volume of liquid savings which both business and consumers can use to buy goods. For the public to continue to hold these savings and for it to save at the needed higher rate in the future requires confidence in the stability of prices. Only broad direct price and wage stabilization can now convincingly provide this confidence Also effective stabilization of prices is necessary to make our allocation and priority system work effectively. As long as prices are not controlled the orderly flow of materials to the most needed places would be disrupted and our production schedules disorganized. This makes all the more urgent the need to stabilize prices if we are to achieve our production program It would be unwarranted however to embrace direct controls of prices and wages in the hope that they offer a less painful and more palatable remedy than do higher taxes. Price and wage controls prevent incomes from rising and thus help limit the growth of demand. But they do not in themselves reduce demand ; on the contrary the lower the prices the greater the demand ; and this provides a breeding ground for black markets and evasion if purchasing power is not restrained. Disposable income must be reduced through taxation and other financial measures or price and wage controls may be seriously undermined. Further price controls must be supplemented by some direct controls over the kinds of civilian goods produced if sellers are not to be able to sidestep price controls by varying their products and shifting to higher-priced and higher profits lines It should be recognized that controls particularly direct controls would place obstacles in the way of production unless the controls were carefully designed and competently administered. For example delay in granting a priority may hold up a defense order ; or wages in less vital industries may be set relatively so high as to impede the recruitment of workers into the more vital ones ; or an error in price regulation may make it impossible to produce and sell certain goods except at a loss. The risk of these and similar mistakes are costs which we must expect in using direct controls. If the inflationary forces in the economy were minor these costs of controls would be likely to far outweigh the benefits which they contribute to production. But when the inflationary forces are powerful the losses to production resulting from direct controls are likely to be far smaller than the losses to production if instability develops. It is the latter kind of situation which we face in a major defense mobilization. We must do everything within our power to make the controls work smoothly so as to interfere as little as possible with production While the interdependence and necessity of the different kinds of controls are clear the emphasis in the last analysis must be placed upon the financial measures which drain off excessive purchasing power. These are basic for any long-run program and without them the others are bound to fail. This statement must be emphasized repeatedly because taxation seems to most people to be the most painful of stabilization measures and as a result there is a tendency to seek in the direct controls an easy substitute. No economic mistake could be more serious. Indirect financial control measures notably taxation must be at the center of stabilization policy in the defense economy Mobilizing our financial resources The distinguishing mark of indirect controls is that they operate through their effects on people 's income and on their financial assets and liabilities Their purpose is to mobilize the Nation 's financial resources for the promotion of defense mobilization Defense mobilization requires the redirection of physical resources. To some extent this is done by direct order as when men and women are drafted into the armed services. But to a major extent financial measures are relied on to facilitate the redirection of resources. Financial mobilization is thus the rechanneling of the flows of incomes and expenditures receipts and disbursements in order to guide production in line with the require- merits of defense and to distribute equitably that part of the product available for the civilian population The instruments of financial mobilization include on the one hand government expenditures whereby resources are commanded for the defense effort and on the other hand a variety of measures for maintaining economic stability by reducing the competition of private demand for resources which are needed for defense Foremost among these measures of financial mobilization is taxation which withdraws spending power by compulsion from private hands. The effect of taxation in reducing consumer and business spending is limited by the fact that it ordinarily does not impinge on past accumulations of funds A second measure is borrowing by government. To have an immediate effect on private demand borrowing must be accompanied by an increase in net saving or a reduction in real investment or both. Borrowing also helps to reduce demand by absorbing liquid funds which would otherwise be spent. Campaigns to sell government securities to the public promote this objective. A sort of " induced saving " also results when goods subject to price controls are in short supply since people are thereby encouraged to save until the goods can be purchased at a later date. Saving as an instrument of financial mobilization is voluntary ^ and therefore more subject to unpredictable fluctuations A third measure of financial mobilization is credit control whereby private borrowing is reduced or restrained from rising. The impact of credit control is limited since it can not prevent persons from spending their own assets It has previously been pointed out that financial measures and direct controls supplement each other in the maintenance of price stability. Thus increased taxation is the basic financial measure on which government must place its greatest reliance if the gap between demand and supply is not to undermine price and wage controls. On the other hand price and wage controls supplement taxation since in their absence tax increases can be largely nullified through compensatory price and wage increases In one respect the problem of financial mobilization at least for the defense effort now contemplated is not so serious as it was in World War II since the present defense program does not require nearly so large a proportion of the national product as that war did. In several respects however the problem of financial mobilization is far more serious today than it was during World War II First a longer period of mobilization is anticipated than was the case at the beginning of World War II. Accordingly the measures to be adopted must be adequate not merely for a few years but possibly for an indefinite period of years Second World War II mobilization was undertaken when the country was still in a period of incomplete recovery while the present defense mobilization is being added to a business boom which even before the Korean attack had carried industrial production to postwar record levels and was being reflected in higher prices. In World War II there was little credit expansion for business or consumption purposes while thus far in the defense mobilization nearly the whole expansion of credit has been for private uses Third the country is entering the present defense mobilization at a time when there is a tremendous volume of accumulated liquid assets. A substantial portion of the liquid assets is held in the form of Government debt At the end of the debt outstanding not held by Federal Government agencies and trust accounts totaled billion dollars compared with billion dollars at the beginning of This debt has a high degree of liquidity so that for many persons and businesses it serves the function of cash. The large volume of liquid funds makes it more difficult than it would otherwise be to hold down demand through taxation. The large amounts of savings bonds held by the public resulting from the successful savings campaign of World War II add to the importance of present savings programs. This is accentuated by the fact that a large part of the Federal debt which was incurred during the war will mature over the next few years. Moreover if and to the extent that the budget is not balanced through current tax collections further borrowing will be necessary Fourth the country is entering the defense program with far higher tax rates already on the books than was the case in For example for there were less than million taxable individual income tax returns ; the exemption of a married couple was $ and the starting tax rate was percent. Today there are approximately million taxable returns ; the exemption of a married couple is $ and the starting tax rate is percent. In the top corporate income tax rate was percent ; today it is percent with an additional tax of percent on excess profits. Clearly it would be more difficult to obtain large additional revenues from increases in these taxes than was possible from the starting point of low rates and high exemptions at the beginning of World War II Fifth effective stabilization measures need to be in operation more quickly and more completely than was necessary at the beginning of World War II. This results in part from the tightness of the economy since increased spending is reflected immediately in price increases. Moreover the public is more conscious of the threat of rising prices than it was in Then mobilization followed half a decade in which price increases had been accompanied by recovery and the increase in employment and in which deflation and price decreases seemed more probable and more dangerous than price increases. Since then the public has experienced substantial price rises which have affected not only their personal budgets but also the financial assets upon which they rely for economic security in later life. People 's willingness to save more and spend less is dependent largely on their being convinced that price stability will be achieved and maintained For this reassurance to be effective it is imperative to stabilize prices as part of the mobilization effort. This presents the old problem of the hen and the egg. A high level of saving is important if prices are to be stabilized but it is going to be difficult to achieve that saving unless prices are stabilized Clearly it will be necessary to move on this problem from every practical direction. In doing so it should be with regard to both the immediate defense period and the more distant time when resources and funds can be shifted back again into their more customary uses. An important goal for mobilizing financial resources for defense is to reduce to a minimum the inflationary and other distorting effects on the economy in later years as well as in the immediate period ahead The three segments of policy most important to financial mobilization taxation debt management and credit policy are discussed in the immediately following paragraphs. Other measures which directly reduce spending or prevent the enlargement of incomes are discussed in later sections dealing with priorities and allocations and price and wage controls. While not in themselves financial measures they are necessary for the success of financial policies under present or prospective conditions Taxation The Council believes it to be of great importance to the future of the country that the firm and continuing policy of the Government be to pay through taxation for the entire cost of the defense program at present and contemplated levels. The reasons are clear and convincing. First paying for the defense program out of current taxes largely offsets the inflationary pressures resulting from increased government expenditures. Taxation is superior to other methods of holding down spending by consumers and businesses. It does not rely on voluntary action. It does not interfere with the flexibility of market adjustments. It avoids the increase of debt and obviates the danger that inflationary pressures of expenditures will not be offset at the time of borrowing or may arise at some later date Second paying through current taxes distributes the burden immediately in a manner in which the Congress determines it should be distributed not unpredictably and unfairly through inflation. When we pay as we go those who serve in the armed forces will not have to pay taxes for increased debt service and debt retirement after they return to civilian life Third there is no economic advantage in postponing taxes through borrowing for the economic burden of the defense effort must be borne currently regardless of the manner in which the expenditures are financed It is not the imposition of taxes to pay for defense that creates the economic burden of defense and it is an illusion to think that through borrowing the Nation can escape or postpone paying the bill Fourth the tax load required to finance a defense program of the size now contemplated would not be unduly heavy at anticipated economic levels. Federal cash revenues collected during the fiscal year amounted to about percent of the national income. To pay for Federal expenditures at the level projected for the end of the calendar year would not require a much higher percentage of national income Such a tax load is heavy but not unbearable It is not to be concluded that a balanced budget could necessarily be maintained during a major war. But the magnitude of the present and planned defense effort is far from being as heavy a charge on the production of the country as was made during World War II. In general a defense program that does not require a diversion of productive resources too large to be sustained over a long period of time is not too large to be financed through current taxation. We believe that from an economic point of view a defense effort of present and contemplated size can and should be financed through taxation during the period of the effort This is not the same as saying that during the relatively short build-up period when expenditures are mounting rapidly month after month tax collections can be kept equal to expenditures at all times. There are time lags in the passage of tax legislation and time lags in the collection of taxes under new tax legislation. The shock of the tax bite on the economic system must also be considered. The adjustment to drastically higher taxes of the taxpayer 's personal budget as well as his attitude outlook and expectations takes time. With due recognition of this which means simply that taxes should be raised just as fast as possible the point must be everlastingly stressed that there is to be no giving up the policy and goal of the balanced budget. There must be no let-up in tax increases until balance is achieved and maintained It must be recognized that to balance the defense budget will require taxes at rates substantially higher perhaps even drastically higher than have ever been imposed before in the United States. The regular corporation income tax is already substantially above the wartime level. Excise tax rates are at their wartime peak. Individual income rates are percentage points below the wartime peak although due largely to income splitting tax liabilities for married couples are substantially lower. The fact that the rates will have to exceed the wartime levels is regrettable but should not be discouraging. It is generally recognized that taxes were much lower than they could and should have been during the last war The importance of reducing private spending influences the forms of taxes which should be used in a tax program as well as its size. Other considerations are also important. A maximum productive effort should not be discouraged. The tax burden should be distributed in an equitable manner. The higher the tax burden becomes the more important it is to avoid inequities which permit some taxpayers to escape paying their full share The individual income tax. We should continue to rely on the individual income tax for a large part of the additional revenue which will be required for the defense effort. Drastic increases in rates will be necessary which will make it more important than ever that the base be an equitable one There are numerous special provisions in the law which need to be changed in order that the base of the tax may be a fair one on which heavy burdens can be appropriately levied. Thus the rates on capital gains are too low in relation to the rates on other incomes while the holding period is so short that the hiding of ordinary income under the capital gains cloak is encouraged. The depletion allowed under the percentage depletion treatment is so excessive for some industries as to constitute a major inequity and percentage depletion has been extended to industries where it has no justification whatsoever. The split-income provisions of the Revenue Act of removed an inequity among certain married couples in different States but introduced an extremely favorable concession for married couples generally. If this concession can not be removed it should be taken into account when considering the increase of income taxes. The exemption of interest on State and local securities provides the anomaly that States and localities can sell securities at lower interest rates than the Federal Government. More important a large part of the tax benefit accrues to the security holder rather than to the State and local government. The defense period would be an excellent time to remove this old-time anomaly from the tax law Income tax increases should be imposed at all levels emphasizing the progressive character of the tax structure ; but by far the largest part of the additional revenue must come from the middle and lower tax brackets These are the brackets in which the great bulk of the income is located Of the total net income shown on all taxable returns percent of the amount remaining after Federal income taxes is estimated to be received by taxpayers with net incomes of less than $ To hold down consumption which is vital to the control of inflation the bulk of consumers must be affected directly by the tax increases Estate and Gift Taxes. The estate and gift taxes have less direct antiinflationary effects than most other taxes but in the interests of distributing the defense burden fairly these taxes need to be overhauled and strengthened. The structure of the estate and gift taxes permits large amounts of transfers to be made with no tax or at a very low tax rate. These defects were accentuated by the Revenue Act of The defective structure of the taxes should be corrected to make them fairer and more productive and the rates and exemptions should be set at such levels as to give their proper and more adequate place in the tax structure Corporate taxes. Taxes on corporate profits were raised substantially in but there is room for further increase. Corporate profits before taxes in the second half of have been approximating a rate of about billion dollars. Federal State and local corporate taxes including the excess profits tax will absorb at this rate of profits on a full year basis approximately billion dollars leaving billion dollars after taxes. Several billion dollars of this can be taken through further taxation and still permit corporations to maintain reasonable dividend payments and to continue necessary programs of expansion without impairment of their financial position ( see chart ) Heavy corporate taxes contribute to the anti-inflation program because they limit the amounts corporations have available for dividends and for investment. Moreover without a further substantial inCHART CORPORATE PROFITS Corporate profits rose spectacularly during to reach the highest levels on record as sales and prices climbed to new highs. Undistributed profits were the second highest on record and the volume of dividends swelled to new all-time highs BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ' NO ALLOWANCE FOR INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT ; SEE APPENDIX TABLE A-4 PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC A D V I S E R S ; ALLOWANCE HAS BEEN MADE FOR THE EFFECT OF THE HIGHER TAXES INCLUDING THE EXCESS P R O F I T S TAXES SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) crease in corporate tax rates there may be an accelerated rise in security prices which feeds inflationary consumer spending and could easily spread to other markets and run directly counter to the goals of the stabilization program. Increasing the tax burden on corporations is essential also from the point of view of equity. It is not convincing to tell the public that consumption must be reduced and personal taxes greatly increased while corporations maintain profits at very high levels. Wage earners can hardly be expected not to demand higher wages if they see that corporations have profits that would permit substantial wage concessions without making necessary an increase in prices The excess profits tax which was passed by the recent Congress makes a major contribution to the corporate tax structure. It appears probable however that some of the allowances made are unnecessarily generous and remove from the excess profits tax some profits which should be taxed at the higher rate Excise taxes. There is a particularly good reason for heavy increases of excise taxes on civilian goods which compete for materials and facilities with the defense effort and the supply of which will very likely have to be drastically reduced. In the absence of the most rigorously enforced price control the price of such goods is almost certain to rise. There is no justification lor such price increases going to producers or dealers and the effect would be to inflate business incomes and to stimulate workers to demand increased wages. By means of heavy excise taxes on such goods the price increase would be diverted into the Federal Treasury in the form of tax revenue to the extent that the goods were available. Such taxes would be particularly appropriate on durable goods which are not essentials of life The rates of many of the other excise taxes might be increased somewhat New items might be taxed but to add substantially to the excise tax base would involve the taxation of commodities of mass consumption. These are in general necessities of life and to tax them would place an inordinate burden on low-income families. Circumspection will be required also in increasing taxes on business-cost items since these would most likely be passed on in the form of higher prices and affect the cost of living and of the defense program Increases in some excise taxes which are reflected in the price structure are a necessary device under current conditions. Yet it can not be overlooked that such measures in their very nature bear more heavily on families with limited means than upon families in higher income groups To a degree this may be unavoidable because an economic mobilization program can not attempt to remove all of the differentials in real incomes and in consumption which are inherent in our economic system. Nonetheless a defense program calls for sacrifices so great that there must be even more emphasis upon considerations of equity than in normal times Towards this end should the situation become more critical and some shortages become acute there would need to be relatively more emphasis than thus far upon rationing and other devices outside the price and tax structure to promote equitable distribution of certain types of goods State and local taxes. Since tax policies are not solely a matter of Federal legislation it may be added that the State and local governments also can help to reduce inflationary pressures. With the existing State and local tax structure advancing prices and personal incomes tend to produce surplus revenues particularly for the States. To the extent that these surpluses occur the State and local governments should build up reserves for later use rather than reduce the level of tax rates. In their expenditure policies likewise these governments should take all possible steps to conserve manpower and materials. By adhering to such policies during the last war the State and local governments made a noteworthy contribution to economic stabilization. They can help again during the present emergency Debt management Policies of debt management can make an important contribution to the success or failure of our stabilization objective for the defense period and afterwards. The public debt today is more than five times as large as it was at the beginning of the defense financing period prior to World War II It comprises approximately one-half of the total debt of the country and constitutes a large portion of the assets of all the major investor classes of the country. Operations affecting the public debt have repercussions which are felt throughout every sector of the economy It is of major importance for the maintenance of economic stability that the public debt be bought and held by nonbank investors. Bank purchases of government securities are accompanied by an expansion of bank credit Under present conditions it is even more important than during World War II that the maximum amount of debt including both new and refunding issues be sold to and held by the nonbank public. We believe that the Treasury should continue to use every effort to expand Government security holdings of nonbank investors particularly individuals An important objective of debt management policy has been the maintenance of an orderly public market for United States securities. A stable and confident situation in the market for Federal securities is particularly important during a period of large military expenditures when new and heavy demands will have to be made on the Nation 's financial system The accumulated savings of the wartime period eased to a large extent the reconversion of business in the postwar years and supported postwar prosperity. The highly liquid condition of the Nation 's financial assets however also made for excessive demand and contributed to the postwar inflation. The achievement of monetary stability in the future will be made easier if the proportion of debt held in readily monetizable forms can be reduced General credit policy Three purposes of credit policy which are particularly important in the period ahead are first to facilitate the smooth transition of business and industry to meet the requirements of defense mobilization ; second to assist Government debt management ; and third to minimize inflationary pressures. To achieve all three purposes at the same time presents something of a dilemma since smooth economic transition may require easily available credit while minimizing the pressure on prices calls for restrict922781 I0 ing the volume of credit at many points. The problem is pointed up by the fact that during the second half of the rapid expansion of bank loans contributed to the inflationary pressures built up during that period There is a real danger that for a time at least consumer and business buying based on credit will continue to be of a magnitude which will aggravate inflationary pressures. Because of the needs of debt management however general credit policy can not be expected to be a major anti-inflationary instrument during the coming period of intensive mobilization Finding the solution to this problem of credit policy will call for a careful appraisal of the applicability under present and prospective conditions of such traditional central banking techniques as changes in rediscount rates reserve requirements and open-market operations. It will undoubtedly be necessary at least in the immediate period ahead to rely more on selective than on general credit controls. It may be found feasible to extend selective controls to other kinds of loans than those to finance the purchase of consumers ' goods real estate and securities and to secure voluntary cooperative action on the part of banks to attain this objective. It is possible and it may be found desirable to regulate and limit the issue of new private securities One hopeful element in the picture is suggested by the experience of World War II which supports the view that if price controls and controls over inventories and facilities expansion are vigorously used the problem of inflationary growth of bank credit will be mitigated. Price control combined with the diversion of materials from civilian production may be expected to restrict new credit to that used for the promotion of productive capacity in the defense program Selective credit controls At the present time two major selective credit controls are in operation : Regulation W which requires minimum down payments on purchases of the principal types of consumer durables ; and Regulation X which regulates terms on residential mortgages. Regulation W was in effect during the war and during most of the postwar period until June at which time legislative authority expired. It was reinstituted on September Less than a month after the Korean outbreak the President asked the Government housing agencies substantially to tighten terms on all mortgage loans insured or guaranteed by them roughly half of all mortgage loans. In October a more comprehensive regulation covering conventional loans on new one- and two-family dwellings as well as Government-insured or guaranteed loans was put into effect. At the present time the regulation is being extended to multi-family structures principally by the requirement of maximum loan values. During World War II the substantial reduction of private residential construction by direct controls minimized the need for credit controls although it would have been desirable to curb demand and limit the price rise on existing dwellings. In the postwar period previous to the Korean outbreak overcoming the acute housing shortage was regarded as a primary aim of public policy and accordingly credit measures were designed to provide positive encouragement to residential construction Regulation W has had some immediate effect in curtailing demand but to date the effect has been small in comparison to the reduction in sales which will be necessary in the future. In the case of Regulation X the effects of the regulation can not yet be appraised to determine whether further tightening of terms will be warranted. The large volume of work under way and commitments made prior to the date of the regulation will assure the continuance of a relatively large volume of residential construction well into the spring months. This has delayed the full impact of the regulation The restriction of consumer credit and of housing credit inevitably bears harder on the lower income groups which have used these forms of credit most extensively. The restraint upon their buying imposed through the present regulation should not be considered a serious and unreasonable hardship. If however ^ much more severe restrictions on the supply of consumer durable goods and the construction of housing should become necessary it would no longer be feasible nor equitable to achieve the needed restraint exclusively through the device of making credit unavailable. This would mean that the drastically reduced supply would go exclusively to those who have the ready cash to pay for appliances or houses. In the case of such drastic restrictions other forms of allocating the remaining supply would have to be considered. Such drastic curtailments are however not contemplated at the present time. The sacrifices imposed on consumers under present regulations are not great in comparison with the benefit they derive from a successful policy of price stabilization In the case of housing the adaptation of the program to a defense economy will require modification of the over-all approach taken in Regulation X. Terms applicable to some housing construction may have to be further tightened. In general a more selective approach will be required Measures will be needed to focus housing construction upon defense areas Other measures will be needed to adjust the character of this housing as to prices rents and size to the needs of defense workers. Still other measures may be needed with respect to the general housing program so that throughout the country the limited supply of new houses may be made to serve first needs first. To encourage a larger volume of rental housing legislation should provide the FHA with a special type of insurance authority differing in terms from the current legislation and concentrating mainly upon defense needs. A substantial volume of public housing will also be needed with reshaping to meet defense requirements One serious defect of the Defense Production Act of is that it does not contain authority to prescribe credit terms on the sales of existing homes except on mortgages insured or guaranteed by the Federal Government Exemption of these homes from credit regulation may result in a large rise in the price of existing homes thus adding credit-created capital gains to the spending stream. A rise in the price of existing homes would intensify inflation also by affecting prices on new homes Materials controls Priorities and allocations. Under the Defense Production Act enacted last September the National Production Authority quickly put into force a basic regulation under which the materials and components needed to fill defense orders were given priority over other business. Subsequently recognition of the urgency of protecting certain other essential programs led to special assistance in providing steel for the accelerated building of freight cars and of Great Lakes vessels primarily iron ore carriers. Steps have also been taken to insure more equitable and orderly distribution of priority-rated orders in a number of industries by establishing maximum percentages of output beyond which individual producers need not accept further rated orders Orders have been issued cutting back nonpriority uses of aluminum copper zinc rubber tin nickel cadmium columbium-bearing steel and cobalt. The first purpose of these orders was to distribute the necessary curtailment fairly evenly over the various nonpriority users to avoid drastic dislocations of production and employment. These restraints also afford incentive to the directly-affected users to conserve scarce material by redesign or substitutions while maintaining their output By the end of the year a number of orders had been issued which selectively curtail or prohibit certain less essential uses of the material in question rather than curtailing all non-rated uses uniformly. For one material cobalt complete allocation was ordered The development of priorities and allocation controls since the Korean outbreak as outlined above has been patterned on methods employed immediately before and during the early stages of U. S. participation in World War II. Some shortcomings in these types of controls are already becoming evident. For one thing it has been impossible as yet to build effective machinery for insuring compliance with the increasingly complex pattern of rules a defect which should be remedied as rapidly as possible. Also the system of curtailing non-priority uses of scarce materials by uniform percentages at the level of primary shapes and semifinished products often fails to give the producer of finished products an adequate incentive to substitute where feasible components containing less of the scarce material The basic shortcoming of the uniform horizontal-cut approach is that it makes no distinction between more and less essential civilian uses. Thus it does not really maximize the production of the most necessary goods and quite possibly does not even maximize total production The use of direct controls has thus far been limited almost entirely to aiding the direct defense programs and the proportions of supply eligible for rated orders are still low. But these proportions are rising rapidly as the pace of mobilization is stepped up. It should now be possible to progress to the necessary next stage of more comprehensive and effective control with far less lost motion than a decade ago. The exigencies of current mobilization call for all speed in staffing and other preparations for instituting complete allocations of a few key materials along the lines of the Controlled Materials Plan at the earliest possible date. In the interim there will be increased pressure for development and authorization of essential civilian programs eligible for priorities assistance on the footing now represented by the freight car and Great Lakes vessels programs. It has been realized from the start that a proliferation of such priority programs leads rapidly to a breakdown of the priority system. Advancing the date for instituting allocations would shorten the interval to be bridged by a priorities system and thus remove the danger of such a breakdown Even before complete allocations are in operation it will be necessary to Impose further and more drastic cutbacks and prohibitions of selected least essential end uses. The control agencies are moving in this direction. In the initial phase of the mobilization effort the preference for uniform percentage rather than selective cutbacks on civilian uses could be justified to some extent on grounds of maintaining production and employment in general. But in the phase of mobilization which we have now entered this justification loses weight progressively An improved system of direct control of materials should entail a careful program for conserving scarce materials by all those who process use or handle them in any way. Many of the practices evolved during World War II to stretch supplies of scarce materials are being put to use again Various sales-appeal features such as chromium trim and nonessential parts can be removed from equipment. In the production of metal parts and alloys use of substitutes for the more essential materials will bring great savings of scarce materials. The useful life of clothing tools and other commodities can be lengthened by the use of protective coatings and treatments. Holding styles of articles to a limited number would reduce the need for maintaining large and varied inventories and permit greater economies of production The search for substitutes already under way should be intensified. The military research program is seeking substitutes for the copper used in cartridge cases for scarce alloy metals used in jet engines and for many other commodities. Federal agencies are conducting research in such fields as new and substitute agricultural materials new techniques of minerals exploration and new sources of minerals and substitutes. Programs are presently being conducted to standardize descriptions and unify terminology and classification systems for supply items Procurement. With the prospect that during this year the Federal Government will be buying an increasingly substantial share of the total na- III tional product for defense purposes procurement policies become a major factor in the mobilization of productive resources. Without effective policies there would inevitably be loss of output through disruption of production schedules and inefficient and unbalanced utilization of the Nation 's resources of manpower and facilities. The policies followed in large-scale military procurement have lasting effects on the competitive and geographical structure of our industries and on their ability to expand and adapt themselves to the demands which will be made on them The most important general principle of sound procurement policy at this stage in the program is that the supply base should be broadened as far as practicable. Contracts should not be piled on a few large and familiar suppliers but spread widely ; and subcontracting should be actively encouraged. Broad distribution of defense business will give many firms the basic experience needed for subsequent rapid step-ups in war goods production. There are of course special cases in which a large procurement contract could not be split up without excessive loss of time or efficiency ; and as the mobilization proceeds many plants should for technical reasons devote themselves exclusively either to military or nonmilitary output But the basic objective of broadening the base of supply will remain valid Such a policy requires a major continuing effort to hunt out and develop hitherto unused suppliers particularly among the smaller firms. These firms in the aggregate have much to contribute but they are normally at a disadvantage in securing business where large quantities of goods are being procured in great urgency. The extra time and effort required for their utilization will pay off increasingly as the pressure grows. Maximum practicable latitude in specifications will be helpful To promote better utilization of facilities and manpower to ease the burden on transportation and to make essential supply systems less vulnerable to disruption by attack or sabotage it is vital that procurement policy take account of the relative availability of resources in different communities and plants. For the most part there should be reliance upon cooperation by business supplemented in exceptional cases by the use of Government powers to requisition facilities or to place mandatory contracts The pricing policies followed in procurement importantly affect efficiency Although excess profit taxation and contract renegotiation are both useful in recapturing some of the windfall gains of the emergency neither takes the place of a careful drawing of the original contracts in such a way as to encourage the cutting of production costs. Both in the initial letting of contracts and in subsequent renegotiation the principle should be that the supplier has an opportunity to secure extra profits by finding additional economies but not to retain extra profits which he may receive without constructive effort on his part It is clear that in order to implement a procurement policy which meets the needs sketched above central formulation of standards and coordination of procurement activities are essential. Procurement policy must be closely tied to the other phases of the effort to expand production and to avoid disruptive price rises Policy for profits prices and wages In a defense emergency more widespread use of controls than in peacetime is essential. But controls obviously do not remove the need to formulate policy. On the contrary controls make this even more essential because the very purpose of controls is to achieve policy objectives with more rapidity and certainty than they could be accomplished without controls. Although taxation is an authoritative indirect control action on the part of Government one seldom hears the proposition advanced that there is no need for tax policy to guide tax action. But there is more frequent expression of the fallacy that the imposition of extraordinary or emergency controls upon profits prices and wages does not equally depend upon sound policy for their success. In these areas consequently the Council feels that it can be most helpful by outlining policy guides rather than by treating those detailed questions of formulae timing and application which must necessarily rest with specialized agencies charged with segments of the stabilization effort In peacetime the function of profits prices and wages is to contribute to the most efficient use of our total resources for the purposes which the Nation deems desirable. Prices serve to allocate products among buyers and to guide producers toward the most desirable products and the most economical methods of production. Profits provide incentives and direction to enterprise in making business investments and help supply funds for that purpose. Wages serve to provide purchasing power and work incentives to a large part of the consuming public and lead to the most effective use of labor In early the Council sought to outline profit price and wage policies for peacetime stability and growth. We found the key to stability and growth in a continuing " balance " between investment and consumption This balance on the one hand would enable business to make full utilization of the labor force and of new technology toward the end of maximum production ; and on the other hand would provide wage earners and other consumers with enough purchasing power to consume the goods produced without excess demand leading to inflation or inadequate demand leading to recession or depression The economy seemed to be in fairly good balance in early although some further adjustments were needed. This led to the question of how this balance might be maintained in future years as the total output of the economy increased three percent a year on the average. It seemed clear that the ratio of profits to the volume of business activity was in general rewarding and that the further growth of the economy would keep these profits rewarding ( and even increase them in absolute terms ) without the " aid of further price increases. This disposed of the only argument that could legitimately be advanced for a rise in the general price level namely that business was not receiving sufficient funds to exercise its function in a vigorous and growing economy The next question was whether the large share of increasing production which over the years must find its way into ultimate consumption and higher living standards should be passed on in the form of a general declining price level or a generally rising wage level. We observed that while either approach was theoretically obtainable the dynamics of the American economy argued strongly for a fairly stable price level and a rising level of incomes measured by increases in production and productivity. Thus in early we looked with general favor upon the new wage formulae which gave reflection to this economic philosophy. In all matters of profits prices and wages however we recognize the need for individual variations to promote efficient operations in a complex and variegated economy The time has now come to reconsider this entire formulation of profitprice-wage policy in the light of new facts which drastically change the use to which we must put our resources. The central character of this change has been discussed fully in other sections of this Review. We must strive even harder to lift total production although we must drastically alter its composition. But since so large a part of this total production will be absorbed in the primary defense effort the level of consumption during the next few years at least can not rise as in normal peacetime and may have to move downward. Cutbacks in some types of investment must be sufficiently drastic to permit expansion essential to the defense effort to move forward even faster What do these new facts mean for profit policy ? They indicate that the current general level of profits which is much higher than the rewarding level in early can be reduced further through taxation without impairing the initiative or types of investment which are now urgently needed. This is demonstrated more comprehensively in other parts of this Review including the discussion of tax policy. A further reason for compressing profits after taxes below the unprecedented high levels which they have now attained is that unless this is done it will be futile to attempt to achieve wage stabilization. We can not afford a soft tax policy in order to take care of the exceptional instances where further incentives may be needed to stimulate some types of business investment. These isolated instances should be taken care of by selective policies such as tax amortization selective price allowances or financial aid These conclusions about profits have an important bearing upon price policy under current and foreseeable circumstances. Every argument which was advanced a year ago against increases in the general price level applies with multiple force now. The price level is already much higher than a year ago and inflationary forces are mounting. Further price in- creases in general can serve no economic function and if these increases go much further they will do irreparable damage. There is no proposition of economics on which there is more general agreement than this. Consequently the imposition of price controls having been initiated this activity should move forward with speed and decisiveness. It should seek as rapidly as possible along with other controls both indirect and direct to achieve and maintain general price stability. Clearly the determination of the items on which price controls should next be imposed or in what order or to what exact scope is an operational function for the Economic Stabilization Agency subject to the general direction of the Office of Defense Mobilization Drastic action on the price front and it should be drastic does not mean the use of only one technique of price control as has been urged in some quarters. We must be flexible in the use of pricing methods. The pricing techniques whether of the freeze " dollars-and-cents " or margin control variety must be skillfully and closely attuned to the peculiarities of individual industries labor markets and distributive levels. It is necessary to deal with wide differences among profit and cost conditions. It is necessary to encompass a vast variety of commodities some standardized and others highly differentiated Any nation-wide program must sacrifice some desirable refinements in the interest of speed uniformity administrative feasibility and public acceptance. In fact more stress should be placed upon these latter considerations than upon the minutiae of differential treatment because it is more important to put brakes upon inflation than to get a perfect system of controls. Nonetheless discretion and discriminating judgment must be exercised lest the objective of effective price control cut across other equally important objectives. The most important of these other objectives is to maintain maximum production and this requires among other things some flexibility in dealing with specific prices The prices of speculative farm products such as cotton wheat and soybeans are affected substantially by trading in futures contracts on the commodity exchanges. In an inflationary period excessive speculation in farm commodities would make price stabilization difficult if not impossible. One of the most effective ways of limiting speculative trading without hindering legitimate hedging operations is by regulating the minimum margins required fpr speculative deals. No Government agency now has authority to require adequate margins for this purpose. Such authority should be granted by the Congress without delay The experience of World War II revealed clearly that price controls particularly in the case of low-priced lines and commodities subject to frequent changes in style and model must be reinforced by and meshed with production and distribution controls. Since we will be diverting nearly one-fifth of our production to the defense effort it becomes all the more necessary to ensure that resources available for civilian output are devoted " to the most urgent civilian needs at least cost. With the imposition of controls to prevent an inflationary price spiral we must recognize that a price structure geared to peacetime patterns of demand can not be expected to bring about the pattern of output necessary to an advanced defense economy While price and wage controls must be operated in such a manner as to provide adequate incentives to maintain maximum output they can not except in rare cases be used to determine the composition of output. Such a task is not administratively feasible. It is more simply and properly the task of the appropriate production controls In view of the particularly inflationary price performance of many of the scarce raw materials in international trade and because of the inability of the United States to cope with this problem unilaterally by means of simple domestic price controls every effort should be made to hasten the development of international agreements to allocate such materials and restrain their price movements. Meanwhile the United States purchases of some commodities should be centralized in the hands of the Government which in turn would resell them to domestic users. This has already been done in the case of rubber and the immediate impact of this action has been a drop in its price The stabilization of wages since it affects the very livelihood of millions of families depends for its success upon three pivotal points. First holding the line on wages depends basically upon holding the line on the cost of living. When a ceiling is placed upon prices in a particular industry it follows that wages in that industry must take account of this price ceiling from the viewpoint of business costs and adequate profit margins. But the establishment of price ceilings in a particular industry is not a sufficient foundation for holding the line on wages in that industry if the prices of things which workers must buy continue to rise. Efforts to achieve wage stabilization can not await a complete or perfect stabilization of the cost of living because no practical aspect of economic stabilization can be delayed until some other aspect of the problem is completely solved. Nonetheless success in holding the line on wages can not be expected without practical success in holding the line on the cost of living. This requires vigorous action on the price front on the tax front and on all fronts designed to achieve price stability both by indirect and direct controls. It requires much tighter rent control reinforced by adequate legislation for that purpose because rent is so large an item in the cost of living of middle income and low income families The second requisite for successful wage stabilization is a rounded program of economic stabilization which recognizes that excessive purchasing power must be restrained in all major sectors in the economy and that the imposition of sacrifices must be equitable. The Council feels that its recommendations with respect to corporate and other taxes with respect to price controls and with respect to other types of restraints provide a fair guide to the achievement of this balanced stabilization program through legislative and administrative action. Wage earners are an important segment of the income-earning population ; but there are other important segments office workers professional people farmers and business groups. Each will be willing to do more in support of the defense program if all are doing their share. Much toward this end has already been accomplished A third consideration in effective wage stabilization is that there be consultation between Government and representatives of workers both in the formulation of policy and with regard to its execution. The Council has frequently expressed the high value which it places upon such conferences With these three pivotal points as a foundation the economic objective of wage stabilization should be to prevent the total of all wages available for spending from rising greatly during a period when the availability of goods for consumption can not rise and on a per capita basis is likely to fall There are factors which will make it extremely difficult to achieve the objective of holding total wages available for spending in line with the availability of consumer goods. The obstacles are fairly obvious. In the first place the great numbers of new workers called for by the defense effort and the longer hours will result in more total wage earnings even without any increase in wage rates. In the second place there will be a few instances where some wages must be raised to facilitate the recruitment of workers for defense production by modifying some of the wage differentials which now exist. In the third place there is the problem of ensuring that some incentives exist particularly to effectuate shifts toward defense production. It may not be possible to achieve completely the objective of holding wages available for spending in line with the availability of consumer goods but every effort should be made to get as close to it as feasible. Doubtful questions should be resolved in favor of stabilization In seeking to achieve this objective of wage stabilization as rapidly as possible two of the most difficult problems involve " cost of living " adjustments and " productivity " or other adjustments designed to provide incentive for increased effort. The principal adjustments to cover increases in the cost of living can not be entirely set aside for to do so would make a particular sector of the population liable for any inability of the Government to hold the line on the most important front of all. The gaps have not yet been closed in the defense line against increases in the cost of living ; and if these increases continued at a fast pace the buying power of workers would decline relative to the available supply of the consumer goods instead of tending to maintain a constant relationship to it. On the other hand only a small percentage of middle income and low income families in United States are now protected by " cost of living " adjustments ; and to afford full protection to one group alone would be at the expense of others and would not represent equality of sacrifice. There is no hard and fast rule which can be applied to this problem. Insofar as the Government is successful in holding the line on the cost of living the problem reduces itself to nominal proportions. So long as this effort is not successful it is practical to expect that adjustments will have to be made in many cases but that the relation and speed of these adjustments should be restrained to avoid the spiral which results when prices and wages and costs start chasing each other The problem of wage increases to reflect increased effort whether by " productivity " allowances or other methods arrived at by collective bargaining is different from the " cost of living " adjustment problems. In ordinary times as the foregoing discussion has indicated such adjustments are a desirable way of passing along part of the benefits of increasing output But during the defense emergency over the next year or two at least the defense program will be absorbing the increased output and it will not be available for civilian use. Under these circumstances one approach to help to keep total wages available for spending as nearly as possible in line with the available supply of consumer goods would be to restrain increases in wage rates. A second approach to this same objective would be to permit some increases in these wage rates in return for increased productive results but to prevent these increases from finding their way into the spending stream by means of higher taxes or larger social security deductions Each of these two approaches has points of desirability. The first makes for more uniformity the second for more flexibility. From the viewpoint of a smooth wage controls operation and the promotion of harmonious industrial relations one approach will work better in some instances and the other approach will work better in other instances. The second approach to a degree furnishes an incentive factor which might prove valuable for the long-sustained effort which we must now make to increase production and to work harder and longer. This incentive factor as applied to the individual may prove very important. In view of all these considerations perhaps some combination of the two approaches discussed in. this paragraph may prove necessary. In addition labor can help in the stabilization effort by encouraging the purchase of bonds as one of the means by which excess purchasing power can be kept away from the markets for goods In the case of wages even more than prices some flexibility must be maintained. Some wage adjustments may become necessary to correct clear inequities among rates for comparable work ; to allow for legitimate job reclassifications within given firms ; to correct " substandards " of living ; and in certain instances to assist in the recruitment of scarce labor skills urgently needed by defense industries. But these adjustments should be carefully screened and held to a minimum. Otherwise they will cumulate the pressures which at best will make it very hard to hold average wage receipts in line with the availability of goods or to prevent the total volume of wages ( including those paid to new workers and for longer hours ) from rising dangerously above the availability of goods From the time the OPA issued its first formal price schedule until the institution of general price controls in April fourteen months elapsed and the agency had developed an organization of employees. Authority to stabilize wages was not granted for still another six months. This time whatever the ultimate goal the pace of action should be much more rapid. The Economic Stabilization Agency has power to put ceilings on wages as well as prices. It is already moving to hold basic industrial prices to control selectively the prices and wages of some products ; and to develop general price and wage standards to serve as a framework for price and wage policy and to identify the areas where controls become urgent because these standards are violated. The Agency should strive to accelerate action in view of the inflationary potential now so clearly apparent and in view of the fact that control action anticipated but not made effective in itself stimulates speculative inflation INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY In framing the economic programs to build up our national strength we must bear in mind that this strength is bound up with that of other free nations immediately as well as in the long run. The requirements of defense call for the adoption of some new economic programs in the international field for changes of emphasis in some of our present ones and for close coordination of our international and our domestic economic programs. Certain broad principles imposed by these requirements can be stated at the present time Economic aid to foreign countries With our economic resources strained by the burden of defense every use of these resources implies the sacrifice of some alternative use. Under these conditions our foreign as well as our domestic programs must be designed so that they are effective and efficient in furthering the purposes which now have highest priority. In determining what we can afford by way of aid to other countries we must take into account that such aid limits the expansion of goods available for domestic use. Against this consideration we must balance the contribution that aid to friendly countries will make in sustaining or increasing our joint strength taking into account the combined military political and economic aspects of our security interests The fact that our economy is operating under forced draft means not only that foreign aid programs must be screened to serve high priority purposes ; they must all be under continuous survey to see that such purposes are carried out and that the programs are adjusted to changing conditions Aid to Western Europe should be related to the high priority requirement for a rapid rebuilding of common defensive strength. This calls for the fullest possible use of resources outside as well as inside the United States. In Western Europe is to be found the largest industrial potential in the world outside the United States and a skilled labor force exceeding in number either our own or that of the Soviet Union. It would be a formidable asset in the hands of a potential enemy. Western Europe can and should provide the major part of the resources for its own rearmament. In some countries notably Germany and Italy the labor force and plant capacity are not being fully utilized ; production can be expanded by placement of orders if adequate raw materials and certain needed ancillary facilities are made available. Hours of work and participation in the labor force will have to be increased in Western Europe as they will in the United States. But resources needed for defense production will also have to be provided in Western European countries as in the United States by restricting both consumption and normal improvement of the capital stock Even this will not provide enough labor material and plant capacity In order to obtain the most rapid possible build-up of defensive strength we with a much larger industrial potential in relation to population shall have to provide large amounts of military equipment and supplies to our North Atlantic Treaty partners Achievement of the necessary defensive strength in Western Europe will also require provision of economic aid. Although most of these countries had been making substantial progress toward self-support indicating that their resources were becoming more nearly adequate to the demands being made upon them at that time these demands are now being much increased Their own rearmament will greatly intensify the pressure on their economic resources. The rise in the prices of their raw material imports more rapid than that of their export prices has already increased the volume of exports required to pay for a given quantity of imports. This has put some additional pressure on their resources. The full impact of this rise has probably not yet been felt. More important the increase in their armed forces and in their own armament production will reduce the resources available to produce goods for export and for their own consumption and investment Economic aid for recovery purposes the need for which has been declining rapidly must give way to aid needed to support a strengthening of the common defenses The degree to which our aid takes a military or nonmilitary form does not indicate its essentiality to the defense effort. If one country can produce military goods most efficiently the most economic use of common resources may make it desirable for that country to produce more of these goods than its own military establishment requires. If this forces it to cut its production of civilian goods below its requirements a larger proportion of the aid it requires may take a nonmilitary form. Similarly one country may make its greatest contribution in the form of manpower for the common armed forces and as a result have to cut its civilian production. Provided that a country is making its maximum contribution to production and to curtailing nonessential use of civilian goods such aid as it may require in making this contribution is essential to the common defense effort whether it takes a military or economic form In reappraising foreign aid programs and shifting their emphasis we must continue to recognize that Soviet-dominated aggression is neither solely military nor of short-run character. Some parts of the world are threatened by Communist penetration but are not subject to direct military threat In many areas where there is a direct military threat this threat exists or is particularly dangerous because political social and economic conditions provide a fertile soil for penetration of Soviet-Communist ideology. In some of these cases well-designed assistance in expanding production even of goods unrelated to military strength can contribute to the essential aspects of common security The productivity of some of the underdeveloped countries is also an important element in the defense of the free world. Not only do these areas produce the raw materials upon which essential production in the United States and other industrial countries depends ; in addition they must be able to provide for the essential needs of their peoples if they are to be kept free from Communist domination. While there is a great production potential in these countries the difficulties are primarily inefficient techniques of production inadequate capital to develop the resources and in many cases institutional obstacles. The large contribution which many of these countries can nevertheless make to the common strength must be fully taken into account. Increased demand for their products has already substantially improved their financial position and their ability to contribute Present plans to help them increase their productive capacity are based on a recognition that such increases contribute to our national security both directly and indirectly by improving the economic strength of these countries and reducing their vulnerability to subversion But the common danger and the greatly increased strain on our own resources call for reappraising and if necessary altering the character and time focus of such programs. Greater emphasis must be put on production of raw materials which will be scarce in relation to important demands Increased production of food in these countries would reduce the drain on the United States. It will also be necessary to shift emphasis to programs which produce results quickly Expansion of productive capacity calls for private capital investment and public investment by the Export-Import Bank and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Grants for technical assistance and in some critical areas capital development will be necessary. Despite present international tensions measures to facilitate private investment can still be effective in certain areas and are particularly needed to expand raw material production. It is desirable to enact legislation authorizing guarantees to private capital against certain risks peculiar to foreign investment and to continue efforts to negotiate investment treaties A carefully selective expansion of public investment is also required to support the security effort. The burden of lending to develop production especially where security interests primarily of the United States are in- volved requires the Export-Import Bank to play an active role. The Bank 's uncommitted lending authority is now only about million dollars. This seriously restricts it. Its lending authority should be raised by billion dollars from the present billion dollars to billion Control of commodities in world trade Even vigorous efforts to expand foreign and domestic production of the major raw materials can not achieve results in time to prevent some important cases of severe shortages, sharp price rises and maldistribution of supplies. For some commodities these effects have already occurred. In a few cases greatly increased United States demand or as in cotton reduced supply has in fact threatened to cut essential production abroad. International collaboration is needed to improve the distribution of important products in acutely short supply so that nonessential uses in some countries do not deprive essential uses in others. The major concrete problems are to identify the commodities requiring such collaboration to work out the policies which should govern their distribution and to work out and put into effect the mechanisms best suited for the purpose both internationally and within the countries affected It will become increasingly necessary to control the export of materials in short supply in the United States which are necessary to our defense program and to direct exports of some commodities to countries where they are most urgently needed. For these reasons as well as for obvious security reasons the power to control exports which is scheduled to expire on June should be extended In view of emergency shortages of raw materials and to implement international arrangements for their distribution the power to control imports which also expires on June needs to be extended It will also become increasingly urgent to secure close coordination between the day-to-day operation of domestic and of international commodity control programs. Where there is excess demand for commodities which we import or export we must limit domestic use not only to avoid taking more than our agreed-upon share of world imports but also to assure that goods are available for necessary exports. Fiscal and credit policies can help by restraining demand for the final products which use the particular raw materials. For example controls which cut the demand for automobiles also indirectly cut the demand for rubber. But such measures probably can not suffice ; international allocation of a commodity implies domestic priority or allocation as well. The administration of these domestic controls must take into account the needs of other countries not only for goods used in defense production but also for essential civilian goods and services Fiscal credit and allocation measures will exert some restraining influence upon prices of the major commodities in world trade. But this influence is likely to be limited. Violent price rises in these commodities create balance of payments difficulties in the importing countries and through their effects upon costs reinforce existing inflationary pressures. For the exporting countries they raise real incomes but may also introduce a considerable element of inflation and lay the basis for future dislocations. The advisability of attempting to control them by international action depends on the extent to which the higher prices elicit increased production which depends largely on the technical conditions of production for the particular commodity and on how long the price increase is expected to last. In general it seems desirable to place primary emphasis on vigorous measures to reduce or eliminate nonessential uses Commercial and financial policies With the virtual certainty of widespread labor and material shortages for an indefinite period we must use all methods of increasing our available supplies which do not prevent friendly countries from satisfying their own needs. Commercial and financial practices which divert demand from foreign to United States production put pressure on our resources ; their relaxation can help to counter inflationary pressures First various statutes require with certain exceptions that the Federal Government and State and local government authorities receiving Federal funds buy only goods manufactured or mined in the United States or produced from domestic materials. The defense effort generally and especially the stockpile program will require increasing Government purchases of imported materials. Such purchases will in addition relieve shortages and inflationary pressures in this country. The Congress has just given the President emergency and temporary power to authorize Federal procurement in connection with national defense without regard to these and other restrictive provisions of existing law when such procurement is in the interest of national defense. Under these new powers the fullest possible use should be made of foreign as well as domestic sources of commodities needed for defense purposes including stockpiling Second the diminishing availability of goods in this country makes more desirable a reduction of tariff barriers. Despite duty reductions under reciprocal trade agreements many United States imports are still subject to high duties. For reasons which have often been explained our long- as well as short-run policies require that we extend the Trade Agreements Act which expires on June and that customs procedures which now also impede the entry of foreign supplies be simplified by enacting the proposed Customs Simplification Act. But further action is desirable in the present inflationary situation. It would be desirable to enact temporary legislation authorizing the President to make unilateral reductions or suspensions of tariff duties and import restrictions on commodities in short supply as long as emergency conditions exist. This is desirable not only in connection with materials for further processing such as copper but may also be desirable in connection with finished commodities I2 Third we place an additional strain upon our resources and add to domestic inflationary pressures when we require that Government loans or grants to foreign countries be spent on goods produced in the United States. Such aid is generally intended to supplement the recipient country 's total economic resources not to promote United States exports. If the recipient can obtain the particular commodities it needs more cheaply from another source it should in general be left free to do so. Until recently it was probable that the " tying " of loans or grants affected primarily the composition rather than the total amount of United States exports ; if the recipient of dollar assistance did not spend the proceeds in the United States the country in which it did spend the dollars would probably do so. Even under these conditions there would be good reasons why it should be our general policy not to tie our aid to our exports. Now however it is probable that a smaller portion of aid spent in foreign countries would be re-spent here. A general policy of not tying dollar aid to United States goods would therefore help ease the inflationary strain of exports on our economy. At the same time it would give other countries a greater chance to earn dollars by exporting to the recipients of our aid. Since some of these countries may themselves be receiving aid from us this policy may reduce their need for such aid. These principles were recognized in the Mutual Defense Assistance Act which provided that United States military assistance for foreign countries may be used to obtain equipment materials and services from any source In general all measures to reduce artificial barriers to imports and artificial stimuli to exports tend to ease inflationary pressures in this country Present circumstances offer the opportunity for taking these measures with little if any disturbance to related domestic industries and with maximum benefit to the American public as a whole Part V. Details of Economic Trends in EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION Employment URING the past year there have been significant labor market changes. The civilian labor force averaged million in compared with in For the year as a whole almost million persons were employed in civilian occupations or about million more than in and million above the average of in Nonfarm employment increased by million. Farm employment decreased by about ; part of this decline may be attributable to the availability of better paying jobs in industry which tended to attract workers away from the farm. Unemployment averaged less than in ( See chart ) From million in January with seasonal activity at a low point civilian employment increased rapidly to an all-time high of million in the summer. It then declined seasonally to million in the fourth quarter or about million above the average in the fourth quarter of During the first half of this steady increase in the number of people at work reflected the growing momentum of economic recovery Employment was given an additional push in the third quarter when the outbreak in Korea led to anticipatory buying of consumer durables when expenditures for expansion of plant and equipment increased and when manufacturers began to build up their work forces Average .manufacturing employment in exceeded that in by about with the largest gains in establishments manufacturing durable goods. In November million persons were enga/ged in manufacturing compared with million in November Between June and November employees were added to the payrolls of durable goods establishments. The most important rises came in electrical and nonelectrical machinery primary and fabricated metals instruments and aircraft. As a result employment in durable goods manufacturing reached million climbing above the high level of million in November There was also a significant increase in employment in nondurable industries with the November figure at million compared with a year earlier. Employment in nondurable manufacturing increased by between June and November. Employment in the production of textiles apparel and foods D CHART CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE Civilian employment averaged million persons in I960 million higher than in The increase was entirely in the nonagricultural segment of the economy agricultural employment dropping about a half million MILLIONS OF PERSONS ' * MILLIONS OF PERSONS ' * TOTAL CIVILIAN LABOR FORCE : : J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D I960 During unemployment averaged about less than in There was a striking improvement during the year. The December level of million pr percent of the civilian labor force was more than a million below December a year ago when percent of the labor force was unemployed UNEMPL VI 'M ElYT AS PEIRCENT OF CIV IL IA ^ LABOR F ( ) R CE T ? m r * T p * r F * ffr > TrH J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N O * I4 YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE I960 expanded seasonally ; chemicals paper and rubber products made significant gains. Compared with November important gains in employment also appeared in contract construction where there was a rise of about ; in trade where there was a gain of about ; and in the Federal Government where a pronounced upturn in employment toward the end of the year reflected the impact of the defense program The general tightening which took place in the labor market is shown by the change in labor market classifications between late and In November out of major labor market areas surveyed only five were classified as having a tight or balanced labor supply ( under percent unemployed ) By November out of areas had been given this classification. In addition to this general tightening in the labor market areas serious shortages of certain skills had developed by the end of the year in some parts of the country. In addition nationwide shortages have emerged of certain professional workers who are of prime importance to the defense effort. This is particularly noticeable in the science and engineering professions Unemployment The general economic recovery during the first half of and inflationary pressures in the second half were mirrored in a marked improvement in the unemployment situation. Beginning with March the number of unemployed persons decreased almost steadily and more than seasonally until in October unemployment was down to million. The December figure of million unemployed is more than a million below a year ago The average number of persons unemployed for the year as a whole was only about less than for ( See chart ) At the end of the year percent of the civilian labor force was unemployed. Such a small percentage of unemployment indicates that we are nearing what is ordinarily considered to be the minimum for a peacetime economy. It is not irreducible however and the employment of more persons now unemployed can help to meet pressing needs for a larger number of workers and greater production. Production may also be increased by a fuller utilization of the million persons who at the end of the year were working part-time but who were able and willing to accept full-time jobs. ( See appendix tables A-ll and A-12 for further statistics of employment and unemployment. ) Production Last January3 the Council stated that to achieve maximum employment it would be necessary to increase total production of goods and services by about percent over As a result of the strong demand following the Korean outbreak the economy actually produced percent more goods and services in the year than during and by the fourth quarter had reached an annual rate percent higher than for the year These measurements of production of goods and services are based on gross national product adjusted for price changes. ( See appendix tables A-l A-9,andA-10. ) Production of goods. Total physical production of goods during was percent above and reached a record high for any peacetime year according to the physical production index which includes agricultural and nonagricultural production. Comparison with war years is difficult but apparently the output was close to the record reached in World War II. ( See appendix table A-16. ) Total agricultural output in was percent below and percent below Although the production of farm crops in was the fourth largest on record it was 4J/2 percent below due mainly to a large drop in the output of cotton. The drop in crop production was partly offset by an increase of percent in the output of livestock products Per capita food consumption in is likely to be about percent higher than last year Industrial production recovered early in from the drop and continued to increase throughout most of the year. For the year as a whole the industrial production index was about percent of the average. This represented an increase of percent above and more than percent above ( See chart and appendix table A-17. ) Gains in output occurred during in most industries. The output of durables at the end of the year was percent above that of a year earlier. Steel production was about million tons almost percent more than in and an all-time record. The automobile industry produced at a record rate during most of the year turning out million cars and trucks for the year as a whole. Production was hampered by work stoppages early in the year but reached a peak in June Production of such consumer durable goods as household appliances radios and television sets leveled off toward the end of the year after increasing sharply in earlier months As the defense program got under way in the second half industries related to the defense program such as machinery aircraft shipbuilding and railroad equipment increased their output Total production of nondurable goods for the year was about percent above the level. The output of nondurable goods increased throughout the first three quarters of the year reached a peak in the early part of the fourth quarter and declined very slightly during the rest of the year Mineral production was hampered in the early part of by the work stoppage in the coal mining industry but then moved up to a level above the highest prevailing rate during Bituminous coal stocks held by industrial consumers and retail dealers at the end of were estimated to be only tons below the postwar peak reached a year and a half ago CHART INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION Total industrial production rose throughout I960 and averaged percent above Gains occurred in most industries but were especially marked in industries manufacturing durable goods PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE * * \ / * NONDURABLE MANUFACTURES I ' I I i ' I I I i I I i i i i i I i i i I I I960 SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM Higher output was also registered by several important industries which are not included in the industrial production index. Electric power output showed a steady expansion in the last half of the year averaging about percent above for the year as a whole In physical terms construction reached an all-time peak during the third quarter of the year ; for the year as a whole it was percent over Production of services. Detailed figures are not available to show changes in the output of most services. There was an increase of percent in real ( constant prices ) personal expenditures for services from to suggesting a roughly similar change in the total output of services ( See appendix table A-10. ) PRICES WAGES AND PROFITS Prices Commodity prices as a whole moved upward throughout but the pace of the advance particularly in wholesale markets picked up sharply after the outbreak of the Korean hostilities at midyear. The prices of most commodities followed a rough pattern of moderate strength in the first half of followed by rapid increases in the second half which brought most indexes to all-time highs The general upsurge of prices in the second half of the year was not regular. It developed in a series of partially overlapping waves the first of which reached a crest and flattened out with the temporarily good news from Korea in September. Following the intervention of the Chinese in late November price increases accelerated again The speed and force with which industrial prices responded to the new international dangers were exceptional when compared with most previous inflations. There was a good deal of price-raising by industries in anticipation of the announced expansion of the defense program and of price control Wholesale prices. In December wholesale prices were percent above their level last June and percent higher than in December The all-commodity index exceeded the previous postwar peak for the first time in November Of the three major categories farm products scored the greatest over-all gain during the year but foods and industrial products did not lag very far behind and all three groups recorded price increases of over percent during the second half of the year. The timing of their movements differed. ( See chart on page and table ) The percent rise in wholesale prices during the first six months of the year was mainly the result of increases in farm and food prices. Industrial prices rose percent during the period in a slow but steady gain which reflected the major recovery of the domestic economy Immediately after the Korean outbreak the monthly rate of increase in wholesale industrial prices which had averaged less than one-half percent during the first half-year increased almost five-fold. The rate of increase averaged more than percent per month during the third quarter and much less during October and November. Following the China attack the rate of increase immediately accelerated The swiftness of the response of manufacturers ' and other industrial pricing to the Korean situation exceeded what might have been expected from past experience. It was not confined to a few industries. By mid-October at the end of the " first wave " the prices of over percent of the industrial commodities in the BLS weekly wholesale price index had increased ; percent had risen percent or more and percent were up percent or more over their pre-Korean levels. These increases in a .great many cases were not forced by cost increases already incurred. In part they were a reflection of the enormous wave of consumer buying and of business orders in the third quarter. And in considerable measure no doubt they represented efforts to jockey into a favorable position in the event a price freeze were ordered The rise in industrial prices during the second half of while notable for its generality was by no means uniform among industrial groups Textiles recording the largest increase rose percent ; chemicals and CHART WHOLESALE PRICES OF INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTS Industrial prices which were comparatively stable in the 1st half of I960 rose with exceptional vigor in response to the Korean outbreak All major groups advanced substantially and most groups reached new postwar highs PERCENT OF AVERAGE I PERCENT OF AVERAGE PRODUCTS * * TEXTILE PRODUCTS LJL J F M A M J J A S O N Q J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J J A S O N D * ALL COMMODITIES OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND fOODS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR allied products percent ; and metal and metal products percent Prices of building materials reached a peak in September receded in October and November because of a sharp drop in some lumber prices and then moved to an all-time high in December. ( See chart ) The inflation was marked moreover by the violent gyrations in the generally upward course of prices of imported raw materials directly demanded for defense production. Tin natural rubber and wool were the notable instances. Such prices were particularly sensitive to the military news from Korea. In the case of rubber the institution of centralized purchasing late in December resulted in a substantial drop in prices For a few weeks immediately after the Korean outbreak there was a precipitous upshoot in wholesale farm and food prices. Thereafter farm prices moved unevenly before beginning to rise again in late October and wholesale foods roughly paralleled their course. Livestock and meats were the principal moderating factors in the agricultural sector reaching their post-Korean highs in the last week of August and thereafter entering a seasonal decline as hog prices dropped sharply. By late November prices of these products began to rise again. Other farm prices were much more buoyant during the last four months of the year with cotton as a result of a short supply and the sudden expansion in domestic and export demand reaching all-time highs. Currently beef cattle veal calves lambs rice wool cotton and cottonseed are the major farm commodities selling at prices above the minimum permissible ceilings provided for in the Defense Production Act. ( Further details on wholesale prices may be found in appendix table A-24. Prices received and paid by farmers are shown in appendix table A-25. ) TABLE Changes in wholesale prices Percentage change Commodity group December to June __ Hides and leather products Textile products Fuel and lighting materials _ __ Metals and metal products Building materials Chemicals and allied products __ _ Housefurnishing goods M iscellaneous _ _ _ _ _ __ November used Source : Department of Labor. ( See appendix table A-24. ) All commodities Farm products _ Foods Other than farm products and foods Special groups : R a w materials Semimanufactured articles Manufactured products June December Pre-Korean to Decem- to De- peak to Deber cember cember i i i i ! +.l '+.2 Consumers ' prices. The consumers ' price index by November was percent over December and percent above the June level It reached a record high in October and continued to climb in the last two months of the year. Preliminary indications are that the index rose sharply in December. ( See appendix table A-23. ) A sharp rise in retail food prices after April accounted for much of the over-all increase in consumers ' prices in the first half-year and continued to lead the index upward in July. Thereafter however because of a seasonal decline in fresh vegetable prices and more importantly because of some weakening of meat prices the food component of the index leveled off for several months. The other components particularly apparel and housefurnishings supplied the principal upward force. Fuel and utility costs also rose substantially and rents continued to edge higher. ( See chart and table ) However in the second half of November food prices began to move up again sharply and by December were percent above the November level and percent above the pre-Korean level. Particularly spectacular was the rise in egg prices which advanced percent over the June level accounting for more than half of the rise in retail food prices. Fats and oils beverages and dairy products also scored substantial gains. While complete data for December are not yet available it should be noted that the estimated increase in retail food prices of percent between November and December will alone raise the consumers ' price index for December by about percent above November. Since other retail prices have undoubtedly also advanced the total increase in consumers ' prices in December will be substantially above percent. This indicates a rise of over percent in consumers ' prices during and of over 4J ^ percent during the second half of TABLE Changes in consumers ' prices Percentage change r December June December Pre-Korean peak to to to * to Novem- November November ber June Item All items Food Apparel Rent Fuel electricity and refrigeration Housefurnishings Miscellaneous _ __ .-._,_ i i a Incomplete data for December indicate a substantial further rise in that month December used Source : Department of Labor. ( See appendix table A-23. ) Wages Wages and salaries which had remained relatively steady throughout rose continuously in as wage rate increases longer weekly hours CHART CONSUMERS ' PRICES Consumers ' prices reached new high levels in I960. A sharp increase in food prices began in the 2nd quarter of the year but the rise was not steady. Most other components were stable in the 1st half of the year but advanced steadily and rapidly in the 2nd half PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE ALL ITEMS ^ I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I ( I960 PERCENTAGE CHANGES DECREASE INCREASE DECEMBER ( TO JUNE ALL ITEMS-17 JUNE TO NOVEMBER FOOD APPAREL RENT A L S O INCLUDES HOUSEFURNISHINGS FUEL ELECTRICITY REFRIGERATION AND MISCELLANEOUS GOODS AND SERVICES NOT SHOWN ON THIS CHART /PERCENTAGE CHANGE TO DECEMBER SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR and increased employment were reflected in workers ' incomes. In the fourth quarter of aggregate wages and salaries and other labor income ( see appendix table A-5 ) were at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars. By the fourth quarter of they had risen by over billion to a new high of billion. About half of the increase during the year may be attributed to increased employment. The other half may be attributed to increased hours higher wage rates and increases in other labor income In November average hourly earnings in all manufacturing industries were $ By November they had risen about cents to a new high of $ The increase has been especially pronounced since August. In the durable goods manufacturing segment there was an increase of about cents between November and November compared with an increase of about rents in nondurable goods manufacturing Average weekly earnings showed an even sharper increase due largely to the increase in the length of the work week in many industries with consequent overtime pay. Such earnings in all manufacturing were $ in November and by November they had risen to $ The increase in durable goods manufacturing was sharper than in nondurable goods ; average weekly earnings in durable manufacturing increased by about $ during the period while those in nondurable manufacturing increased by half this amount. Real weekly earnings in all manufacturing measured by changes in the consumers ' price index rose by almost percent between November and November Average weekly hours in all manufacturing increased from hours in November to hours in November a gain of hours The upward trend was markedly greater in durable goods manufacturing where the rise was hours to hours a week than in nondurable goods manufacturing where the rise was hour to hours a week. ( Statistics on wages hours of work and earnings are shown in appendix tables A-13,A-14,andA-15. ) Wage negotiations. The pattern of wage negotiations and contract settlements during divided into two distinct parts. During the first half of the year contract settlements were generally moderate by postwar standards with emphasis on supplementary benefits. After September a landslide movement developed for sizable wage increases accompanied in some instances by fringe benefits During the first half of the year contract settlements with general wage advances were made most frequently in nonmanufacturing industries particularly in construction. The most important settlement was the renewal of the General Motors contract with a provision for a five-year term with cost-of-living adjustments " productivity " increases of cents each year throughout the life of the contract and a pension plan and increased social insurance benefits After the Korean development pressures built up for wage increases as the labor market tightened the cost of living began to increase and profits reached new highs. Late in August and in September a movement for rapid and sizable wage increases developed in the mass production industries led by a round of wage increases in the automobile industry. Some of the wage increases were based in part on cost-of-living adjustments within the terms of existing contracts. General Motors production workers for example received a cents cost-of-living adjustment at the beginning of September in consequence of the rise in the consumers ' price index between April and July and another increase of cents in December. In August Chrysler employees were granted an increase of cents an hour without the formality of a wage reopening and without a change in the terms of the three and a half month old contract. However the contract was changed in December to include the General Motors wage arrangement bringing an additional increase of one cent. On September Ford and the UAW-GIO set aside a contract four months before a permissive reopening date to negotiate a new agreement with wage provisions similar to the General Motors arrangement and with an immediate cost-of-living increase of eight cents an hour which was later raised to cents. Other automobile companies quickly fell into line The wage-increase movement spread rapidly during the last four months of accelerated by the continued rise in the consumers ' price index and by expectations of wage and price controls. Most increases were granted in manufacturing industries. Through formal or voluntary wage reopenings adjustments became widespread in meat packing textiles apparel petroleum rubber glass and the major metalworking industries ( including basic steel aluminum aircraft electrical machinery and agricultural implements ) A substantial number of workers in nonmanufacturing industries ( particularly maritime telephone and the railroad industries ) also received wage increases. In addition a large number of unorganized clerical and production workers have received wage increases since midyear Even when all of these groups are included it is probable that somewhat less than half of the workers in private nonagricultural employment have participated in the wage adjustments which have been made since the Korean outbreak During the past few months second adjustments were common which supplemented increases negotiated earlier in the year. Many of these second adjustments were prompted by a desire to revise agreements which were concluded before the Korean outbreak. In many cases wage increases were granted by voluntary action on the part of employers either by consenting to discuss wage matters with union representatives prior to formal wage reopening dates or by offering increases prior to formal negotiations. This willingness of many employers to consider wage increases made it possible for so many organized workers to receive increases within such a short period of time During two devices to cover future adjustments under long-term contracts came into prominence : the first cost-of-living escalator clauses which tie wage rates or cost-of-living allowances to changes in the BLS Consumers ' Price Index ; the second stipulations regarding adjustments to be made in or later without reference to price developments A large number of workers are covered by contracts which provide one or both arrangements. According to BLS estimates about ll/<2. million organized workers are now covered by cost-of-living escalator clauses Close to the same number but not always the same workers have been promised a specified increase or increases in or later. The combination of the two devices commonly identified as the General Motors formula appears in many contracts As a result of these developments wage increases in the second half of have contributed materially to the underlying inflationary situation In many instances increases in wage rates have been followed by price increases. In other instances price increases have encouraged demands for wage increases. Between the second and fourth quarters of the total increase in aggregate wages and salaries which resulted from more employment longer hours higher wage rates and other increases in labor income amounted to almost billion dollars Profits The year witnessed the largest total profits in American business history reflecting record levels of sales and prices. ( See chart on page ) For as a whole corporate book profits before taxes ( not adjusted for inventory valuation ) were billion dollars compared with billion dollars in and billion in the previous record year. ( See appendix tables A-32 through A-36 for statistics on profits. ) The recovery movement in the first half of had by the second quarter already brought profits to new record levels and with the tremendous expansion in business during the second half of the year profits rose to even higher levels. By the fourth quarter corporate book profits were at an estimated annual rate of billion dollars before taxes compared with an annual rate of billion in the fourth quarter of a rise of almost percent. Prior to the previous peak was reached in the third quarter of with corporate book profits at an annual rate of billion dollars Corporate book profits after taxes also reached new highs. ( The tax liabilities reflect the higher income taxes already passed including the effects of excess profits taxes. ) In the fourth quarter of corporate book profits after taxes ( not adjusted for inventory valuation ) were running at an estimated annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion dollars in the fourth quarter of and with the previous peak of billion in the third quarter of Corporate book profits after taxes in were billion dollars compared with billion in and billion in The profits after taxes represented about percent on sales and over 9J4 percent on net worth compared with under 4J/2 percent and percent respectively in Net income of nonagricultural unincorporated businesses and the professions ( not adjusted for inventory valuation ) also made new records. In the fourth quarter of it was running at an annual rate of billion dollars before taxes compared with billion in the fourth quarter of a rise of percent. For as a whole net income of unincorporated business amounted to billion dollars compared with billion in ( See appendix table A-4. ) Net income of farm proprietors in the second half of increased in response to higher farm prices. By the fourth quarter of net income of farm proprietors before taxes was at an annual rate of billion dollars compared with billion dollars in the fourth quarter of However the fourth quarter level was about percent below the postwar peak annual rate of billion in the second quarter of For as a whole net income of farm proprietors was billion slightly below the level Although profits rose generally throughout the rate of rise differed sharply among different industries. During the first half of and particularly in the second quarter of the increase in profits was most marked for manufacturers of durable goods. This reflected the relatively greater level of output and demand for these industries. During the second half of the year the rise in profits was most marked for producers of nondurable goods where prices rose relatively more than for the durable goods producers. But during the third quarter profits before taxes were higher than in the two previous 'quarters for every major manufacturing group In addition the sharp rise in over-all profits was reflected in a striking improvement in the position of small firms. In the third quarter of the smallest manufacturing corporations those with assets of less than dollars showed the largest relative improvement in their profits after taxes compared with the corresponding quarter of However on a before tax basis the return on net worth and on sales for these firms continued to be below that of the larger corporations. Particularly in the case of return on sales the smallest firms in the third quarter earned percent on sales before taxes compared with percent for those firms with assets of million dollars and over. On an after tax basis the smallest firms in the third quarter had a return on net worth somewhat above that for the larger firms while their return on sales continued to be substantially below that for the larger firms TABLE Corporate profits as a source of funds after allowing for changes in costs of replacing inventories [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Net funds available Changes in from corpocosts of rate profits replacing after allowing for changes invenAfter taxes in costs of tories i replacing inventories Corporate profits Period Before taxes First half Second half Inventory valuation adjustment with sign reversed Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers. Profits after taxes include an estimate for the effects of higher income taxes including excess profits taxes Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) In appraising the availability of profits as a source of funds account must be taken of the effects of changes in prices particularly in the replacement costs of inventories. ( See table ) In periods of rapid price increase such as more funds are needed to finance inventories even without any increase in the physical volume of stocks held. Such requirements reduce the availability of profits for such purposes as expansion of plant dividends the financing of accounts receivable and the building-up of liquid assets The net availability of funds from corporate profits after taxes after allowing for the change in costs of replacing inventories was billion dollars in about percent below the previous peak. There was also a large use of bank credit as well as considerable flotation of security issues to finance the tremendous expansion in business activity. ( See appendix table A-37 and " Corporate Finance33 in the section on Business Investment and Finance. ) MONEY AND CREDIT The expansion of outstanding public and private credit during reflected the speed dimension and directions of growth in the nation 's output. The movement was almost entirely in business consumer and State and local government indebtedness. Several types of private credit increased with extraordinary rapidity especially during the third quarter and many reached new highs during the year. On the other hand the gross Federal debt declined slightly The housing boom stepped up the growth in the outstanding volume of residential mortgage debt from an annual rate of percent in to CHART CONSUMER CREDIT After expanding at a record rate during the summer of I960 instalment credit outstanding leveled off in the 4th quarter as the anticipatory buying of durable goods slackened and credit restrictions took hold. Total consumer credit continued to rise during the latter part of the year because of seasonal additions to charge accounts BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS J F END OF MONTH _ ! / PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) percent in Consumer instalment credit which helped implement the strong demand for automobiles and other durables increased billion or percent during the first nine months of compared to billion or percent during the same period of During the third quarter of when buying of consumer durables reached its peak the instalment debt of consumers expanded almost as much as during the first three quarters of ( See chart and appendix table A-26. ) Total loans and investments of commercial banks expanded not much more in than in but there were marked differences in the movements of the various components. In the rise of billion dollars or percent in the earning assets of banks was mainly in holdings of Government securities and other investments which increased billion or percent while the increase in loans was but billion or percent In contrast the increase of billion or about percent in loans and investments of all banks during resulted entirely from new loans chiefly to business. Loans to all classes of borrowers jumped nearly billion dollars or percent while investments in Government and private securi- ties dropped about billion or percent. ( See appendix table A-27. ) Business loans of commercial banks after a somewhat less than usual seasonal decline in the first half of the year moved upward more than seasonally during the second half. These loans attained the record high of more than billion in December about percent above the December total. During business loans outstanding had dropped nearly percent Total bank deposits and currency held by individuals business firms and State and local governments increased by about billion dollars in the largest expansion since to reach an all-time high of more than billion at the end of the year. Though some factors such as gold exports and a net drop in the ownership of Government securities by the banking system as a whole tended to pull the volume of deposits and currency down these factors were far more than counterbalanced by the growth of loans and by bank investments in State and private securities. ( See table ) Adjusted demand deposits which had increased only slightly between December and December declined billion during the first half of partly because of seasonal tax payments. During the latter half of the year demand deposits climbed more than billion dollars principally because of loan expansion to about billion which was more than percent above the December level During the first half of time deposits increased billion but they were drawn down billion in the second half. The net increase in time deposits in was billion compared with billion in ( See appendix table A-28. ) TABLE Factors changing the volume of deposits and currency [ Billions of dollars ] Changes in volume Factors Loans of commercial and mutual savings banks _ Securities of U. S. Government held by banking system Securities of State and local governments held by commercial and mutual savings banks _ _ Treasury deposits * Monetary gold stock Other factors net Net change in deposits and currency '__ total Total First half Second Total half First half Second half * Signs preceding figures in columns indicate change from the previous period. An increase is denoted by a positive figure and a decrease by a negative figure for all factors except Treasury deposits where the reverse is true Estimates based on incomplete data ; second half by Council of Economic Advisers s Includes commercial banks mutual savings banks and Federal Reserve banks See footnote above See appendix table A-28 for aggregate money supply and its components NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) During the first half of credit expansion supported consumer and business demand to a degree that was not generally excessive for a recovery period though it contributed to higher prices for some commodities. After the Korean outbreak with the accelerated growth of business and consumer credit heavy liquidation of accumulated savings and rising personal income private demand surged to an inflationary level. In the second half of the growth of credit was subjected to several restraints. Federal and State bank supervisory authorities pressed banks to restrict their loans and investments. In August the Federal Reserve System raised rediscount rates from \ l/z to % percent and at the same time modified its program of open market operations. The purpose of the increase in discount rates was to make borrowing additional reserves more costly for member banks The objective of the new open market policy without which the discount rate rise would have little effect was to limit sales of Government securities by banks and others and thus restrict creation of new bank reserves which could be used as a basis for further credit expansion. At the end of December the Federal Reserve Board announced increases effective in January and February in the cash reserves required of member banks Though interest rates in general rose only slightly during the first half of the policy adopted by the Federal Reserve System in August brought sharp increases in short-term rates. The rate on Treasury bills which rose from percent at the beginning of the year to percent at the end of July reached percent by the end of December. The yield on month Government issues averaged percent in the fourth quarter of compared to percent in the fourth quarter of Rates on short-term open market loans to private borrowers moved with the rates on Government obligations of like maturity. ( See appendix table A-31. ) Selective controls on consumer and real estate credit were also imposed In September the Federal Reserve Board applied regulations to consumer instalment credit which required minimum downpayments and set maximum maturities on instalment loans for the purchase of automobiles and other durables. In October terms were substantially tightened. As a result of the regulation and the subsidence of late summer buying which began before the regulation was put into effect total instalment credit increased less than percent during the fourth quarter of compared to percent during the same period of Action to restrict residential construction was first taken on July when terms were tightened on Government insured or guaranteed real estate loans. In October under authority granted by the Defense Production Act a more comprehensive regulation was put into effect. Minimum downpayments and maximum loan maturity periods were prescribed for new conventionally financed one- and two-family houses and the same terms with some preference for veterans were applied to new and existing houses insured by the Federal Housing Administration and the Veterans Administration. On all types of housing the severity of the terms increased progressively with the price of the house. In general the terms required by the October regulations were substantially more stringent than typical terms charged by lenders previously. The actions taken to tighten housing credit terms have contributed to a large drop in the volume of applications for Government insured or guaranteed loans At the present time multi-family structures are being brought under a credit regulation. But because of the large construction backlog not affected by the new regulations it will be a number of months before the regulations can result in substantial decline in housing production THE FLOW OF GOODS AND PURCHASING POWER Personal income consumption expenditures and saving Personal income. Personal income attained an annual rate of billion dollars seasonally adjusted in the fourth quarter of This was percent higher than during the same period of and more than percent higher than the second quarter of The rise was most impressive between the second and third quarters when increases in economic activity and prices pushed the total up from to billion dollars ( annual rate ) despite a billion decline in transfer payments. From the third to the fourth quarter there was a further rise of about 85/2 billion dollars in total personal income. ( See chart ) Wage and salary receipts and other labor income rose rapidly in the second half of attaining a peak level of billion dollars in the fourth quarter or more than billion dollars above a year earlier. A gain of billion dollars between the second and third quarters resulted for the most part from longer hours and rising employment. A further gain of billion dollars from the third to the fourth quarter was due largely to rising wage rates Farm income which had dipped to a postwar low in the second quarter of gained over billion dollars ( annual rate ) between the second and fourth quarters rising to the level of billion dollars. Rising farm prices were largely responsible for the increase. However while all of the other major components of income were at higher levels in the fourth quarter of than in farm income was only percent of its level Business and professional income advanced billion dollars between the second and third quarters of to a peak of billion dollars ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) Profits in retail trade showed the greatest gain owing to the greatly increased volume of consumer purchases. In the fourth quarter there was some decline. Dividends increased substantially in the second half of this year reflecting a billion dollar increase in corporate earnings The volume of Government transfer payments fell from an annual rate of billion in the first half of the year to the more normal level of CHART PERSONAL INCOME Personal income increased by billion dollars between and I960 with all categories except farm proprietors ' income participating in the rise. The increase was most marked in the 2nd half. Total income reached a record high of over billion dollars ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) in the final quarter BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES. SEASONALLY ADJUSTED IOO if OTHER ? J PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS INCOME CONSISTS OF RENTS INTEREST AND DIVIDENDS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) billion in the third quarter as payment of the National Service Life Insurance dividend was completed. In the fourth quarter the statutory increase about percent in the average benefit paid recipients of Old-Age and Survivors ' Insurance was offset by declines in benefits to the unemployed and other payments Personal tax payments rose by billion dollars ( annual rate ) from the first to the second half due partly to rising incomes and partly to the increase in withholding rates on October The rise in tax liabilities was considerably greater than the increase in collections and there will be a sharp step-up in collections in the first half of this year Owing to rising tax payments the increase in personal income after taxes from the first to the second half was only billion dollars compared to an increase of billion in total personal income. A considerable fraction of the rise in income was offset by a rise in prices of consumer goods but when disposable income is adjusted for changes in prices there was a gain from the first to the second half of about percent in purchasing power This places the second half about percent above the level. On a per capita basis real income in the second half of this year ( annual rate ) was about percent above ( Appendix tables A-5 through A-8 give further detail on personal income. ) Personal consumption expenditures. The annual rate of consumption expenditures almost reached the billion dollar mark in the third quarter of and receded only slightly in the fourth quarter as purchases of durables and nondurables reached heights surpassing those of any previous period. A spurt in consumer purchasing took place between the second and third quarters when news of the crisis in Korea transformed a moderate upward trend into a buying spree for durable and semi-durable commodities The quarterly rise of billion dollars ( annual rate ) or percent was the greatest on record both in dollar terms and percentage-wise. In when similarly large increases were recorded a larger part of the rise was the result of higher prices. ( See appendix table A-2. ) Over one-half of the increase from the second to the third quarter was accounted for by purchases of durable goods. Even in the first half of the year durable goods purchases had accounted for a higher percent of disposable income than in any previous period. This may be attributed at least partially to the distribution of the veterans ' insurance dividend In the third quarter durable goods expenditures rose to percent of income or an annual rate of billion dollars. ( See chart ) The fourth quarter rate of total consumption expenditures was somewhat below that in the third quarter. Increases in the nondurable goods category and in services partially compensated for a moderate decline in purchases of durable goods The first buying wave for durable and household goods prospectively in short supply began in July and had apparently subsided somewhat before the Regulation W credit restrictions were imposed on September Con- CHART CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES FOR DURABLE GOODS Expenditures for durable goods in the last half of I960 were billion dollars ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) above the 1st half of the year and billion above the last half of BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS EXPENDITURES FOR DURABLE GOODS ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED I I960 The proportion of disposable income spent for durable goods rose to over percent an all-time high in the 3rd quarter of EXPENDITURES FOR DURABLE GOODS AS PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE INCOME I I ^ PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL. OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) I I trols were tightened on October to restrict demand further. Nevertheless durable goods purchases in the fourth quarter were still in excess of any previous period except the immediately preceding quarter The general rises in the prices of consumer goods in the second half of were probably sufficient to account for about half of the increase in dollar volume limiting the increase in the physical volume of consumption to about ^ percent between the first and second half of the year Personal saving. The volume of personal saving dropped from an annual rate of billion dollars in the second quarter to billion dollars in the third quarter during the post-Korean wave of consumer spending ( See appendix table A-7. ) Saving in the first half of the year in which personal income was augmented by the National Service Life Insurance dividend had averaged percent of disposable income a fairly high rate for peacetime. In the third quarter consumer instalment credit mounted rapidly savings accounts were drawn down and redemptions of Series E bonds ran considerably in excess of sales. Unspent portions of the NSLI dividend were in many cases added to spending. As a result savings dropped to percent of income in the third quarter. ( See chart ) However in the final quarter of the year despite a rise in tax collections saving rose to a rate of percent of income The distribution of income expenditure and saving. There was an increase of million spending units receiving money incomes of less than S2,000 from to despite the fact that total personal income declined only about /2 percent. Higher unemployment a substantial drop in farm income and greater frequency of farm and business losses were mainly accountable for the increase in the number of spending units with very low incomes. While unemployment averaged only ^ percent of the labor force in three out of every ten employees in the major occupational groupings were unemployed one month or more during the year In expanded economic activity benefited many lower-income families. However many other families at the lower end of the income scale particularly fixed income recipients do not benefit from a rise in economic activity while they do suffer from concomitant price rises. According to the Survey of Consumer Finances sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System pensions allowances annuities or contributions are the chief source of income for about one-fifth of all units having annual money incomes of less than $ In October a long-recommended step was taken to raise the income of one large group of fixed income receivers the recipients of benefits from old-age and survivors ' insurance. The average benefit for aged couples was raised from $ to about $ per month and the eligibility requirements were relaxed In as in previous years the expenditures of the two-fifths of the population with lowest incomes probably exceeded their incomes. In as shown in table the lowest one-fifth of the nation 's spending units those with incomes below $ dissaved an amount equal to over one-half of CHART PERSONAL INCOME SPENDING .AND SAVING Personal consumption expenditures declined somewhat in the 4th quarter of I960 after reaching a peak of over billion dollars ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) in the 3rd quarter. Disposable income continued to rise BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DISPOSABLE PERSONAL INCOME ( PERSONAL INCOME LESS TAXES ) PERSONAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURES I I * I O The rate of saving dropped sharply immediately after the Korean outbreak but increased again in the 4th quarter PERSONAL NET SAVING AS PERCENT OF DISPOSABLE INCOME I PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS / SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) n 4V their income. Only the top two-fifths those with incomes in excess of $ saved an appreciable amount The dissaving in the lowest income quintile is attributable to only about percent of the spending units in the quintile ; about percent of the units just " make ends meet " and an additional percent have positive savings. A high proportion of the dissaving in the lowest income brackets is done by a relatively few units with low or negative incomes but large assets. The exceptionally heavy dissaving on the part of lower income groups in to some extent reflects the fact that many farmers and businessmen suffered income declines during the year which brought them into income brackets below their accustomed level The acquisition of durable goods on a wide scale in the postwar period has been the major cause of dissaving by many families. In percent of families with negative saving also purchased consumer durables which is considered a consumption expenditure. The volume of consumer debt has risen consistently while many families have reduced their holdings of liquid assets in the postwar period. The median size of liquid asset holdings ( Government bonds bank deposits and saving and loan shares ) per family has declined each year since and there has been an increase in the number of units with no assets. Owing to the fact that the number of spending units has been increasing total liquid asset holdings have grown somewhat. According to the most recent Survey of Consumer Finances the median liquid asset holding in early was about $ ( Statistics on the distribution of income and saving may be found in appendix B. ) TABLE Proportion of income spent or saved by income groups Percent of income of each fifth used for Spending units ranked by size of annual money income Lowest fifth Second fifth Third fifth Fourth fifth Highest fifth All spending units __ Income range Under $ $ $ $ $ ; 500andover All uses Federal Selected income durable tax goods ex- liability penditures All other expenditures Net saving ( < ) Estimated personal tax liability on income apart from capital gains and losses. Other taxes are included in " all other expenditures. " Includes automobiles furniture radios television sets and household appliances The definition of saving used here is not identical with that of personal net saving as denned for the national income accounts. See Survey of Consumer Finances Part IV Appendix I Less than one-half of percent Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Business investment and finance During the second half of gross private domestic investment in construction equipment and additions to inventory rose to the all-time record level of nearly billion dollars at a seasonally adjusted annual rate. ( See table and chart ) This was an increase of percent from the first half of and percent from the second half of The corresponding increases in consumer expenditures were only and percent respectively TABLE Gross private domestic investmentl [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Total gross private domestic investment Period Construction and equipment Total Nonfarm residential construction Other private construction Producers ' durable equipment Increase in inventories First half Second half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First half Second half See appendix table A-3 for further details Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) In the fourth quarter of gross private domestic investment was running at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars or percent of the total national output of goods and services. This is the highest proportion yet on record The most dynamic major component of business investment in the latter half of was the purchase of producers ' durable equipment which rose abruptly to a record rate nearly percent higher ( after allowance for normal seasonal variation ) than that of the first half of and percent above the second half of At the end of the year equipment purchases were at or near all-time record levels and the inflow of new orders for machinery still exceeded deliveries Government restrictions imposed in the summer and fall curtailed some types of construction primarily housing although the momentum of previous starts kept house building at the year 's end above the level of a year earlier. Nonresidential building activity rose steadily through the year to reach a record level of outlays in the fourth quarter Inventory accumulation proceeded at a moderate rate during the first half of in contrast with the sharp liquidation that had prevailed through most of The sudden post-Korean upsurge of consumer and CHART BUSINESS INVESTMENT Private outlays for producers ' equipment housing and nonresidential construction all rose to record levels in I960. Inventory accumulation was only briefly interrupted by the post-Korean buying rush BILLIONS OF DOLLARS I PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS / SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) BILLIONS OF DOLLARS business demand temporarily depleted inventories but by the end of the third quarter inventories were growing again. During the fourth quarter there was a rapid accumulation of inventories as sales leveled off and production continued to rise Plant and equipment. A significant revival in business investment in productive facilities became evident during the second quarter of This played an important part in the general upsurge of production employment and income after the recession. By the second quarter the rate of outlays for producers ' construction and equipment was nearly back to peak levels and was rising rapidly. ( See appendix tables A-3 and A-19. ) The dollar value of new orders for machinery already exceeded that of any previous time since World War II and contracts for nonresidential building in terms of floor space were at a new high since late The stimulus of the expanding defense program in the second half of was thus superimposed on an already buoyant investment trend. As it became clear that for a considerable period existing capacity would be inadequate to meet demands and that the construction and equipping of facilities might become progressively more costly and difficult business hastened to step up its plans and commitments for investment. The major emphasis was on purchases of machinery and other equipment which rose from billion dollars ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) in the first quarter and billion in the second quarter to billion in the fourth Even after allowing for price increases this rate of private investment in equipment far exceeded the previous peak reached in New orders for machinery by August were being placed at more than double the rate of a year previous. Though ordering slackened off slightly after the initial post-Korea rush it continued through the rest of to run well ahead of the rate of deliveries. ( See chart on page ) The unfilled-orders backlogs of machinery producers which had touched a postwar low at the end of rose gradually in the first half of and very rapidly in the second half to levels not experienced since early Foremost in the investment boom of the latter half of the year were the manufacturing industries. Purchases of railroad and highway transport equipment also rose rapidly and the expansion of utilities continued at a rapid pace As the year ended business was planning to continue investment in plant and equipment at a high rate. Private and Government surveys of investment plans for made late in indicated a substantially larger total outlay in than in particularly in the industrial sector ( See appendix table A-19. ) With continued high earnings and readily available outside capital business seemed likely to continue spending on plant and equipment at very high rates subject to the influence of materials shortages and Government controls Nonfarm inventories. The resumption of inventory accumulation during the first half of was an important factor contributing to business recovery. By the second quarter of the year nonfarm inventories were being accumulated at an annual rate of billion dollars compared with a rate of liquidation of billion dollars a year in the fourth quarter of There was thus a net change of nearly billion dollars in terms of seasonally adjusted annual rates. ( See appendix tables A-3 A-20 and A-21 and chart ) Economic developments following the outbreak in Korea increased the desire of business to build up inventories but made it more difficult to do so Despite the sharp rise in output during the third quarter and the enormous increase in new orders consumer buying was so great that stocks fell off slightly. During the third quarter nonfarm inventories were being reduced at an annual rate of about a billion dollars This reduction was primarily in manufacturers ' stocks of finished goods The book value of finished-goods inventories held by manufacturers declined by more than percent during July and August. During the same interval there were increases of about the same percent in stocks of raw materials and goods in process. These increases were in part necessary to maintain the higher levels of output though the sharp rise in materials prices provided additional inducement to accumulate materials The book value of retailers5 inventories was higher at the end of the third quarter than at the beginning but the rise was not steady. ( See appendix tables A-20 and A-22. ) In July inventories declined ; in August the mounting tide of deliveries overtook the rate of consumer buying and inventories began to rise again. The increase was greater in nondurable than in durable goods lines In the last five months of the year with the leveling-off in consumer buying from the summer peak and the continued rise in output inventory accumulation was resumed in both trade and manufacturing. In the fourth quarter it reached a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars the highest since ( See appendix tables A-3 and A-20. ) Particularly noteworthy was the increase in nondurable goods inventories Corporate finance. In the use of capital funds by non-financial corporations was higher than in any previous year and almost billion dollars above Plant and equipment outlays which by the end of the year had reached the peak rate accounted for nearly half of this total. The other half was required for a sizable expansion of inventories and customer accounts and for a substantial addition to corporations ' liquid asset holdings. The shift from a 5-billion-dollar liquidation of inventory book values and accounts receivable in to an expansion of billion dollars in involved an 18-billion-dollar increase in the need for funds At the end of the year corporations ' total holdings of Government securities were about as large as at the end of World War II Corporations were able to finance more than half of their total requirements internally from retained earnings and depreciation allowances Despite record disbursements of dividends accounting for about percent CHART SOURCES AND USES OF CORPORATE FUNDS In total corporate expenditure on fixed and working capital was at a record level. More than half of the expenditure was financed from retained earnings and depreciation reserves BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SOURCES RETAINED EARNINGS DEPRECIATION RESERVES .t OTHER SOURCES ( i USES PLANT AND EQUIPMENT OUTLAYS CHANGE IN | i | iji ij ; H : ! H : ; : i : ! | ii ; i INVENTORIES OTHER USES -'PROFIT ESTIMATES FOR oso BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS ^ NEGATIVE ITEM IN RESULTED FROM DECLINE IN TRADE PAYABLES FEDERAL INCOME TAX LIABILITY AND BANK LOANS SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ESTIMATES BASED ON SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION AND OTHER FINANCIAL DATA ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) of earnings after taxes in compared with percent in and about percent in billion dollars of earnings were retained for investment an amount which was only slightly exceeded in Because of the increase in tax rates and sharply rising corporate profits corporation tax liabilities rose billion dollars External sources of funds provided about billion dollars the largest amount in any postwar year. Bank loans increased by about billion dollars and trade debt by about billion much larger expansions than occurred in This was in sharp contrast to when corporations were retiring both bank and trade debt. ( See chart and appendix table A-37. ) Total net new issues of securities in were about billion dollars smaller than in and nearly billion smaller than The volume of stock issues on the other hand was larger than in either of the two previous years due mainly to the more favorable market for floating new stock issues. Hdwever corporations were still not using the stock market as a major source of capital Construction. Total new construction in reached a record level of billion dollars compared with billion in the previous high This was an increase of percent. The pattern was one of expansion through most of with declining tendencies beginning to appear toward the end of the year. ( See appendix table A-18. ) In December total new construction was running at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars or percent above the level of a year earlier. Private construction was at an annual rate of billion dollars a rise of percent while public construction was at an annual rate of billion an increase of percent The trends of major categories were sharply different in Private new construction increased greatly through October thereafter declining slightly as a substantial drop in residential construction was not wholly compensated by large increases in industrial and commercial construction -Public construction fluctuated within a narrow range through August but then rose sharply in each succeeding month. Total construction increased steadily until December when it fell off slightly with the increase in public outlays more than offsetting the decrease in private outlays during the last few months More nonfarm housing units were started in than in any previous year. The total was over million more than percent higher than the slightly more than million started in the previous peak year But there was a sharp reversal of trend during the year. The peak of monthly starts was reached in May and a level of over starts was maintained through August. Thereafter in part under the impact of the credit restrictions on residential construction housing starts declined sharply and in the last three months of the year fell below the levels of the corresponding months in Beginning in the spring of private nonresidential construction climbed steadily. Increases in industrial and commercial construction accounted for much of the increase during the final months of the year New recreational construction tapered off following the National Production Authority 's October order designed to eliminate most types of such construction but this category represents only a very small fraction of total construction. Electric and gas utility construction totaled about the same in as in ; construction of railroad and telephone and telegraph facilities declined The largest increases in new public construction between and were for schools highways and for military and naval construction which CHART EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES A rapid growth in imports practically eliminated the U. S. export surplus in the 2nd half of BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES- * ' IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES- ^ -/ INCLUDES INCOME ON INVESTMENTS & PRELIMINARY ESTIMATES Q,Y COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ( EXCEPT AS NOTED ) had begun to reflect the impact of the defense program by the end of the year. A major step-up in military and naval construction will appear during this year During the Department of Commerce composite index of construction costs rose about percent. The increase in the wholesale price of lumber was about percent. In the hourly earnings of construction workers it was about percent The seasonally adjusted composite index of the production of building materials increased by about percent during For the year as a whole nearly all such materials were produced in record volume International transactions Although the expansion of domestic economic activity and the rise of prices in the second half of were the result of international developments these developments made their influence felt on the economy mainly by stimulating domestic demand rather than by increasing foreign purchases here or by reducing the supplies available to us from abroad. In fact saw a reduction in the net demands upon American output arising from international transactions In early exports of goods and services were at the lowest levels since termination of the Lend-Lease program after World War II Although a rise began late in the summer of such exports were nearly billion dollars less for the year as a whole than they were in Imports of goods and services on the other hand which had been rising steadily since the summer of rose even more sharply in the second half of than in the first half and for the year as a whole were billion dollars higher than in As a result of these changes the surplus of United States exports over imports of goods and services which had amounted to billion dollars in fell to an annual rate of billion in the first half of and to an estimated annual rate of million dollars in the second half of the year. ( See table and chart ; also appendix tables A-38 through A-47 for detailed statistics on international transactions. ) TABLE United States exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of dollars ] Exports of goods and services l Period 1948..._ Annual rates : 194< ) First half Second half ( ) First half Second half Imports of goods and services l Surplus of exports of goods and services Includes income on investments Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers ; based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) There were substantial increases both in the quantity of goods brought into the country and in their prices. Although merchandise imports had been rising steadily throughout the first half of the year as domestic business activity rose they were given a sharp impetus following the aggression in Korea by the decision of the United States and its North Atlantic Treaty partners to strengthen their defenses. These developments gave rise to large purchases abroad to meet the needs of current and expected increases in production and for stockpiling purposes. Imported raw materials such as rubber wool tin wood pulp burlap and other products rose sharply in price in some cases to twice their June levels. These price rises have not yet been fully reflected in the dollar value of our imports. ( See chart ) Foreign countries were able to get along with a smaller volume of net goods and services from the United States in large part because of continued increases in Western European production. For Western Europe itself this made possible a reduction in its total imports of certain major products and an expansion of exports without impairment of domestic consumption or investment. For countries in other areas it made possible a shift of imports from the United States to Western European sources of supply The changes in our merchandise trade which brought it into virtual balance in the second half of the year greatly reduced the dollar difficulties of foreign countries which had characterized earlier postwar years. The expanded United States demand for foreign products has vastly increased foreign earnings in this country. Many of the Western European countries and Japan have been able not only to increase their direct sales to the United States but also to improve their competitive position in other areas because of the relative fall in their export prices resulting from devaluation the rise in our export prices and the tighter supply situation in the United States. South America the Far East and Africa were able to earn dollars on balance in their merchandise trade with the United States. Western Europe was able to cut its trade deficit with us drastically between the first and second halves of the year. Moreover the financial position of some Western European countries the United Kingdom in particular was greatly aided by the increase in dollar earnings of raw-material-producing countries whose monetary reserves they hold or in which they have investments In the first half of the United States export surplus was less than our foreign aid. In the second half of the export surplus fell still further below the volume of our aid although this aid itself was reduced during the course of the year. ( See appendix table A-38. ) Partly because our aid exceeded our export surplus but also partly because of a speculative outflow of capital in the third quarter of the year foreign countries in the aggregate were able to accelerate greatly the process of rebuilding their depleted gold and dollar reserves. The main increases were in the sterling area and Canada. Japan and a number of raw material exporting countries outside the sterling area chiefly in Latin America also made large relative gains or were able to pay off short-term debts. The rebuilding of these reserves proceeded during the second half of at an even more rapid rate than it had in the nine months between the widespread devaluations of foreign currencies and the middle of The rapidity of improvement in the financial position of the United Kingdom was so great that it was possible to suspend aid to it under the European Recovery Program The decision to increase the defensive strength of the Western World coming on top of a recovery of economic activity in the United States has created a new problem of inflationary pressures on a world-wide scale In many countries a considerable degree of internal financial stability had been achieved though often the stability was a precarious one. In the '58 CHART PRICES OF IMPORTS Prices of U.S. imports ( average unit value ) have risen percent since the currency devaluations of September and percent si'nce June when hostilities broke out in Korea PERCENT OF SEPTEMBER PERCENT OF SEPTEMBER I/ ALSO INCLUDES MANUFACTURED FOODSTUFFS AND FINISHED MANUFACTURES NOT SHOWN ON THIS CHART SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE second half of expanded defense needs were beginning to reduce supplies available for civilian use by absorbing manpower. materials and industrial facilities. At the same time actual and anticipated increases in defense expenditures were increasing effective money demand in countries accounting for the bulk of the world 's consumption. Thus inflationary pressures were again being activated throughout the world Government transactions Total cash payments of Federal State and local governments in the second half of the calendar year were running at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of almost billion dollars. This was about billion dollars lower than in the first half of the calendar year. Cash receipts were running at an annual rate of about billion dollars higher than in the first half of the year. The reduction in public payments changed a total cash deficit of more than billion dollars for the first half of into a surplus of around billion dollars for the second half. ( See chart and table ) TABLE Government cash receipts from and payments to the public [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Calendar year Calendar yearJ949 Receiptj>r payment Cash receipts : Federal. State and local First half Second half i _ _ Total surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) : Federal State and local __ Total cash receipts _ Cash payments : Federal State and local Total cash payments Total i i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See Appendix C The counter-inflationary impact of the surplus on the expansion in economic activity was lost in the effect of the large amounts of contracts placed both by Government and by consumers and business acting in anticipation of an enlarged defense program. The accelerated pace of economic activity after the outbreak of the Korean war was in fact largely due to the actual and anticipated increase in defense activities of the Government Government expenditures have not yet reflected much of the increase in these defense activities but a rapid increase in expenditures must be expected to occur during the course of Cash payments by the Federal Government. The decrease in Federal cash payments to the public between the first and the second half of the calendar year was due to the large National Service Life Insurance dividend paid out in the first half of the year. Excluding the NSLI dividend cash payments were running at an annual rate of about one billion dollars higher in the second half of the year than in the first half Significant declines took place in expenditures for the price support program in payments to veterans and international programs and in the net purchase by the Federal National Mortgage Association of government-insured and guaranteed mortgages. Increases occurred in social security payments particularly because of the increased benefits under the amended Social Security law Expenditures by the military services which declined in the first half of the calendar year increased by an annual rate of billion dollars in the second half of the year. But until the beginning of the fourth quarter they were running only about the level of the year CHART GOVERNMENT CASH RECEIPTS FROM AND PAYMENTS TO THE PUBLIC Federal cash payments to the public in the 1st half of including the National Service Life Insurance dividend exceeded receipts by billion dollars ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) In the 2nd half of the year receipts were 3v9 billion larger than payments. State and local governments had cash deficits in both periods FEDERAL BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ^ DEFICIT RECEIPTS SURPLUS ' PAYMENTS RECEIPTS I960 FIRST HALF PAYMENTS I960,SECOND HALF STATE AND LOCAL BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED DEFICIT RECEIPTS FIRST PAYMENTS RECEIPTS HALF CALENDAR SOURCE : SEE APPENDIX C PAYMENTS I960 SECOND HALF YEAR TABLE Federal cash payments to the public by junction [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Calendar year Calendar year Function Military services International security and foreign relations. __ Veterans ' services and benefits Social security welfare and health Agriculture and agricultural resources Interest Other Deductions from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Total Federal cash payments to the public Total i First half Second halfi Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See Appendix C A month by month comparison shows that the expenditures for defense began to rise appreciably only during the last quarter of the year. Expenditures by the military services were billion dollars in December compared with about billion dollars in June the last month before the Korean outbreak. The increase in expenditures does not however fully reflect the actual progress in military programs. During the five-month period from July through November obligations incurred by the Defense Department for military purposes exceeded comparable expenditures by about billion dollars. Procurement has an impact on the economy when contracts are placed as well as when payments are made. In the initial period work on contracts is financed largely by business funds and is only later reflected in Government expenditures. ( See tables and ) TABLE Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Calendar year Calendar year Classification of payment Direct cash payments for goods and services ; excluding military services : To individuals for services rendered To business and international institutions for goods and services Loans and transfer payments to individuals Loans investments subsidies and other transfers to business and agriculture. Loans and transfer payments to foreign countries and international institutions Military services cash payments for goods and services Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports __ __ Total i First half Second halfi Total Federal cash payments Estimates based on incomplete data Differs from the estimate of military service payments in table above by the exclusion of certain transfer items here included with loans and transfer payments to individuals NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See Appendix C Federal cash receipts. The increase in cash receipts from calendar year to calendar year and especially from the first to the second half of ( seasonally adjusted ) largely reflected the increase in economic activity. In addition the increase in rates of employment taxes that became effective January added to cash collections. Because of lags in collection the additional revenue resulting during the last few months of the year from the Revenue Act of was only a modeist amount collected through increased withholding tax rates. The collections of the corporate income tax reflected the lower profits of the recession year and collections from corporate income taxes will increase substantially this year reflecting both the high profits of and the increases in tax rates. ( See table ) TABLE Federal cash receipts from the public [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Source of cash receipts Total i Direct taxes on individuals Direct taxes on corporations _ _ Employment taxes __ Excises and customs Surplus property receipts _ Deposits by States unemployment insurance Veterans ' life insurance premiums _ Other Refunds of receipts First half Second halfi Total Federal cash receipts from the public 1i __ _ * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See Appendix O The Federal budget deficit the cash surplus and changes in the national debt. The foregoing analysis has been in terms of the consolidated cash statement of Federal cash payments and Federal receipts. While the consolidated cash statement is a preferable means of measuring the impact upon the economy of government transactions on the flow of funds and incomes it is also important to consider the conventional budget. ( See table ) Surpluses or deficits in the conventional budget decrease or increase the national debt held by the public and Government trust accounts. The conventional budget is the basis of the appropriations recommended by the President and voted by Congress In calendar the budget measured in conventional terms showed a deficit of million dollars. There was an excess of cash receipts from the public over cash payments to the public of about million dollars Though there was a deficit in the conventional budget the gross public debt dropped million dollars in calendar because of a surplus of trust and clearing account receipts and a drop in the Treasury 's general TABLE Federal receipts and expenditures : Budget totals and consolidated cash totals [ Billions of dollars annual rate ] Calendar year Calendar year Receipt or expenditure Total i First half Second hain Budget totals not adjusted for seasonal variation : Receipts ( net ) _ _ Expenditures _ Budget surplus ( { ) or deficit ( ) -K4 Consolidated cash totals : Not adjusted for seasonal variation : Cash receipts from the public Cash payments to the public Cash surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) Adjusted for seasonal variation : Cash receipts from the public Cash payments to the public Cash surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department and Bureau of the Budget fund. In the calendar year the public debt had increased billion dollars. ( See appendix tables A-29 and A-30. ) State and local transactions. State and local government expenditures after a very rapid rise in the immediate postwar years increased at a slower pace in and although demands for additional school highway and other facilities remained pressing. To a large extent this flattening of the trend was forced by a reversal of the favorable financial position in which most State and local governments emerged from World War II. ( See table above. ) The expansion of general business activity beginning in and accelerating sharply after the Korean invasion had a marked effect upon many types of State and local revenue. The sales tax an important revenue source in many States showed rapidly increasing yields. During the second half of calendar year State and local cash expenditures advanced moderately above the level of the previous year or of the first half of despite delay in some projects because of increasing costs of construction. Cash deficits of State and local governments for the second half of the calendar year are estimated at an annual rate of billion dollars somewhat smaller than the deficit of the preceding half-years Summary : The Nation 's Economic Budget In order to form a statistical picture of the total domestic economy it is necessary to bring together in a single statement the description of the flow of receipts and expenditures within the separate segments of the economy under the influence of the forces and events which have been discussed in this part of the Review with respect to each segment This comprehensive statement The Nation 's Economic Budget is set forth and treated in great detail in Appendix G. Being a double entry statement it must always be in balance and for every change in any item there must be compensating changes in one or more of the other items. It is presented in three divisions for the year for the first half of and for the second half of Sharp changes in economic currents have taken place between each of these periods and the Economic Budget shows how these changes have affected in quantitative terms the money flow within and among the principal sectors of the economy. It also indicates how the necessary balancing changes have actually occurred during the past year. ( See chart and table ) TABLE -The Nation 's Economic Budget calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] first half Economic group second half Excess Excess Excess of reof reof reEx- ceipts Ex- ceipts Exceipts ReReRe- pend- ( ) or pend- ( ) or ceipts pend- ( ) or ceipts itures expend- ceipts itures expenditures expenditures itures itures ( ) ( ) ( ) CONSUMERS Disposable income Consumption expenditures Personal net saving ( } ) BUSINESS Retained receipts _ Gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) INTERNATIONAL Cash loans abroad _ Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) GOVERNMENT Cash receipts from the public Cash payments to the public Cash surplus ( ) or deficit ADJUSTMENTS ( To arrive at gross national product ) For receipts For expenditures Difference between adjustments Total gross national product. Estimates based on incomplete data Includes receipts which do not arise from current production and hence are not a part of the national income : Transfers to individuals Government interest cash loans abroad and the difference between tax liabilities and cash receipts. Also includes statistical discrepancy Includes all cash payments which are not payments for goods and services and hence are not included in the gross national product NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See Appendix C for more detailed treatment of the Nation 's Economic Budget CHART THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET Business and consumer expenditures rose more than receipts from the 1st to the 2nd half of while the Government cash deficit gave way to a small surplus BILLIONS'OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES SEASONALLY ADJUSTED CONSUMERS I960 FIRST HALF Transfer f payments SECOND HALF BUSINESS I960 SECOND HALF INTERNATIONAL FIRST HALF I960 SECOND HALF GOVERNMENT FIRST HALF SECOND HALF EXCESS OF RECEIPTS ( ) FIRST HALF CONSUMERS BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENT SOURCE : SEE APPENDIX C EXPENDITURES ( ) SECOND HALF For the second half of as a whole gross national product at a seasonally adjusted annual rate which appears as the total figure in the Nation 's Economic Budget reached a record level of about billion dollars. This was nearly percent above the rate of billion dollars in the first half of the year. About half of this rise was due to price increases ; the growth in physical volume of output was less than percent The decision of the United States to undertake a large-scale preparedness program had its impact on the economy in largely through anticipations of businessmen and consumers. In terms of actual Government expenditures national defense and international programs rose only billion dollars ( at an annual rate ) in the second half of the year. Total Government payments even showed a decline while receipts rose The increase in activity and in inflationary pressure between the first and the second half of the year was thus primarily attributable to private spending. While all categories of consumer expenditures increased expenditures for durable goods which were already at unparalleled high rates rose percent compared with a rise of percent for nondurable goods and services. Expenditures for producers ' durable equipment advanced percent. Total private domestic investment reached a level of nearly billion dollars ( annual rate ) in the second half of the year an increase of nearly percent over the first half The rise in private incomes while impressive was less rapid than that in expenditures. The rate of personal net saving declined from an annual rate of billion dollars in the first half of to billion in the second half partly as a result of expanding consumer credit and cashing of Government bonds by many families. In the business sector investment expenditures exceeded retained receipts by billion dollars ( annual rate ) in the second half of compared with billion in the first half The Nation 's Economic Budget in summary, portrays an economy which is undergoing a boom in expenditures for both producers ' and consumers ' durable equipment stimulated by anticipation of a large and expanding defense program Appendix A Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power CONTENTS National income or expenditure : A-l. Gross national product or expenditure A-2. Personal consumption exDenditures A-3. Gross private domestic investment A National income by distributive shares A-5. Personal income A-6. Relation of national income and personal income A-7. Disposition of personal income A-8. Total and per capita disposable oersonal income in current and prices A-9. Gross national product or expenditure in prices A-10. Gross national product or expenditure in prices Employment and wages : A Labor force employment and unemployment A Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments A Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries A-l Average hourly earnings in selected industries A Average weekly hours in selected industries Production and business activity : A-l Physical production index of goods and selected services A-l Industrial production index A-18. New construction activity A-l Business expenditures for new plant and equipment A Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade A-21. Manufacturers ' inventories by stage of fabrication and as ratios to sales A-22. Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Prices : A-23. Consumers'price index A-24. Wholesale price index A-25. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Page Money banking and credit : page A-26. Consumer credit outstanding A Loans and investments of all commercial banks and weekly reporting member banks A-28. Deposits and currency A-29. Estimated ownership of Federal securities A-30. United States Government debt volume and kind of securities A-31. Bond yields and interest rates selected years Corporate profits and finance : A-32. Profits before and after tax all private corporations A-33. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations A-34. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity private manufacturing corporations by industry group A-35. Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group A-36. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size class A-37. Sources and uses of corporate funds International transactions : A-38. The international transactions of the United States A-39. United States exports and imports of goods and services by area and A United States Government grants other unilateral transfers and loans to foreign countries A United States merchandise export surplus by area quarterly average and A United States merchandise exports including reexports by area quarterly average and A-43. United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class quarterly average and A-44. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class quarterly average and A-45. United States general merchandise imports by area quarterly average and A United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and A Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and Summary : A-48. Changes in selected economic series since and and during Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power TABLE A-1. Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Gross national product Period Gross Personal Net foreign consumpprivate tion exdomestic investment penditures investment Government purchases of goods and services ' _ ._ _ _.- * Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half ___ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First half. _ Second half ' } * Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A-2. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Durable goods Nondurable goods Services Total exAutomopenditures Total biles Other Total Foodi Cloth- Other Total Hous- Other ing ings and parts Period _ < Annual rates seasonally adjusted _. First half Second half * First quarter _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter __ First half Second half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter * * Includes alcoholic beverages Includes shoes and standard clothing issued to military personnel Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A-3. Gross private domestic investment [ Billions of dollars ] Period Nonfarm producers ' Farm equipment and construction plant and equipment Total gross private domesConContic Total i Equip- struc- Total * Equip- strucment tion i ment tion investment Residential construction ( nonfarm ) " Net change in business inventories Other priNonvate farm conafter struc- Total revalu- Farm tion e ation adjustment ( ) ( ) Q.I _ Q ) ( ) o Annual rates seasonally adjusted : 1st half 2dhalf : 1st half 2dhalf : 1st quarter 2d quarter 3d quarter 4th quarter. _ : 1st quarter 2d quarter 3d quarter 4th quarter __ Items for and earlier years are not comparable with those for later years nor with figures shown in appendix table A-18 Total producers ' durable equipment less " farm machinery and equipment " and farmers ' purchases of " tractors " and " business motor vehicles. " These figures assume that farmers purchase and percent respectively of all tractors and motor vehicles used for productive purposes Industrial buildings public utilities gas- and oil-well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants and garages. Includes hotel construction prior to only Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus " farm machinery and equipment " and farmers ' purchases of " tractors " and " business motor vehicles. " ( See footnote ) Includes construction of hotels tourist cabins motor courts and dormitories since only Includes religious educational social and recreational hospital and institutional miscellaneous nonresidential and all other private Less than million dollars s Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A National income by distributive shares [ Billions of dollars ] Business and professional income and inventory valuation Inadjustment Total Comcome pennation- sation of al InIn- farm in- l of emcome ven- procome ployof tory prieees unin- valuTotal corpo- ation tors rated adenter- justprises ment Period Rental income of persons Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Net Corporate Total profits before tax In- interven- est tory valuation adjustment -.'l ( ) Annual rates seasonally adjusted 1949_First half Second half First half Second half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter. _ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter5 Fourth quarter _ ._ _. National income is the total net income earned in production by individuals and businesses. The concept of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income ( see appendix table A-5 ) and employer and employee contributions for social insurance ( see appendix table A-6 ) See appendix table A-32 for corporate tax liability ( Federal and State income and excess profits taxes ) and corporate profits after taxes Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; corporate profits and total national income for third quarter and all items for fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A-5. Personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Total personal income Period Salaries wages and other labor income * Proprietors ' and rental income Dividends and personal interest3 income Transfer payments Nonagricultural personal income ._ _ _ _ _ _ _ Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half _ _ First half 8_ Second half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter- Fourth quarter Differs from " compensation of employees " in appendix table A-4 in that it excludes employer and em ployee contributions to social insurance. Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income compensation tor injuries employer contributions to private pension and welfare funds pay of military reservists not on full-time active duty ( pay for full-time active duty included in military wages and salaries ) directors ' fees jury and witness fees compensation of piison inmates Government payments to enemy prisoners of war marriage fees to justices of the peace and merchant marine wai-risk life and injury claims fe See appendix table A-4 for major components ! r_ See appendix table A-32. for dividend payments * Nonagricultural income is personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net rents agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A-6. Relation of national income and personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Plus : Less : CorpoExcess rate of Nation- profits Contri- wage and in- butions acal income vento tory social cruals valu- insur- over disation ance burseadjustments ment Period Net Gov- interBusi- Equals : Perernest ness ment paid Divi- trans- sonal transincome by dends fer fer paypay- Governments ments ment 1929.' _ __ .__ ) ) ) ) ) ) Annual rates seasonally adjusted -First half Second half First half Second half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter Fourth quarter P ) ) ( ) ( ( ) ) ) Less than million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; corporate profits and total national income for third quarter and all items for fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers f NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding f Source : '-Departmentjof Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A Disposition oj personal income Personal income Period Less : Less : Equals : Equals : Personal Disposa- Personal Personal contax and ble net nontax personal sumption payments income expendi- saving tures Net saving as percent of disposable income Billions of dollars ._ i _ Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half __ First half Second half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _._ Fourth quarter ___ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. J Fourth quarter __ _ _ Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A Total and per capita disposable personal income in current and prices Total disposable personal income ( billions of dollars ) Current prices Period Per capita disposable income ( dollars ) Current prices prices prices l Population ( thousands ) _ _ _ _ _ Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half. Second half First half Second half Dollar estimates in current prices divided by the price index of personal consumption expenditures This price index was based on the Department of Commerce data shifted from base Estimated population of continental United States including armed forces overseas ; annual data as of July and semiannual data as of April and October Population of continental United States on April including armed forces overseas was according to the Census. Estimates made prior to the Census and used in this table put total population including armed forces overseas at on April which is ] higher than the official results of the Census. Intercensal estimates used here for through will be adjusted later to take care of this small difference Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Sources : Department of Commerce and Council of Economic Advisers TABLE A-9. Gross national product or expenditure in prices * [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Total gross naProtional New ducprodDur- Non- Servdurcon- ers ' uct Total able able ices Total struc- durgoods goods able tion equipment Period Net foreign Change inin vestbusi- ment Total Fed- State and ness eral local inventories Private gross national product _ _ 1937_ ._ _ Government purchases of goods and services Gross private domestic investment ( ) ( ) See " Survey of Current Business " January for explanation of conversion of estimates in terms of current prices to those in terms of prices Total gross national product less compensation of general government employees Estimates for are tentative based on published figures for first three quarters and forecast of fourth quarter Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE A-10. Gross national product or expenditure in prices 1940-50l [ Billions of dollars prices ] Personal consumption expenditures Total gross Peri- naod tional product Total Dur- Nondurable able goods goods Government purchases of goods and services Gross private domestic investment ProNew ducers Serv- Total condurices struc- able tion equipment KT A JNet foreign Change investin busi- ment ness Total inventories Fed- eral State and local 1940__ 1941__ 1942__ 1943__ 1944__ ( ) 1945__ 1946__ 1947__ _ 1949__ " These estimates represent a rough conversion of the Department of Commerce series in prices to prices. ( See appendix table A-9. ) This was done by major components using the implicit price indexes for Although it would have been preferable to redeflate the series by minor components this would not substantially change the results except possibly for the war years and for the series on changes in business inventories Less than million dollars a Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Council of Economic Advisers TABLE A Labor force employment and unemployment Total labor force ( includSingl armed forces ) ^ Period Civilian labor force Employment Total civilian labor force Total Agricultural Nonagricultural Unemployment Unemployment as percent of total civilian labor force Thousands of persons years of age and over Monthly average : _ _ _. .-_ First half Second half First half Second half-- _ January FebruaryMarch April May June _ _ _ _ _ July August September October November December January. _ February March April May June JulyAugust September _ October November December _ Data for exclude about members of the armed forces who were outside the continental United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the census. This figure is deducted by the Census Bureau from its current estimates for comparability with data Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation llness bad weather temporary lay-off and industrial disputes NOTE. Labor force data are based on a survey made during the week which includes the 8th of the month Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Labor ( ) and Department of Commerce ( ) TABLE A-12. Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments 1929-50l [ Thousands of employees ] Manufacturing Period Monthly average : Total wage and salary workers Total NonDura- durable ble goods goods GovTransernCon- portament tion Trade FiServ- ( FedMin- tract conand nance ice eral ing struc- public ( ) State tion utiliand ties local ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _._ _ First half Second half First half Second half <__ January February March. April May June July August September October November December January * February March April May June July August September * October November Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked or received pay during the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors selfemployed persons domestic servants and personnel of the armed forces. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force reported by the Department of Commerce ( appendix table A-ll ) which include proprietors self-employed persons and domestic servants ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather or temporary lay-offs and which are based on an enumeration of population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments Data for the trade and service divisions beginning with are not comparable with data shown for earlier years because of the shift of the automotive repair service industry from the trade to the service division Not available Estimates based on incomplete data Data reflect work stoppages in bituminous coal mining NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series Source : Department of Labor ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) TABLE A-13. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries M anuf actur in g Period Total Monthly average : $ Bitumi- Build- Class I Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels nous ing con- steam sale ( year coal phone trade strucrailtrade round ) Dura- Nonroads ble durable mining tion goods goods $ $ $ ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) $ _ * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) $ First half Second half- _ First half Second half s January February March April. _ May__ June July August September __ October November December January February March April.. May June July August September __ October November _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Money payments Not available only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips not included Not available. Series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June data relate to nonsupervisory employees Not strictly comparable with previous data Preliminary average ; does not include any retroactive wage payments Estimates based on incomplete data Data reflect work stoppages or 3-day workweek NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly data are used Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE A-14. Average hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total Monthly average : Bitumi- Build- Class I nous ing con- steam Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels sale ( year coal strucrailphone trade Dura- Nontrade round ) durable mining tion roads ble goods goods $ ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) I ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) $ ( ) $ ( ) $ < ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ $ $ First half Second half- _ M.346 * First half Second half January February March April May Juiie -_ July August September October __ November December January February March _ _ April May June July August September6. October November * >__ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips not included Not available Not available. Series beginning April includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees. Beginning June data relate to nonsupervisory employees * Not strictly comparable with previous data Preliminary average ; does not include any retroactive wage payments Estimates based on incomplete data -fi ^ u-juotiiiciiucs iiavt Bureau Of Old-Age aim out vivuis iisuiam ; t ; Lmuugu iwt/ aim iiave ueen carried lurwaru irum iy4 : / uenuiimark levels thereby providing consistent series The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE A-15. Average weekly hours in selected industries Manufacturing Bitumi- Build- Class I ing nous steam conNoncoal railDurable durable mining struc- roads Total goods tion goods Period Monthly average : Tele- Whole- Retail Hotels sale ( year phone trade trade round ) ( ) ( C1 ) ) P ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ( ) ) ) P ) ) ) ) ) C1 ) P ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ( ) ) ) ) ) ) ) l ( ) l _ ( ) ) C1 ) ) ) ) ) C1 ) ) P ) ) ) ) ) ) P ) P ) ) ( ) ( P ) ) ( ) First half Second half- _ * First half Second half * January _ February March April May June July August September. __ October November. _ _ December January February March April May June July August September <__ October * November * ) C1 ) ) C1 ) C1 ) ( ) P ) Not available Average for year not available because new series was started in April Beginning with June data relate to nonsupervisory employees only Not strictly comparable with previous data * Estimates based on incomplete data * Data reflect work stoppages or 3-day workweek NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly data are used Adjustments have been made to levels indicated by data of unemployment insurance agencies and the Bureau of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance through and have been carried forward from benchmark levels thereby providing consistent series The half-year data are straight arithmetic averages of the monthly figures and not strictly comparable with the annual averages which have been weighted by data on man-hours Source : Department of Labor TABLE A-16. Physical production index of goods and selected services [ = ! ] Production of selected services Production of goods Nonagricultural production Period x AgriTotal cultural production proof goods duction Total Industrial production Construction Electric and gas utilities Weights : Total Nonagricultural _ First half Second half First half Second half ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) TeleTransphone porand tation telegraph ( ) % ( ) ( ) All half-year data have been seasonally adjusted except the electric and gas utilities for which no satisfactory adjustment factor is available Computed from the Department of Commerce national income data. The weight factors are percentages of the national income for each industry to the total for the industries. The agriculture weight excludes net rents paid by landlords living on farms imputed rents and subsidy payments. The weight for construction has been adjusted to include force account and other construction done outside of the contract construction industry the weights for other industry groups to exclude such construction. Manufactures and minerals of the industrial production index were weighted into the total indexes separately but only the total industrial production index is shown here. See appendix table A-17 for the individual components of the index of industrial production Not available * Because of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production only an annual index has been computed Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. A composite index of production of goods and services has not been compiled because of the inadequate data for measuring the production of services. The only service production data used were for transportation and for communications by telephone and telegraph. Data for measuring such services as wholesale and retail trade finance insurance real estate Government and communication other than telephone and telegraph were inadequate for separate indexes and for an index for all services other than transportation telephone and telegraph Sources : Based on the following data : Agricultural production : Department of Agriculture index of farm output which measures the physical volume of farm production for human use Industrial production : Federal Reserve index of industrial production Construction : Department of Commerce value of new construction activity deflated by their index of construction costs and converted into relatives with as Electric and gas utilities : Based on the following series : Electric power produced by utilities as reported by the Federal Power Commission and sales of manufactured and mixed gas to consumers as reported by the American Gas Association. The two series are converted into relatives with the average for the period as The relative series are combined into an index with electric power given a weight of and gas the respective percentages of the revenues of each of the utilities to the total revenues produced by both in the base period Transportation : Department of Commerce index of transportation Telephone and telegraph : Based on Department of Labor production indexes for and on a series of Works Progress Administration for These indexes are for class A telephone carriers and the principal wire-telegraph and ocean-cable carriers which file annual reports with the Federal Communications Commission TABLE A-17. Industrial production index [ = adjusted for seasonal variation ] Total industrial production Period Monthly average : Manufactures Minerals Total Durable Nondurable First half Second half._ First half Second half i January February March _ April May June July August September October November December January February March April -__ May June July. August September October November L December _ i Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE A-18. New construction activity [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Total Resi- Nonnew Nonresicon- Total den- den- Other Mili- resitial Total tary den- High- Other struc- pri- build- tial pripuband tion ^ vate tial ing build- vate public naval build- ways lic a ing ( non- Period ( nonfarm ) farm ) ing __. _ _ Public construction _ Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half January February March April _ May June __July August September October November December January February... March April May June July August September October First half Second half _. _ _ Novp.mhpr December. ._ _ * Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural-gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures included in the gross national product a Includes public utility farm and other private construction not separately shown Includes residential sewer and water miscellaneous public service enterprises conservation and development and all other public construction not separately shown Sources : Department of Commerce and Department of Labor TABLE A Business expenditures for new plant and equipment ^ [ Millions of dollars ] Manufacturing and mining Transportation Period Total Commercial and miscellaneous Other Electric and gas utilities ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total Manufacturing Mining ( ' ) ( ) Railroad _ _ __ _ _ * ( ) ( ) <i ( ) Annual rates not adjusted for seasonal variation First half Second half First half. Second half * First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Excludes agriculture and outlays charged to current account * Commercial and miscellaneous include trade service finance and communication for all years shown Prior to miscellaneous also included transportation other than railroad and electric and gas utilities which are not available separately for these years Not available separately for years prior to * Included in commercial and miscellaneous prior to * Estimates for fourth quarter of and first quarter of are based on anticipated capital expenditures reported by business in a survey made between mid-October and mid-November ; anticipated expenditures for the year are based on a survey made in December NOTE. These figures do not agree with those shown in column of appendix table A-3 and included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce principally because the latter cover certain equipment and construction outlays charged to current expense. Figures for are Federal Reserve Board estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other data Detail will not necessarily add to totals because figures are rounded to the nearest million dollars Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce ( except asjioted ) TABLE A-20. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade [ Adjusted for seasonal variation ] P CO Millions of dollars CO c3 CO Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales o3 Retail trade Inventories l Millions of dollars Ratio of average i n v e n t o r i e s to monthly sales Wholesale trade Inventories * Jj Ratio of average i n v e n t o r i e s to monthly sales Millions of dollars Inventories * CO Manufacturing Inventories Millions of dollars Period Ratio of average i n v e n t o r i e s3 t o monthly sales Total manufacturing and trade First half... Second half_ First half... January February. __ March April May June July August September. October November. _ December..- January February.. March April May June July August September October * November4 * Book value end of period * Monthly average shown for year and half year and total for month ' Average inventories based on centered averages of end-of-period figures * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of " change in business inventories " included in the gross national product since they cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation Source : Department of Commerce TABLE A Manufacturers * inventories by stage of fabrication and as ratios to sales [ Not adjusted for seasonal variation ] Total manufacturing Period Book value of inventories at end of period ( billions of dollars ) Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Book value of inventories at end of period ( billions of dollars ) Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales i Book value of inventories at end of period ( billions of dollars ) Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales MateMateMateMaterials rials rials rials FinFinFinFinand and and and ished goods ished ished ished goods goods goods goods goods goods goods in in in in process process process process MateIrials if and goods in process Finished goods First half Second half First half January February March April May June July August September _ _ October November December January February March AprilMay June. July August September __ October Average inventories based on centered averages of end-of-period figures Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE A-22. Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Millions of dollars Period Ratio of orders to stocks ( * > ( > First half Second half _ __ _ _ _ First half Second half ~ _ _ __ 1948__ January _ February March April May June July August September October November Ratio of orders to sales January February March April May June July August September October November December. Ratio of stocks to sales Stocks ( end of month ) Monthly average : Outstanding orders ( end of month ) Sales ( total for month ) ( ) i Not adjusted for seasonal variation * Not available * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. These figures represent retail sales stocks and outstanding orders as reported by a sample of of the larger department stores located in various cities throughout the country and are not estimates of total sales stocks and outstanding orders for all department stores hi the United States. Data are not available prior to Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE A-23. Consumers ' price index For moderate-income families in large cities [ = ] All items Period ._ Food Apparel Rent Fuel elec- Housetricity furMisceland re- nish laneous ings frigeration _ First half Second half First half Second half i _ _ ( ) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ January February March April May June July August September October November December _ _ January February __ March April May June July August September October November December __ _ __ ___ ___ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) * Estimates based on data available through November except for food Not available Source : Department of Labor * J ( ) ( ) TABLE A-24. Wholesale price index [ = ] Other than farm products and foods bO Period ! s ! .a I-i 1s a i " " W> S * a .S a * S | wd " a o II p be S m Sf SM W _ ft E-i <B M S Monthly average : _ Farm products All commodities o> c3 CO T3 W ft o> PQ H6.3 & to J3 O January.. February March.. April May June July August _ September October __ November December January February March April May.. June _ July August September October November December First half Second half First half Second half i Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Labor TABLE A-25. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio [ = ] Prices received Period Monthly average : Prices paid ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) Parity ratio i 1949-First half Second half.. First half Second half.. January February 15-_ March April .May June July ._ August September _ October November _ December January February 15._ March April May June July August September October November December * Ratio of prices received to prices paid ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) Includes subsidy payments between October and June Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE A-26. Consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] Instalment credit End of period Total consumer credit Total Automobile sale credit Charge accounts Other Other consumer credit January February March April May June July.. August.. _ September October.. November December _ January February March April.. _ May June July August September October November a December i Includes other sale credit and loans including repair and modernization loans insured by Federal Housing Administration mer< Federal ! Estimates based on incomplete data ; December by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE A-27. Loans and investments of all commercial banks and weekly reporting member banks [ Billions of dollars ] Weekly reporting member banks All commercial banks Total loans and investments End of period * June __ Loans Total U. S. Government obligations Other securities Total loans ( net ) Commercial industrial and agricultural loans June * _ _- ( < ) ( < ) ( ) _. June * June ' June ' June'. June Investments I ) W January _ _ February March _._ __ April May June July August __ September October November December JO.O January February March April May JuneJuly August September October * c November December * Excludes mutual savings banks Reporting date nearest end of period June data are used because complete end-of-year data prior to are not available for TJ. S. Government obligations Not available prior to May when the loan classification was revised Series revised to extend coverage. Previous figures not strictly comparable Estimates for all commercial banks based on incomplete data ; December by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) TABLE A-28.-Deposits and currency [ Millions of dollars ] Total deposits and currency End of period Total Demand Currency Time deposits outside adjusted a deposits < banks _ __ _ _ _ 1939_ 1946.__ Deposits adjusted and currency ( privately-held money supply ) Foreign United States bank deposits Government ( net ) balances January February March April May _ _ June.. July August September October November December January February March April May _ June July August September _. _ October ._ November8. December _ Reporting date nearest end of period Includes Treasury cash and balances at commercial savings and Federal Reserve banks Includes demand deposits other than interbank and U. S. Government less cash items in process of collection Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System Estimates based on incomplete data ; December by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) [ TABLE A-29. Estimated ownership of Federal securities * [ Billions of dollars par values ! * ] Gross debt and guaranteed obligations outstanding Held by public Held by U.S GovernTotal ment State agencies Total and local Com- Federal and trust held by govern- mercial Reserve public ments8 banks banks funds End of period Nonbank private corpoIndirations viduals * and associations January February March April May June July August September October November _ December January February. _ March April May June July August September October November December __ United States savings bonds series A-D E and F are included at current redemption values Securities issued or guaranteed by the U. S. Government excluding guaranteed securities held by the Treasury Includes ^ trust sinking and investment ] jfunds of State and local governments and their agencies and Territories and insular possessions Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and insular possessions ; excludes securities held in trust departments Includes insurance companies mutual savings banks savings and loan associations dealers and brokers and foreign accounts in this country. * Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund in special non-interest-bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government ; beginning with June they Include holdings of Federal land banks e Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) TABLE A-30. United States Government debt volume and kind of securities [ Billions of dollars ] Interest-bearing public debt Gross Marketable public Issues public debt and guaranteed issues ^ Short- Treasury term issues bonds End of period Nonmarketable public issues Noninterest bearing Special United Treas-L issues4 debt ury States tax and savings savings bonds notes Fully guaranteed securities * _._ __ _ January February March April May June. JulyAugust September October November December January February March April May June July August. September October November December _ _ ___ _ _ ( ' ) ( J ) s ) ) fi ) * ) ) ( S ) li o '8 ? i ( ) ( ' ) * Includes postal savings bonds depositary bonds Armed Forces leave bonds and ^ j percent Treasury investment bonds not shown separately * Includes amounts held by Government agencies and trust funds which aggregated billion dollars on December Includes Treasury bills certificates of indebtedness and Treasury notes Issued to United States investment accounts ' Less than million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department TABLE A-31. Bond yields and interest rates selected years [ Percent per annum ] U. S. Government security yields Period Long-term bonds month issues Aaa Partially years bonds taxand over exempt * taxable average average average __ average average ( ) average average _ ( ) average _ _ average average average. average High grade corporate bond yields ( Moody 's ) average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( 5s ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Bank Bankers Federal rates on accept- Reserve Bank short- ances discount term daysratebusiness New New Baa loans York York bonds ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * * U.OO ( ) ( ) Average of yields on all outstanding partially tax-exempt Government bonds due or callable after years in and ; and after years from Not available before August Not available * From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less No partially tax-exempt bonds due or callable in years and over Estimates based on incomplete data Sources : Treasury Department Moody 's Investors Service and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE A-32. Profits before and after tax all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] _ _ _ _ _ .__ _ _ Corporate tax liability * Period Corporate profits after tax Corporate profits before tax Total Dividend payments Undistributed profits ( ) Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half Second half ! t.27.6 First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ .__ Federal and'State corporate income and excess profits taxes Minus million dollars ' Estimates based on incomplete data ; third and fourth quarters by Council of Economic Advisers. Cor porate tax liability for the second half of the year includes an estimate for the effect of the higher taxes including the excess profits tax NOTE. No allowance has been made for inventory valuation adjustment. See appendix table A-4 for profits before tax and inventory valuation adjustment Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A-33. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations [ Millions of dollars ] Durable goods industries ( corporations ) l Period Nondurable goods industries ( corporations ) Profits Profits Sales Sales Before taxes After taxes _ _ Before taxes After taxes Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal variation First half.. _ Second half First half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ See Federal Reserve Bulletin June and subsequent issues for similar data for the following industry groups : primary metals and products machinery automobiles and equipment foods and kindred products chemicals and allied products and petroleum refining Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Compiled by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and based on published reports of various industrial corporations TABLE A--34. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity private manufacturing corporations by industry group Percentage ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity Industry group total Third Fourth First Second Total quarter quarter quarter quarter Third quarter Before Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations. Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles ._ _ _ Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products _ __ Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products ___ ._ Stone clay and glass products. _ Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products __ ._ Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery. _ _ Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) After Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations _ Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) _ Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) --Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE A Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry group Profits in cents per dollar of sales Industry group total Third Fourth First Second Third Total quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter Before Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations- Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks _ _ Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Food _ Tobacco manufacturers Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles LuTTlbcrflTidwood products __ ._ After Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Rubber products _ _ _ _ Leather and leather products _ _ Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products _ Furniture and fixtures _ Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal __ Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE A-36. Relation of profits before and after taxes to stockholders ' equity and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size class total Assets class ( thousands of dollars ) Total Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Ratio of profits before Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All sizes to to to to and over Profits before Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All sizes to to to to and over _-- Ratio of profits after Federal taxes ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All sizes to to to to and over _ Profits after Federal taxes in cents per dollar of sales All sizes to to ___ to to and over _ Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE A-37. Sources and uses of corporate funds [ Billions of dollars ] Source or use of funds Uses : Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( change in book value ) Change in customer receivables Cash and U. S. Government securities Other current assets. Total internal sources External : Change in trade debt Change in Federal income tax liability Other current liabilities _ Change in bank loans Change in mortgages Net new issues Total uses Sources : Internal : Ketained profits andldepletion allowances. ._ Depreciation allowances __ ( ) Total external source Total sources Discrepancy ( sources less uses ) Excludes banks and insurance companies Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers. Total sources and uses are derived from unrounded figures while the components have been rounded to the nearest billion dollars Less than million dollars NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Commerce estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data ( except as noted ) TABLE A-38. The international transactions of the United States IMillions of dollars ] total Type of transaction Exports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods3 _ total total First Third Total i quarter Second quarter Fourth quarter quarter * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( ) C44 ) ( ) ( ) Total goods Services Income on investments Total exports ( ) Imports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods 3_ Total goods Services. _ Income on investments ( ) ( ) ( < ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total imports Surplus of exports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods Total goods Services. _ Income on hi vestments Total surplus of exports Means of financing surplus of exports of goods and services : fi Liquidation of gold and dollar assets by foreign countries Dollar disbursements by : International M o n e t a r y Fund International Bank U n i t e d States Government sources : Unilateral transfers Long- and short-term loansUnited States private sources : Remittances Long- and short-term capiital * Total means of financing. _ Errors and omissions Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Figures for recorded exports of goods in have been adjusted to include goods shipped to United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas in order to make them comparable with figures for subsequent years. Such shipments are included in exports as recorded by the Bureau of the Census beginning in but were not so included hi prior years Includes goods sold to or bought from other countries that have not been shipped from or into the United States customs area and other adjustments * Not available ' Allfiguresfor means offinancingare on a net basis fl Excludes subscriptions to the capital of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund. For detail see appendix table A-40 Excludes net purchases of notes issued or guaranteed by the International Bank consisting of million dollars of long-term and million dollars of short-term notes hi million dollars of long-term notes in first quarter of and net sales of million dollars of long-term notes hi each of second and third quarters Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A-39. United States exports and imports of goods and services by area and [ Billions of dollars ] Area First Second Third Fourth quar- quar- quar- quarter ter ter i Total i ter Annual rates Exports of goods and services : ERP countries ERP dependencies Europe except ERP countries. Canada and Newfoundland Latin American republics Other ^ Imports of goods and services : ERP countries ERP dependencies ._ Europe except ERP countries- _ Canada and Newfoundland Latin American republics Other Export surplus of goods and services : ERP countries ERP dependencies Europe except ERP countries... Canada and Newfoundland Latin American republics Other Total exports Total imports Total export surplus ( ) ( ) I ( ) ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Includes income on investments Not available Includes international institutions NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) i ( } ^ TABLE A-40. -United States Government grants other unilateral transfers and loans to foreign countries [ Millions of dollars ] Type of aid A. Unilateral payments : UNRRA and post-UNRRA Civilian supplies distributed by the armed forces Transfers to Philippines Chinese aid Korean aid program Greek-Turkish aid International Refugee Organization Interim aid European Recovery Program Mutual Defense Assistance Program Other Total unilateral payments Less unilateral receipts Equals : Net unilateral payments __ 1QJQ 1Q4Q total total total First Second Third Fourth Total i quarter quarter quarter quarter * ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Total long-term loans and investments Less repayments C8 " ) X3 ) Equals net long-term loans and investments including International Bank and International Monetary Fund Less subscriptions to International Bank and International Monetary Fund.__ Equals net long-term loans and investments excluding International Bank and International Monetary Fund C. Outflow of short-term capital ( net ) Total net unilateral payments loans and investments excluding International Bank and International Monetary Fund ( A+B+C ) B. Long-term loans and investments : Lend-lease credits Surplus property including ship sales Export-Import Bank loans___ United Kingdom loan Subscriptions to : International Bank International Monetary Fund European Recovery Program Other ( ) w ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Includes aid to Indonesia of million dollars in first quarter million dollars in second quarter and million dollars in third quarter of * Not available Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A United States merchandise export surplus by area. quarterly average and Total merchandise export surplus Period Other Can- Western ERP coun- Other ada i Hemi- tries Europe sphere Asia Australia Africa and Oceania Millions of dollars Quarterly average : s First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ ___ _ ___ ._ _ _ __ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) n Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Fourth quarter First quarter. Second quarter Third quarter < Includes Newfoundland and Labrador Turkey is included with ERP countries and excluded from Asia. Exports to and imports from Germany are included with those of ERP countries and in the postwar period relate almost wholly to trade with the three western zones * Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available Data by area exclude " special category " exports of million dollars in the third quarter of which are included in total exports. Thus the export or import surplus by area will not add to the total export surplus in this period NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding. See also footnote Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A-42 United States merchandise exports including reexports by area quarterly average and Period Total Other exports Westinclud- Canada * ern Hemiing reexports sphere ERP Countries Other Europe A Asia Australia Africa and Oceania Millions of dollars Quarterly average : 3_ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) First quarter. _ __ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter 8_3 Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : 1949___ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter.. Third quarter _ i Includes Newfoundland and Labrador * Turkey is included with ERP countries and excluded from Asia. Exports to Germany are included with those of ERP countries and in the postwar period relate almost wholly to exports to the three western zones Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers * Not available Data by area exclude " special category " exports of million dollars in the third quarter of which are included in total exports. Thus exports by area wiil not add to total exports in this period NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise including reexports shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in to goods destined to United States armed forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding. See also footnote Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class quarterly average and Total SemiManuCrude Crude domestic materials foodstuffs factured manuexports foodstuffs factures Period Finished manufactures Millions of dollars Quarterly average : 1947._ _ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter > ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) First quarter _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ' ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( a ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ i Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers * Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all domestic merchandise shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in to goods destined to United States armed forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A-44. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic class quarterly average and [ = ] Total domestic exports Period Crude materials ManuCrude factured foodstuffs i foodstuffs i Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter October Unit value indexes Quarterly average : _ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. October _ Indexes of crude and manufactured foodstuffs particularly those of unit value in are influenced by large shipments of surplus food products. These shipments vary in kind and quantity from month to month and are sold at prices considerably below market quotations Average of ten months NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes i n average prices has been el iminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including change in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade. The indexes for to are based on data which include goods destined to the United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas Source : Department of Commerce TABLE A-45.- -United States general merchandise imports by area quarterly average and Total general imports Period Other ERP Can- West- counern ada i Hemis- tries phere Other Europe Asia a Australia Africa and Oceania Millions of dollars Quarterly average : ( ) ( ) First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ; ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ Includes Newfoundland and Labrador Turkey is included with ERP countries and excluded from Asia. Imports from Germany are included with those of ERP countries and in the postwar period relate almost wholly to imports from the three western zones Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise received in the United States customs area from foreign countries. General imports include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising channels plus entries into bonded customs warehouses Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE A-46. United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and Period Total imports for consumption Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Millions of dollars Quarterly average : ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter l Fourth quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter * Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers a Not available NotB Imports for consumption include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising or consumption channels plus withdrawals from bonded customs warehouses for consumption Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) 2l6 TABLE A Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic class quarterly average and [ = ] Total mports for consumption Period Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter _ October _ _ Unit value indexes Quarterly average : ._ First quarter Second quarter _ Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter Third quarter October Average of ten months NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including changes in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade Source : Department of Commerce TABLE A-48. Changes in selected economic series since and and during Percentage change i = Source : Appendix table No Economic series to Total First half Second half a A-l Gross national product Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investment Government purchases of goods and services _ ._ A-4 National income Compensation of employees _ A-7 Personal income Disposable personal income Personal net saving ( ) A-8 Per capita disposable personal income : Current prices prices A-10 _ ._ _ Gross national product prices : Total Personal consumption expenditures Gross private domestic investment Government purchases of goods and services W ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) first half to second half ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Physical production index of goods : TotaL._ Agricultural Nonagricultural ._ _ ( ) ( ) A-17 Industrial production : Total Durable manufactures Nondurable manufactures Minerals.-. A-18 New construction : Total Private Residential Nonresidential Other private Public A-19 Business expenditures for new plant and equipment ._ A-20 Inventories : Total _ Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) i ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) A-ll Labor force including armed forces Civilian labor force " Rmploymfint Nonagricultural Agricultural Unemployment A-13 Average gross weekly earnings : Manufacturing. Bituminous coal mining Building construction A-16 .._ _ Sales : Total Manufacturing Wholesale trade Retail A-23 ] Consumers ' price index ; All items Food Apparel Rent ._ ) ) ) g ( ) ( ) ) ) TABLE A-48. Changes in selected economic series since and and during Continued Percentage change = Source : Appendix table No Economic series Total First half first to half Second to second half half A-24 Wholesale price index : All commodities Farm products Foods Other than farm products and foods A-25 Prices received by farmers _ Prices paid by farmers ( including interest taxes and wage rates ) Consumer credit outstanding end of period _ rnstfllrnfint credit s A-26 A-32 A-39 Profits before tax Profits after tax__ Dividend payments Undistributed profits International transactions in goods and services : Exports Imports _ _ _ Export surplus A-42 Merchandise exports including reexports A-45 General merchandise imports Changes are computed from data as reported and therefore may differ slightly from changes computed from the indexes shown here Estimates based on incomplete data a Indexes and percentage change not computed because data change from positive to negative values < Not available = average = Appendix B The Distribution of Income and Saving in the United States CONTENTS Page The distribution of income The distribution of saving and liquid assets Statistical tables : B-l. Distribution of spending units and total money income before and after Federal income tax by income groups B-2. Distribution of characteristics of low and high income groups B-3. Percentage of spending units within various income groups having income from selected sources B-4. Proportion of spending units owning various types of assets by income groups early B-5. Summary of saving of positive and negative savers and B Money income and positive negative and net saving of each fifth of spending units and B-7. Major types of expenditures of spending units reducing liquid assets during by income groups B-8. Median liquid asset holdings by income level early and The Distribution of Income and Saving in the United States The distribution of income As the people of the United States are called upon to devote an increased proportion of productive effort to defense they can consider themselves fortunate that the period just ended was one of great progress in raising living standards. Not only has total personal income increased but as compared with the prewar period a higher proportion of income now goes to the middle and lower income groups. Disparities between the quality and style of goods available to low and higher income groups have been narrowed The outstanding example is perhaps automobiles where low-priced cars are in elements of serviceability and many elements of style equal to those in high-priced ranges. The clothing of the average working girl is neat and modish and to the casual observer little different from that of her wealthier sister ; the variety of foods on sale in working-class neighborhoods rivals that of high income localities Nevertheless there are still large numbers of families in the United States with small or inadequate incomes. According to the Survey of Consumer Finances * in percent of the spending units in the economy had less than $ money income before taxes and an additional percent had between $ and $ income before taxes.2 ( See table B-l. ) Allowing for Federal income taxes the proportion of spending units below $ is raised to percent. State and local incomes taxes are not included in these computations but in general they are not very important for lower income groups Table B-2 summarizes some of the data with regard to characteristics of low income families which have been assembled by the Survey of Consumer Finances. These data indicate that there are some factors which tend to mitigate the degree of disparity between the status of the very low and The Survey of Consumer Finances has been conducted annually in postwar years for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System by the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan. The detailed findings of the Survey may be found in the Federal Reserve Bulletin The Bureau of the Census data on family income in collected in connection with the Current Population Survey and the Census of Population will be published in the near future A spending unit consists of all persons related by blood marriage or adoption who live together and pool their income for major items of expense. A family may contain more than one spending unit ; for example an aged couple dwelling with children may have separate financial arrangements. Family income is on the average higher than spending unit income. According to the Survey of Consumer Finances for the mean family income in was $ as compared with a mean spending unit income of $ middle income groups. For example as compared with higher income groups a greater percentage of the under- $ group are one-person units a larger fraction are retired persons who in some cases have adequate savings and a greater proportion live in rural areas where costs of living may be somewhat lower. Of those living in rural areas a considerable fraction are farm families who may produce food and fuel for their own consumption After these qualifications are made however it is apparent that there still remains an economic and social problem of great magnitude. For example percent of the under- $ group and percent of the under $ spending units have heads between the ages of and years a period of life in which earnings should be adequate. Over half live in metropolitan or other urban areas. A lack of adequate education is indicated in a large number of cases since only percent of the under- $ group progressed beyond grammar school. The position of families who must depend on the earnings of a woman head is particularly unfortunate due to the pressure of family responsibilities and the discrimination against women in gainful employment. In the under- $ family income group according to statistics of the Bureau of the Census for percent of nonfarm families of two or more persons ( whose heads were between and years old ) were headed by women as compared with only percent in higher income groups.1 Table B-3 shows that in a much smaller proportion of the under $ income units received wages and salaries than in higher income groups while a relatively high proportion received pensions and allowances. The large number of units at all income levels receiving pensions and allowances as compared to interest dividends and rents is one of the more interesting findings of the consumer survey. In the $ 7,500-and-over group a surprisingly small proportion percent received wages and salaries while percent received interest and dividends. A relatively large number in the upper income groups also received entrepreneurial income The fact that expenditures of the lower income groups exceed the income of those groups by large amounts year after year indicates that some low income units have previously been in a more favorable position. Family income tends to rise with age of the head until about or after which it declines. Temporary business reverses fluctuations in farm prices sickness and chance factors also contribute to shifting families from one income level to another. More data are needed on the degree of shifting up and down the income scale which families undergo over a period of years The Survey of Consumer Finances shows that around percent of the under- $ income group in were in the same or lower income group in the preceding year.2 " Materials on the Problem of Low-Income Families " assembled by the staff of the Subcommittee on Low-Income Families of the Joint Committee on the Economic Report 81st Cong. 2d sess. Table p. Owing to a relatively large number of cases in which previous income was not ascertainable these proportions are not exact About half the spending units in the under- $ income group have assets worth at least $ while one-fourth have assets worth $ or more. As shown in table B-4 percent of the under- $ group have liquid assets as compared with percent for all income groups and percent own automobiles. The fact that a larger proportion of this income group own homes or farms than in the population at large indicates a disproportionate number of units with heads in older age classes Distribution of saving and liquid assets In about percent of spending units had net savings about percent had expenditures in excess of income and the remainder about broke even. Spending units with incomes in excess of expenditures saved billion dollars compared with billion of negative saving on the part of spending units with deficits as shown in table B-5. There was thus a net saving of billion dollars in as compared with billion in The mean saving of all units in was $ as compared with $ in As shown in text table the lowest one-fifth of income units spent an amount equal to one-and-one-half times their incomes in The middle fifth broke even and the upper income fifth saved about percent of income. The saving of this fifth however more than counterbalanced all the dissaving done by the lower segments of the population. Thus the upper income groups accounted for percent of total net saving of all units in as shown in table B-6 Sixty-two percent of positive saving ( i. e. saving of all families with net positive saving ) in was concentrated in the top one-fifth of income receivers while negative saving was more widely distributed. However the lowest fifth of income receivers not only dissaved much more heavily in relation to their incomes than did upper income receivers but actually performed a disproportionately large amount ( percent ) of total negative saving The purchase of durable goods ( which is not included in saving ) was an important reason why saving was low or negative for many families in the last two or three years. In percent of spending units with negative saving purchased durable goods in comparison with only percent of positive savers. Of the negative savers percent increased their indebtedness and percent decreased their holdings of liquid assets ( bank deposits saving and loan shares and U. S. Government bonds ) Table B-7 shows the major reasons given for reducing liquid assets in by spending unit respondents. Medical expense was the most frequent reason given being cited by percent of units reducing assets. Purchase of automobiles or other durable goods was given as a reason for reducing assets in percent of cases. In some cases liquid assets were converted This concept of saving differs from that of net saving in the national income and product accounts. See Appendix I to Part IV Survey of Consumer Finances for a discussion of differences into other types of tangible assets such as homes or into business equities While a large proportion of spending units have dissaved in each postwar year in early most units were found to have assets greater than outstanding liabilities indicating that in all probability the same units did not dissave year after year The last table ( B-8 ) shows the postwar decline in median liquid asset holdings by income level. Not only has the median holding declined fairly steadily for all income groups but the percentage of units with no liquid assets ( outside of currency ) has grown. Since there has been a steady growth in the number of spending units total holdings of liquid assets have grown somewhat since the end of the war TABLE B Distribution of spending units and total money income before and after income tax by income groups Federal [ Percent ] Spending units l Before Federal income tax Income groups Under $ $ $ $ $ 2,999___ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ and over _ _ All cases Total money income After Federal income tax ( disposable inincome ) } $ Median income * Mean income Before Federal income tax } $ $ $ After Federal income tax ( disposable inincome ) The spending unit consists of all persons related by blood or marriage who live in the same dwelling unit and pool their income for major items of expense Income data for each year are based on interviews during January February and March of the following year Money income after deduction of estimated Federal personal income tax liability. See Appendix to Part III Survey of Consumer Finances for method of estimating disposable income. Money income figures exclude capital gains or losses and tax estimates make no allowance for such gains or losses The median amount of income is that of the middle spending unit when all units are ranked by size of income The mean amount is the average obtained by dividing aggregate income by the number of spending units Source : Survey of Consumer Finances sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and conducted by the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan TABLE B Distribution of characteristics of low and high income groups [ Percent ] Money income before taxes Characteristic of spending unit Size : One person Two persons Three or more persons Race : White Negro.- ._ Under $ $ $ $ $ $ and over _ _ __ Place of residence : Metropolitan area Other urban area Rural area _ _ Number of income receivers : None One Two or more _ _ _ Age of head : Under years years years and over Occupation of head : Retired Farm operators Unskilled and service workers All other occupations Education of head : No education Grammar school High school and colleges All spending units Less than one-half of percent were " other " race Detail for each characteristic will not necessarily add to because of a small percentage of non-ascertainable cases Source : Same as appendix table B-l TABLE B Percentage of spending units within various income groups having income from selected sources [ Percent of units within each income group ] Selected source of income Money income before taxes Pensions Wages and and allowsalaries ances AH spending units _ Under $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ $ and over Interest and dividends Rent In addition percent of spending units had income from farming and percent from unincorporated nonfarm business Source : Same as appendix table B-l TABLE E-4. Proportion of spending units owning various types of assets by income groups early [ Percent ] Previous year 's money income before taxes Under $ _ $ $ $ $ $ $ 3,999_ $ $ $ $ ___ $ and over Liquid assets Automobile Home or Other real Business Corporate farm estate interest stock _ __ __ All income groups _. _ _ Includes all types of U. S. Government bonds checking accounts savings accounts in banks postal savings and shares in saving and loan associations and credit unions. Excludes currency Owner-occupied home or farm Real estate other than home or farm on which owner is living. Includes lots one- or two-family houses apartment houses summer or week-end homes commercial or rental property farms owned by nonfarmers and additional farms and land owned by farmers and other types * Full or part interest in a nonfarm unincorporated business or privately held corporation * Common and preferred stock of corporations open to investment by the general public. Excludes stock of privately held corporations U. S. Government securities and bonds of corporations and State local and foreign governments Source : Same as appendix table B-l TABLE B-5. Summary of saving of positive and negative savers and Item Spending units ( millions ) : All units _ Aggregate saving ( billions of dollars ) : All units ( net saving ) _ _ _ __ _ _ __ ^ _. _ ____ _ Mean saving ( dollars per spending unit ) : All units ( net saving ) r ,,.___ Positive savers Negative savers _ Positive savers Zero savers Negative savers Positive savers Negative savers Net saving does not entirely correspond conceptually with personal net saving as denned in the national income and product statistics. ( See chart pp. and and table C-2. ) For an explanation of the differences see Appendix I to Part IV of the I960 Survey of Consumer Finances Federal Reserve Bulletin November Aggregate and mean saving of units with positive or negative saving rather than of all items of positive or negative saving NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Same as appendix table B-l TABLE B-6.- -Money income and positive- negative and net saving of each fifth of spending units and Percentage of total accounted for by each fifth Spending units ranked by size of Money income Positive saving Negative savincome ing * Lowest fifth Second fifth Third fifth Fourth fifth Highest fifth ______ All spending units Net savingfi * Income and saving data for each year are based on interviews in January-March of the succeeding year The figures in this table can not be used to measure precisely changes in income and saving because of the limited size of the sample. However it is believed that the data show with reasonable accuracy the nature of certain broad changes which occurred in the pattern of income and saving during these years The surveys for and differ somewhat in their definitions of saving as discussed in the Survey of Consumer Finances Part IV Appendix I Annual money income before taxes ; revised from data presented in the " Annual Economic Review January " by the Council of Economic Advisers tables B-4 and B-5 p. Positive saving comprises the saving of all spending units with money incomes in excess of expenditures Negative saving comprises the dissaving of all spending units with expenditures in excess of money income Net saving ( plus or minus ) is positive saving less negative saving for the combination of all units in each income quintile Source : Same as appendix table B-l TABLE B Major types of expenditures of spending units reducing liquid assets during by income groups [ As percent of spending units reducing liquid assets in each income group ] income of spending units reducing liquid assets All income groups Medical _ _ Food clothing and nondurable goods * Automobiles and other durable goods Investments and reduction of debt Other large outlays * Under $ $ $ $ and over Data are not comparable to the survey findings on reduction of liquid assets because of changes in the wording of the questionnaire. This table is based on answers to two questions asked of spending units reporting reductions in liquid assets : " What sort of things did you use this money for ? " and " Did you have any large expenses we did not talk about for instance doctor and hospital bills expenses for moving or trips or the like ? " Reported as reasons for reduction of liquid assets Investments include purchases of securities and real estate and investment in privately owned business < Includes repairs and additions to houses travel amusement education taxes car repairs moving and farm operating expenses Source : Same as appendix table B-l TABLE B-8. Median liquid asset holdings by income level early and Income before taxes Under $ $ $ $ $ $ $ 3,999_._ $ $ $ $ $ and over _ Percent of spending units at each income level Source : Same as appendix table B-l $ $ $ $ $ $ Median holdings of all units Median holdings of those with liquid assets- Median liquid asset holdings $ $ $ $ $ $ Appendix C The Nation 's Economic Budget CONTENTS Page C-l C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5 The Nation 's Economic Budget calendar years and Consumer account calendar years and Business account calendar years and International account calendar years and Government account ( Federal State and local ) calendar years and C-6. Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing calendar years and C-7. Federal cash payments to the public by function calendar years and C-8. Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction calendar years and 23I The Nation 's Economic Budget The Nation 's Economic Budget provides a comprehensive view of national economic activity by major economic groups. Such a summary is given in table C-l. It shows the total gross national product or expenditure as well as the receipts and expenditures of the major economic groups and the net additions or absorption of saving of these groups for calendar year and the first and second halves of Column indicates the major flow of receipts or income. This column contains not only income arising from current production but also receipts of government transfer payments and interest. The total of incomes from current production shown in roman type adjusted for the statistical discrepancy between total receipts and expenditures gives a total equal to the gross national product. Transfers to individuals government interest and net cash loan transfers abroad are not included in this total. Total government cash receipts which differ from receipts arising from current production by the amount in line are also shown In column of this same table are expenditures for current output by the four major economic groups : personal consumption expenditures gross private domestic investment net foreign investment and government expenditures for goods and services. These shown in roman type are equal to the gross national product. Total government cash transfer payments are also shown Government cash transfers on the expenditures side in column are shown as receipts by consumers and by foreign countries and international institutions. The sum of these transfer receipts however does not exactly equal government transfer payments. This is due to the use of somewhat different bases for measurement of various components of receipts and payments. For example government interest payments are recorded on a cash basis ; interest receipts in the consumer account are recorded on a net accrual basis and include interest paid by government corporations. The difference resulting from the two methods of estimating is included in the adjustment item ( line ) Column shows the excess of receipts ( ) or expenditures ( ) for the various accounts. These items include personal net saving the government cash surplus or deficit the excess of international receipts or investment and the excess of gross investment over business receipts. The total excess of receipts must equal the total excess of expenditures since national income and product are conceptually equal. Personal net saving. for example which is an excess of receipts must be matched by an excess of investment by business or a government deficit or both. But the adjustments made in the receipts items ( column ) must also be made in column in order to balance the positive and negative items While the summary table on the Nation 's Economic Budget gives a comprehensive view of the economy additional detail is needed for analytical purposes. Such detail is shown in the tables that follow the " accounts " for the major economic groups. More complete statistics on national income and product and their constituents are published in the " Survey of Current Business " July Some of this detail can be found in appendix A of this review. Another source of the data relating to the Federal Government is the Budget of the United States. The Council 's Review of January appendix A contains a more extended discussion of the Nation 's Economic Budget TABLE G-l. The Nation 's Economic Budget calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Economic group CONSUMERS " Disposable income arising from nvirrfmt prndnfitior ) Government transfers and net interest payments Ul Disposable personal income " Personal consumption expenditures Personal net saving ( -J- ) _ _ BUSINESS fi. Rfitainp.d business rftopipts from current production O-ross private dom.Astifi investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) INTERNATIONAL U S Government cash loan transfers abroad Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) _ _._ GOVERNMENT ( Federal State and local ) Tax payments or liabilities Adjustment to cash basis Cash receipts from the public Purchases of goods and services Government transfers Excess of Excess of Excess of receipts receipts receipts Receipts Expend- ( ) or Receipts Expend- ( -f- ) or Receipts Expend- ( ) or itures itures expendiitures expendiexpenditures ( ) tures ( ) tures ( ) +S.5 & Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) ADJUSTMENTS For receipts relating to gross national product Other adjustments Gross national product second half first half & i Estimates based on incomplete data ; third quarter profits and all fourth quarter data by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer payments and receipts and subtotals including them are in italics ; they are not included in the gross national product Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce and on Federal cash receipts from and payments to the public compiled by the Bureau of the Budget. See also footnote Explanatory notes to table C-l : Lines : See table C-2 Consumer account Lines : See table C-3 Business account Lines : See table C-4 International account Lines : See table C-5 Government account Line : The adjustments bring the estimates on the receipts side into agreement with those on the expenditure side of the accounts. They include the statistical discrepancy less " subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises. " The statistical discrepancy represents the difference between the two independent estimates of gross national product : income received from current output and expenditures for this output " Subsidies less current surplus of government enterprises " are included in national income but not in the gross national product Line : Other adjustments are net and are the amount necessary for balancing the excess of receipts ( ) and excess of expenditures ( ) They are required because some items of government cash payments are either not recorded in private receipts at all ( such as purchases of existing assets ) or they are recorded in a different time period from that in which payment is made. Government cash receipts also include some items not deducted from private incomes or deducted in a different period TABLE C-2. Consumer account calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Receipts or expenditures Total i Personal income arising from current production of goods and services : Wage and salary receipts and other labor income Farm proprietors ' income Business and professional income Dividends Private interest and rental income ._ Business transfer payments First half Second half i Equals ' Disposable personal income Less : Personal consumption expenditures Equals : Personal net saving ( } ) Total Plus : Net interest paid by government _ Dividend on National Service Life Insurance Other government transfers to individuals _ _ _ Equals : Total personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments _. _ ADDENDUM Personal income arising from current production __ Less * Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable income arising from current production i Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers > Includes adjustment for inventory valuation * For detail see appendix table A-2 NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE G-3. Business account calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Receipts or investment Total i Corporate profits before tax _ Less : Corporate tax liability Dividend payments First half Second halfi ._ Equals : Corporate undistributed profits Plus : Capital consumption allowances Corporate inventory valuation adjustment Equals : Retained business receipts from current production Less : Gross private domestic investment Construction _ Residential ( nonfarm ) Other private construction Producers ' durable equipment Change in inventories Equals : Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data ; third quarter profits and all of fourth quarter data by Council of Economic Advisers. Corporate tax liability for second half includes an estimate for the effect of the excess profits tax Includes capital consumption allowances on noncorporate capital including residences The adjustment measures the excess of the value of the change in the volume of nonfarm business inventories valued at average prices during the period over the change in the book value of nonfarm inventories For additional detail see appendix table A-3 NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE C-4. International account calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates ] Receipts or investment Total i U.S. Government cash long-term loans ( net ) Plus : Cash payments to International Monetary Fund and International Bank First half Second halfi E quals : U S Government cash transfers on loans ( receipts ) Surplus of exports of goods and services Less : Net unilateral transfers * Government Private Equals : Net foreign investment _ Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) _ _ Estimates based on incomplete data ; fourth quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Includes only cash withdrawals under loan agreements. Does not include noncash transactions such as lend-lease and surplus property credits Cash payments on subscriptions. In the first half of the International Monetary Fund returned over million dollars of cash ( annual rate ) to the U. S. Treasury in exchange for United States notes Net unilateral transfers are included with government or private expenditures for goods and services For example remittances ( gifts ) made by American citizens to relatives or charitable groups abroad are included with consumer expenditures. Government aid in the form of grants is included in government purchases of goods and services. Thus net unilateral transfers must be deducted from the export surplus to avoid double counting Unilateral aid included in appendix table C-8 is on a Daily Treasury Statement basis and is gross NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE G-S. Government account ( Federal State and local ) calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Receipts or expenditures Total Receipts : Tax and nontax payments or liabilities : Federal State and local Total Adjustment to cash basis : Noncash receipts * Excess of cash receipts over tax liabilities or payments Second half Total Total Other government payments : Transfers to individuals Cash interest payments to the public * Loans to foreign governments and subscriptions to International Bank and International Monetary Fund _ All other Cash receipts from the public Expenditures : Purchases of goods and services : Federal _ State and local Cash surplus ( -J- ) or deficit ( ) +3/9 _ __ Cash payments to the public Federal : Cash receipts Cash payments First half ADDENDUM _ _ Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) _ _ State and local : Cash receipts Cash payments Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) * This table reconciles cash receipts and payments to the public with estimates of government receipts and expenditures included in the national income and product accounts. Cash receipts or payments represent the consolidated cash accounts of the Federal Government including the trust funds and State-local governments. All intergovernmental transactions are excluded. The receipts of government corporations and the Post Office are offset against expenditures and the net expenditure included as a cash payment Grants-in-aid to State and local governments are included as a cash payment of the Federal Government and not included as either a receipt or payment of the States or localities Estimates based on incomplete data Personal and indirect business tax payments corporation tax liabilities and contributions for social insurance. Estimate for second half of year includes an estimate for the effect of the excess profits tax Consists of deductions from government employees ' salaries for retirement funds and government contributions to retirement funds National Service Life Insurance and U. S. Government life insurance funds ^ Includes excess of corporation tax receipts over liabilities and excess of personal tax receipts over payments. Cash receipts also include some items of miscellaneous receipts not included in tax and nontax payments such as receipts from sales of surplus property Does not agree with net ^ nterest paid by government ( appendix table C-2 ) which is on a net accrual basis and includes interest paid by government corporations See appendix table C-4 International account Includes all other cash payments less noncash payments for goods and services. Other cash payments include net payments by government corporations ( except capital formation ) net prepayments and the excess of checks paid over checks issued. Noncash purchases of goods and services include deductions from government employees ' salaries for retirement funds and the government contribution to such funds NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE C Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Cash receipts Total i Direct taxes on individuals Direct taxes on corporations Employment taxes Excises and customs. Surplus property receipts Deposits by States unemployment insurance Veterans ' life insurance premiums Other Less : Refunds of receipts _ Total Federal cash receipts from the public First half Second half i i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE C Federal cash payments to the public by function calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Function Total i Military services International security and foreign relations _ Veterans ' services and benefits Social security welfare and health A griculture and agricultural resources __Interest Other Deductions from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reportsTotal Federal cash payments to the public Second halfi i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding First half TABLE G-8. Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient and transaction calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Cash payments Total i Direct cash payments for goods and services excluding military services : a Payments to individuals for services rendered : Civilian wages and salaries ( excluding Post Office ) : Federal3 ._ Grants- and loans-in-aid for performance of specified services net Second halfi o O ( ) Total Payment to business for goods and services : Public works : Federal Grants-in-aid and loans for public works Other goods and services _ Payments to foreign countries and international institutions for goods and services _ Total Loans and transfer payments to individuals : Social insurance and public assistance : Federal emplovees ' retirement benefit payments Old-age and disability benefit payments Unemployment insurance benefit payments Grants-in-aid for public assistance Keadjustment benefits pensions and other payments to veterans Loans to7 home owners netInterest _ Other Total Loans investments subsidies and other transfers to business and agriculture : Farmers : Price support net ( including supply program ) International Wheat Agreement Other loans and direct subsidies to farmersBusiness : Home mortgage purchases from financial institutions. Loans net Direct subsidy payments Subsidy Tarising from the postal deficit Interest _ __ ._ ( ) ( ) ( ) Military services cash payments for goods and services Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Total Federal cash payments to the public See footnotes on following page 24Q Total Loans and transfer payments to foreign countries and international institutions : European Recovery Program loans and grants Other loans ( net withdrawals ) _ _ Other grants Subscriptions to the International Bank and Monetary Fund ( net cash withdrawals ) Total First half ( ) ( * ) ( ) ( ) Estimates based on incomplete data Differs from the national income concept of " government purchases of goods and services " by excluding in addition to military services farm price support expenditures and unilateral aid to foreign countries Grants to States and localities for public works here included as a Federal expenditure would be included in the national income accounts as a State and local expenditure. There are other less significant differences between the two concepts Excludes payroll deductions for Federal employees ' retirement j Includes all grants-in-aid and loans to public bodies for purposes other than public works and public assistance. Includes in addition one-third of Federal expenditures for veterans ' tuition books and supplies This figure is obtained as a residual by deducting all other expenditures from total cash payments to the public. Owing to the fact that data are incomplete for calendar year the residual is subject to a high margin of error Includes cashing of terminal-leave bonds mustering-out pay and National Service and Government life insurance refunds and benefits in addition to veterans ' pensions and readjustment benefits. Includes only one-third of payments for veterans ' tuition books and supplies Includes a small amount of interest on tax refunds in addition to interest on the public debt. In addition it includes payment of about million dollars to business and about million dollars to individuals in resulting from a nonrecurring change in the method of reporting interest payments. Interest paid to business includes over million dollars of interest paid each year by the Federal Government to State and local governments. Interest in appendix table C-2 is net and is on an accrual rather than a cash basis ; it includes interest paid by State and local governments and by government corporations Less than million dollars Includes expenditures for Mutual Defense Assistance Program NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding