Midyear Economic Report of the President TRANSMITTED TO THE CONGRESS July THE MIDYEAR ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT To the Congress July Together with a report THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR by the COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE WASHINGTON : LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL THE WHITE HOUSE Washington D. C July The Honorable the PRESIDENT OF THE SENATE The Honorable the SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES SIRS : I am presenting herewith a Midyear Economic Report to the Congress. This is supplementary to the Economic Report of the President of January and is transmitted in accordance with section ( b ) of the Employment Act of In preparing this report I have had the advice and assistance of the Council of Economic Advisers members of the Cabinet and heads of independent agencies Together with this report I am transmitting a report the Economic Situation at Midyear prepared for me by the Council of Economic Advisers in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully in Contents T H E MIDYEAR ECONOMIC REPORT OF THE PRESIDENT Summary review of recent economic developments Policies for economic stability and expansion Summary of legislative recommendations ( a report to the President by the Council of Economic Advisers ) T H E ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR Page To the Congress of the United States : The United States economy is the strongest and most productive the world has ever known and we have the resources and the skills to make it still stronger and more productive In recent months we have seen the abatement of postwar inflationary forces. We are now in a transition period in which we must work toward conditions that will promote a more stable and enduring growth in production employment and purchasing power The fundamental task facing us all businessmen workers farmers Government is to apply positive policies with confidence and courage in order to achieve a sounder price structure and the restoration of maximum production and employment. In so doing we need to start with a clear understanding of the facts concerning our present situation Our economy today possesses vitally important elements of strength that did not exist in earlier periods. Over the course of the last years many steps have been taken by the Government to bulwark our economy against the forces of recession Unemployment insurance has helped to alleviate the hardships of unemployment and to sustain consumer incomes and expenditures. The old-age retirement system and public assistance for needy persons also serve to maintain purchasing power. The housing program recently enacted by the Congress will furnish positive support for housing construction and slum clearance The Federal Reserve System has been developed into an instrument of such strength and elastic power that the risk of credit restriction at the very time when business requires easier credit has been greatly reduced. The insurance of bank deposits has eliminated the danger of widespread loss from bank failures. The several credit institutions established within the Government go far toward preventing waves of bankruptcies and fore * closures. The farm price-support program affords assurance that our farmers and the two-fifths of our population in rural communities will not be forced out of the markets for goods These and other Government policies are providing strong supports to business activity and are enlarging the opportunities of private business The fact that public expenditures of Federal State and local governments are running at a rate of close to billion dollars a year is itself an element of great stability in the present situation Our position would be even stronger if we had taken adequate steps to control the inflation between and We were confronted as an aftermath of the war by an inflationary boom that lifted production and employment to extraordinarily high levels. But underneath the surface of the inflationary boom there were serious dangers. Some incomes were disproportionately high. Most prices were rising at a perilous rate and serious price and wage distortions were being developed. The spiraling cost of living was inflicting hardship on millions of families. These conditions threatened to bring about a serious break in employment and production. Therefore I recommended repeatedly for private and public action an anti-inflation program to curb these dangers before we suffered the consequences A large part of the necessary anti-inflation program was not adopted and the inflation went on largely uncontrolled. The dangers that are latent in inflation of which I repeatedly warned are now being revealed Employment is still high but unemployment has been increasing and veterans and others leaving school are finding it much harder to obtain work than a year ago. Production is still high but it is lower particularly in some industries than it was last year. Business investment is at a high rate but plans for new investments are being made with caution The decline has been moderate and the opportunity is now ours to reverse the trend and achieve maximum production and consumption of goods and services without the evils of inflation The adjustment process has been rendered less difficult by the prudent actions of many groups and individuals in our business system. We have had no speculative spree in either securities or commodities. Inventory buying has been moderate and distress liquidation of inventories such as we experienced in is not to be anticipated. Personal indebtedness on the part of farmers home owners and consumers generally has been held to conservative levels. Many far-seeing businessmen made sincere efforts to avoid or minimize price increases during inflation and in recent months have reduced their prices and have sought valiantly to maintain production and employment. Many labor unions have used their collective strength with moderation and with consideration for the interests of the whole economy. All groups in the Nation have gained an improved understanding of economic problems since the 19205s and their actions reflect this fact We should not however be lulled into a false sense of security by these favorable aspects of the situation. Many of the price adjustments that have taken place have been healthy and afford ground for expectation that our economy will work its way successfully through a difficult period of transition. But there is nothing healthy about more unemployment or less production. Such trends can and must be reversed by positive action private and public. The way to check a decline in business investment or production is to take affirmative action that will lead to more investment and more production. The way to check an increase in unemployment is to take affirmative action that will provide more jobs. The way to prevent our economy from shrinking is to take affirmative action that will help it to expand These things can not be done by business labor agriculture or government acting alone. They can only be done by all of us working together in mutual respect and with common objectives It is with these considerations in mind that I transmit to the Congress a brief summary of the economic situation and recommendations for action at this time Summary Review of Recent Economic Developments A moderate downward trend characterized most phases of economic activity in the first half of Civilian employment averaged million. This was slightly below the level of the first half of with the greatest decrease in manufacturing industries. In June of this year civilian employment was million ; in June of last year million. The number of unemployed averaged million the increase of about one million over the first half of about equaling the increase in the total labor force. The unemployed were percent of the civilian labor force in June compared with percent in June of last year. The number of unemployed in June was million and acute unemployment problems have developed in certain localities Production of all goods and services adjusted for price changes and for seasonal variation in the first half of was about l * /2 percent less than in the second half of The decline in industrial production was rapid and by June had reached percent below last fall 's peak. Other business activity as a whole changed but little. A moderate decrease in private construction was partly offset by a rise in public construction. This year 's agricultural production seems likely to approach last year 's Prices generally decreased reflecting the shift from a sellers ' to a buyers ' market. The decreases were in most instances moderate and orderly with no indication of a general spiraling downward. Wholesale prices by midyear had declined percent consumers ' prices percent from their high points of last August Wages increased in some industries but at least in manufacturing the increases were more than offset by reduced overtime and shorter workweeks. Since the cost of living decreased by about as much as workers ' average earnings real earnings generally were maintained Profits reflected the decline in prices and production. Corporate profits before taxes and inventory valuation adjustment in the first half of this year were about percent below the first half of last year. The corresponding figure for unincorporated enterprises however fell only about percent Farm income was about percent below the first half of Credit requirements of business decreased as inventories and customer receivables were reduced. Commercial loans of large city banks shrank percent but otherwise loans by banks and other investment institutions remained stable. Total bank deposits and money in circulation decreased about percent during the past half year. Interest rates continued low Business investment decreased in the first half of from the level Allowing for seasonal variations in the second quarter it was percent below the peak rate of the fourth quarter of chiefly as a result of reductions in inventories. Plant and equipment outlays were still about as high as a year ago but some decrease is anticipated in the last half of Corporate finance reflected the reduction of inventories and of customer credit. Funds thus freed helped corporations to reduce their total indebtedness by about billion dollars Housing starts were less than in the first half of but since March have been moving up toward last year 's levels Personal income of consumers after taxes decreased only about percent from the level of the last half of Since consumers ' prices dropped percent real income did not change significantly. Consumption expenditures in dollar terms decreased nearly percent. Total liquid assets of individuals and business firms are now about billion dollars. However nearly percent of our families have no reserve of liquid assets In foreign trade an increase in exports and a falling off of imports have continued the rising trend in the export surplus which began last fall. The surplus was financed almost entirely through Government foreign-aid programs Government fiscal transactions were a source of support against other factors making for decline in the economy during the past half year. Using figures on a consolidated cash basis rather than the conventional budget basis to reflect the effective impact of total governmental receipts and payments upon the economy cash payments by the Federal Government ran at a rate more than percent higher than in the first half of and State and local payments at a rate about percent higher. Federal cash receipts were down about percent State and local receipts were up about percent. All governmental units combined showed a cash deficit in the first half of at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of billion dollars in contrast to a surplus at a rate of billion dollars in the corresponding period in The Federal cash deficit in the past half year was at an annual rate of about billion dollars contrasted with a surplus at an annual rate of billion dollars in the first half of last year Policies for Economic Stability and Expansion These facts show that our economy is still operating at high levels of employment and production. The kind of Government action that would be called for in a serious economic emergency would not be appropriate now However it would be even less appropriate to rely entirely on " letting nature take its course " to restore economic stability and maximum production and employment. Within the memory of this generation we have experienced both the terrible consequences of inaction and the saving value of affirmative policy. It is consistent with the whole history of American progress to recognize that now as before action can and should be taken to make our economy still stronger and to deal with the new problems of the present It is fundamentally important to recognize that we should direct our policies and actions not merely toward preventing a depression or holding our ground. Many times I have pointed out that the life and spirit of the American economy is progress and expansion. We need to use the productive capacity of a growing labor force. We need to translate improved productivity and managerial skills into constantly increasing output. If the real needs and aspirations of our people are translated into effective demand through constantly growing employment and purchasing power our markets can absorb a vigorously expanding output. We can achieve within a few years a national output well above billion dollars valued at current prices Our goal of growth and expansion determines the kind of policies that private enterprise and Government should now develop and apply To restrict business investment curtail production reduce employment or slash wages because our economy has declined somewhat would only serve to drag us further downward. But if in every field of action we do the things that are consistent with a strong and growing economy we will have a strong and growing economy It is vitally important that Government policy be based upon the determination to achieve a constantly growing economy. While some businessmen may find it difficult to expand their operations under current circumstances the Government can always take conscious and positive action to counteract recessionary forces Yet there are those who assert that the decline in national income requires that we cut essential national programs. Nothing could represent greater economic folly than to follow this course of action. It would contribute to the very recessionary forces that we should be counteracting. It would be a defeatist admission that we can not prevent our economy from running downhill and that those programs which are vital to the international security and domestic welfare of our people as well as to the strength of our economy must be steered in the same downward direction This issue is fundamental. Are we going to admit that the forces of progress in our economy have become so feeble that we must content ourselves with lower levels of education health and housing international and domestic security and national development ? Or are we going to move forward toward making our economy as strong and productive as our resources and skills permit and adopt the programs which are consistent with that kind of economy and necessary for its attainment ? I propose that we follow the latter course Business investment Initiative ingenuity and courage have always been characteristic of American businessmen. The production goals achieved during the war were a miracle to the rest of the world. There are now great opportunities for business investment to remove obsolescence to make use of the rapid progress of science and invention to improve transportation facilities to enlarge the housing supply to industrialize underdeveloped areas of our country to bring conveniences and labor-saving devices to American homes and farms and to meet the needs of a population that will continue to grow. Businessmen should lift their sights to the needs of an economy that grows and prospers from year to year I have previously recommended and I again recommend that the Congress provide for a broad study of potential business investment expansion and market opportunities under conditions of maximum use of our productive resources in a growing economy conditions which the Employment Act of contemplates and which can be achieved if we have the confidence and determination to achieve them. This study should be designed especially to discover inadequacies in capacity in basic industries which may serve as limiting factors to expansion when the upward movement of business is resumed Price and wage policies In addition to the need for expanded business investment positive actions are required to enlarge consumer purchasing power Businessmen have a great opportunity to maintain production and sales volume by adjusting prices downward even at the cost of temporarily reduced profits. Maintaining volume in the present situation is far more important than maintaining profit margins. The only ultimate source of sustained profits is sustained employment and purchasing power The same concept should guide wage policies. Business can not be prosperous unless the purchasing power of workers is maintained. While price reductions are desirable they should not be attained at the expense of wage cutting. Management and labor through collective bargaining should seek agreements which recognize that the benefits of improved technology and productivity should be reflected both in the wage structure and in the price structure Fiscal policy The Government 's programs of expenditures and receipts must be carefully planned in the light of economic developments as they occur The Federal Budget in recent years has necessarily been large reflecting not only the needs of the people for Government services but also the extraordinary responsibilities of the United States in working toward a peaceful world The sound objective of Government policy is to contribute toward the maximum use of our resources not to contribute toward having them lie idle and unused. When I submitted my budget for the fiscal year last January the programs of expenditure that I then recommended were held to a minimum consistent with our basic needs in view of the inflationary strain upon materials and manpower then prevailing. Now that this strain has been removed it would be inconsistent with sound fiscal policy and common sense to make these programs smaller Continuing these necessary programs involves the problem of how and when we should achieve a balance of Federal receipts and expenditures and a reduction of the national debt. No one has been more concerned with this problem than I and this concern has not diminished. I will continue to exert every effort to achieve every economy in the development and execution of programs that is consistent with the national welfare Balancing the budget and reducing the national debt are objectives to be achieved at the earliest feasible time But these objectives can not be achieved without regard to the general state of the Nation 's economy. During the fiscal years and we were able to achieve although not to the extent desired the objective of balancing the budget and reducing the national debt. I urged repeatedly during this inflationary period that Government revenues be maintained to provide a surplus for retirement of the national debt. The present deficit of Federal receipts below expenditures caused primarily by the untimely tax reduction of billion dollars during the height of inflation against which I so strongly advised has been aggravated by the loss in revenue resulting from the decline in production and national income As I said in my Economic Report in January of this year : The national tax policy should beflexibleand should be promptly adjusted to the changing needs of business and consumers in the course of evolving economic events Under present economic conditions we can not immediately correct the tax mistakes of the past or the conditions which led to a lower level of national income and lower Federal revenues. Any tax increase should be judged by the effect which it might have upon national income and purchasing power. Under present conditions immediate tax increases should be limited to raising estate and gift tax rates and closing the loopholes in their administration so as at least to restore the revenue from this source lost under the Revenue Act of This will have no significant adverse effects upon present economic conditions. At the same time the tax on transportation of goods which enters directly into such a large number of business costs should be eliminated. Furthermore the loss carry-over provisions in the corporate income tax laws should be liberalized in order to give an increased incentive to some business investments which may now be held back because of uncertain profit expectations. The net effect of these three changes in our tax structure taken together will be favorable to the expansion of business activity without causing a significant net loss in total receipts. No changes in the tax laws which would result in a larger net loss in revenues would be justified at this time In view of our domestic and international obligations an abundant economy is the only safe road to a Government surplus. In the value of our national output of goods and services was above billion dollars. A or 4-percent annual growth of our economy which I set as a practical objective in my Economic Report in January would increase annual national output in real terms by ^ to billion dollars. Higher national output means more Federal revenues at any given tax rate Present levels of expenditures are due in large measure to the extraordinary costs of our national defense and international activities. These activities are of such paramount importance that it is out of the question to slash them at this time. But as our policy for peace takes effect it should be possible in future years to reduce these expenditures which now make such heavy demands upon our Federal budget. As opportunity offers I shall make every effort to achieve an excess of Federal income over outgo consistent with our major objectives of peace and prosperity But if we tried to avoid a budget deficit by cutting essential expenditures we would contribute to lower national output and lower employment Federal receipts would fall further and the burden upon Federal expenditures would increase. We can not expect to achieve a budget surplus in a declining national economy There are economic and social deficits that would be far more serious than a temporary deficit in the Federal budget. Gould we be truly prosperous if the level of business investment or consumer purchasing power should become seriously deficient ? Could we be truly prosperous with gaping deficts in our educational system or our housing or our health services or our programs for resource development ? If we should allow these deficits to multiply they would drag the whole economy down and there would be no hope for balancing the Government budget. But if we prevent these deficits if we realize the productive potentials of the American economy the whole Nation will prosper and not only will we balance the Federal budget but we can also move forward to improve the tax system and to resume reduction of the national debt Monetary and credit policy Federal monetary and credit policies should contribute to the needs of an expanding economy Present conditions of ample credit supplies and low interest rates are favorable to business investment. The policy of the Government will be to continue to maintain orderly conditions in the Government security markets and to encourage banks and other institutions to maintain and expand their productive lending activities Over the years Federal lending has come to exercise an important influence upon business investment by providing funds which would otherwise not be available particularly for small and new businesses. In a period of business contraction no matter how moderate deficiencies in capital funds force many enterprises to the wall. It is no answer to this difficult question to say that this squeezes out the inefficient because it also ruins many who are temporarily in adverse financial circumstances without being inefficient and prevents others from getting a start in business The Reconstruction Finance Corporation under its existing authority will continue its support of business activity by making loans based upon reasonable assurance of repayment not under depression conditions but under generally prosperous long-run conditions. The Corporation is also very properly focusing its loan activities toward areas where unemployment has become serious. New legislation is needed however to extend the maximum maturity periods for loans in order to permit financial assistance by the Corporation to business ventures which are economically sound and urgently needed in an expanding economy but which require long periods of time to develop and produce earnings that will permit orderly amortization of debt Agricultural policy Millions of American consumers derive their livelihood from farming and buy the products of industry. Experience has taught us that there can be no lasting general prosperity without farm prosperity There is immediate need to overcome a number of shortcomings in existing farm legislation. It is necessary to assure fair and adequate supports for major farm products notably livestock products which have not been covered in past programs. It is necessary to authorize the use of direct production payments as an alternative to the pegging of market prices if an effective support program is to be carried forward without waste of commodities and without denying to consumers the benefits of agricultural abundance. It is desirable to recognize clearly that the oBjective farm support prices is to maintain an adequate level of farm income and promote shifts in lines of agricultural production which will encourage an increase in the total domestic consumption of farm products. I urge the Congress to enact at this session legislation to meet these needs Minimum wages Minimum-wage legislation is essential to maintaining adequate consumer purchasing power among large groups of our population. The cost of living has been reduced very little so that low-paid workers are still faced with a grave problem in meeting living expenses. Higher minimum wages are an element in the general improvement of American living standards which we can afford and must achieve. I repeat my request for the immediate raising of the minimum wage under the Fair Labor Standards Act to at least cents an hour and the extension of the Act 's coverage Social security Although unemployment has not risen to the dangerous levels which would call for all-out emergency measures there is an inescapable obligation of Government to take action when large numbers of people are unemployed through no fault of their own. Such action is important not only to the unemployed but also to business since unemployment benefits maintain to some extent the purchasing power of those who have lost their jobs Because these measures contribute toward isolating the consequences of unemployment and reducing its duration it is not economical even by the measure of dollars alone to leave these protective devices in an inadequate state. The cost of such measures is determined not only by the extent of coverage or size of benefits but also by the extent and duration of unemployment Under current economic conditions it is urgent that the unemployment compensation system be broadened and liberalized. I recommend that the Congress strengthen our Federal-State unemployment insurance system by establishing minimum benefit standards for all parts of the country and by broadening coverage. These minimum standards should provide benefits for weeks ranging up to $ a week for single individuals with additional amounts for dependents Ample funds are available for this purpose in the trust accounts of most States. However these increased benefits will require action by the State legislatures and it will obviously take some time before the laws of all States can be amended for this purpose. It will be necessary therefore to allow a reasonable period before the requirement for new standards takes effect To encourage the States to meet the new standards without waiting for this period to expire I recommend that a Federal reinsurance fund be established for those States which meet the minimum standards to assure that the increased protection will not threaten the continued solvency of State unemployment funds. This would represent an extension and strengthening of the present legislation authorizing Federal loans to States whose unemployment funds run low which expires on December io I further recommend that the expiration date for unemployment benefits for veterans under the Servicemen 's Readjustment Act be extended for one year to July Such benefits should not be available to those eligible for unemployment compensation under State laws except where necessary to bring State payments up to the Federal level or when State benefits are used up The improvements in the old-age and survivors ' insurance system which I have recommended to the Congress are also badly needed. The present schedule for increasing pay roll taxes to \ l/i percent each on employers and employees next January will provide the financial basis for such improvements without unduly reducing consumer purchasing power I have already recommended to the Congress that in addition to Federal aid to the States for the needy aged for the blind and for dependent children such aid should be extended to other needy persons receiving general assistance. In most States the programs now in operation are inadequate and in many localities there is no program at all. Recent economic developments have emphasized the need for aid and I again urge its favorable consideration by the Congress Public works Public works programs Federal State and local assume added significance under present conditions as a means of maintaining consumer purchasing power and stimulating investment opportunities. My January budget proposals called for Federal expenditures for civil public works in fiscal year in the amount of about billion dollars compared to about * billion dollars in fiscal Continuing the programs included in the present budget even without any new starts will require expenditures of approximately billion dollars in each of the fiscal years and at construction rates now planned This is a substantial program and coupled with private construction expenditures at the current rate and with local and State expenditures at a rate in excess of billion dollars a year should maintain the construction industry at a high level of activity and thus strengthen the whole economy The economic situation does not now call for an immediate and sweeping expansion of public works. It would be dangerous however to neglect the precautionary preparation of measures which might be needed if the business downturn should become more serious. Such preparatory measures by themselves will serve to inspire confidence that the Government will if necessary help further to maintain a high level of demand They will thus reduce doubts that businessmen may have about planning investments for the future. They will also encourage consumers to continue their normal purchasing with more confidence I urge therefore that the Congress ( ) enact legislation to provide for loans to assist State and local advance planning of public works ; ( ) pro844384 II vide funds for the Public Buildings Administration for advance planning and site acquisition for Federal construction under the authority recently enacted ; ( ) enable the Bureau of Public Roads to make advances to States for acquiring and clearing rights-of-way ; and ( ) provide for the surveys and planning for school construction which I have previously recommended Together with the advance planning already under way by many Federal agencies these actions will round out a substantial backlog of planned public works Concentration upon areas of relatively serious unemployment While unemployment is not now at a very high level for the country as a whole there are many localities and even some States where it is serious. These pools of heavy unemployment need to be treated before they spread and the responsibility is in part national There are a number of Federal programs of direct action or assistance to localities which can be timed and channeled so as to concentrate upon areas where unemployment is heavy without sacrifice of general national objectives. This principle of wise selectivity is particularly applicable to procurement and construction activities but it is also relevant to other grant or loan programs designed to stimulate private enterprise or to effect public improvements. Toward this end I am directing that a continuing review of such activities be undertaken within the Executive Office in order to coordinate planning to keep the various types of activity and their geographic distribution in proper balance and readiness and to focus emphasis upon alleviating unemployment in particular areas where it becomes serious before it has a chance to spread. I am also having a study made of possible changes in the laws governing these activities which may be needed for these purposes Foreign economic policy The decline in our business activity is reducing our imports which is an important factor affecting the ability of foreign countries to earn the dollars they require to restore their economic health. The decline in imports if long continued could have very serious effects. If a severe shrinkage in the flow of dollars abroad occurred it would not only reduce our exports now but would also force other countries to try to save dollars by making discriminatory trading arrangements that would adversely affect the long-run future of our foreign trade. Moreover it would set back recovery and reconstruction abroad and might precipitate developments which would have serious consequences for world political stability For these reasons it is especially important at this time for us to continue the efforts we are making to help rebuild a strong and advancing world economy based upon an effective network of world trade and the growing productive strength of free nations. In addition to maintaining our foreignassistance programs and restoring a full-scale Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act I urge the Congress to enact the legislation I have recently recommended to expand both technical and capital assistance for the economic growth of underdeveloped areas The expansion of foreign investment by making more dollars available directly to the underdeveloped countries and indirectly to the capital-goodsexporting countries of Europe will improve the rest of the world 's ability to buy from us. The expansion of technical assistance will stimulate foreign investment by assisting countries that want capital for development to translate their aspirations into concrete projects by creating new productive investment opportunities and by increasing the private investor 's knowledge of those that already exist. Both under its existing authority and under the new legislation I have proposed the Export-Import Bank will be expanding its operations and substantially contributing to these objectives These actions are called for by both our foreign policy and our domestic economic policy. They will be supplemented by the strong support of the United States for an expansion in the development activities of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development There is danger that a further reduction of economic activity may give rise to pressure to restrain imports in an attempt to divert to United States markets part of the small fraction of total demand now directed toward foreign goods. It should be recognized that diversion is a poor substitute for expansion of total demand. Protectionist measures would not merely shift the problem of inadequate markets to other countries but would also with the present dollar stringency promptly reduce our own exports. Such measures would therefore not have a stimulating effect on the domestic economy even in the short run Summary of Legislative Recommendations In summary I recommend that the Congress take the following actions at this session because of their vital importance in the current economic situation : Repeal the tax on the transportation of goods liberalize the provisions for carry-over of losses by corporations and raise estate and gift taxes. No major increase in taxes should be undertaken at this time Extend the maximum time limit now fixed by law on the maturity of loans to business made by the Reconstruction Finance Corporation Provide for a broad study of investment and development needs and market opportunities in an expanding economy Adopt an improved program of farm income supports Increase the minimum wage to at least cents an hour and broaden its coverage Strengthen the unemployment compensation system by increasing the amount and duration of benefits and extending coverage Extend to July the availability of readjustment allowances for veterans not protected by State unemployment compensation laws Raise benefits and extend coverage under the old-age and survivors insurance system and improve the public assistance program Enact legislation to permit Federal agencies and assist States and localities to intensify their advance planning and to acquire sites for useful projects Enact legislation to provide technical assistance to underdeveloped areas abroad and to encourage investment in such areas Restore the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act * * * * * * * The core of my message to every businessman worker and farmer and to everyone responsible for the making of national policy is just this : We can not have prosperity by getting adjusted to the idea of a depression by cutting investment or employment or wages or essential Government programs. We can be prosperous only by planning and working for prosperity by increasing private investment production employment and purchasing power and by carrying forward essential Government programs The whole world is watching developments in the American economy Our own people insist upon the maintenance of prosperity and will not tolerate a depression. Our friends abroad know that their well-being and hopes for world peace are greatly dependent upon the economic strength of the United States. Those opposed to our system and way of life are hoping for the vindication of their prophecies that economic collapse is inevitable in a free society Ours is at once a fateful responsibility and an inspiring opportunity to prove to ourselves and to the world that prosperity and freedom will endure together THE ECONOMIC SITUATION AT MIDYEAR A REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT BY THE COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS. Washington D. C July T H E PRESIDENT : SIR : The Council of Economic Advisers herewith submits a report The Economic Situation at Midyear in accordance with section ( c ) ( ) of the Employment Act of Respectfully Chairman Vice Chairman in Contents I. T H E COURSE OF ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT AND ITS PROBLEMS. The economy in transition Factors of underlying strength Elements of uncertainty The process of price and income adjustment The need for maintaining the rate of investment Public and private responsibilities Page II. ECONOMIC INDICATORS AND THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET. The course of employment and production Employment Production Prices wages and profits Prices Wages and labor relations Profits Money and credit The flow of goods and purchasing power Consumer income spending and saving Business investment and finance International transactions Government transactions Summary : The Nation 's Economic Budget APPENDIXES A. T H E NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET B. T H E DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME AND LIQUID ASSETS AND PERSONAL SAVING C. SURVEYS OF ACTUAL AND INTENDED BUSINESS INVESTMENT D. STATISTICAL TABLES RELATING TO EMPLOYMENT PRODUCTION AND PURCHASING POWER I. The Course of Economic Adjustment and Its Problems The United States in is faced with the problems of a new and strikingly different phase of postwar economic adjustment. We are seeking to liquidate inflation without being overcome by business depression. Our problem is to work out a lower level of prices without a further decline of production and employment and to effect the transition to more stable conditions conducive to maximum employment and production. In this review of the situation at midyear the Council of Economic Advisers is undertaking to report on the economic state of the Nation giving full value to the elements of basic strength but not failing to recognize the realities of current recessionary factors. We find the prospect reassuring THE ECONOMY IN TRANSITION During the early postwar years the situation was dominated by shortages of goods tremendous * backlogs of deferred consumer demand created by the war an acute shortage of productive capacity in many lines the vast accumulation of liquid savings and the high level of expenditures needed to meet military and foreign requirements. In earlier reports these various factors were dealt with extensively. It was pointed out that they represented the active elements in the inflationary course which the economy took after wartime controls were removed. So long as these extraordinary factors were maintained in combination it was possible to continue very high employment and production even without a balanced adjustment between prevailing prices and current incomes. But it was foreseen that when temporary supports slackened full prosperity could not be preserved without a wide range of adjustments It was not to be expected that all of these adjustments could take place without any temporary slackening of employment and production ; that would be too much to expect given the dynamic quality of our free economy But there was concern lest these adjustments if too long delayed would culminate in a manner which experience had taught us might carry the whole economy downhill rapidly and far. How to limit the inflation and prevent it from running a disastrous course to economic crisis and depression was the central theme of previous reports The public and private actions which were taken were not sufficient to prevent a very substantial degree of inflation from developing. More extensive measures of public control and more restrained private behavior would have reduced the difficulties of the inevitable adjustment. But the actions taken have been effective enough to prevent the kind of exaggerated speculative spree which could end only in a disastrous slump. The inflationary tendency has eased off gradually at one point after another so that we have arrived at the present stage where general inflationary pressures ? have disappeared without being followed by a collapse of the price structure In the first quarter of some reduction in the level of economic activity was expected on a seasonal basis. But in addition to this seasonal slackening there was an increase in the number of points at which the catching-up process caused markets to weaken and some reduction of production and employment to appear. After relatively moderate developments of this character in the first quarter intense interest centered on whether there would be the normal seasonal improvement in the second quarter. This was widely regarded as the test of whether or not the economy was slipping downward In the second quarter of the year there was indeed some noticeable improvement in various areas of industry particularly residential construction and a seasonal pick-up in agricultural employment. The level of consumer income remained high there was no general withdrawal from markets and no contagious development of sharp downward price spirals. On the other hand after allowance for seasonal factors the general drift of prices production and manufacturing employment was still downward And in particular the market weakness extended to metals and other products which at the beginning of the year were still in a tight demandsupply situation. It is no longer possible to describe the situation as one of mixed inflationary and deflationary forces as at the beginning of the year. The weakening of markets has become general FACTORS OF UNDERLYING STRENGTH Many factors augur well for the successful culmination of the readjustment process in early stability followed by renewed growth. Among the most favorable elements is that the readjustment has thus far proceeded gradually without giving rise to panickp reactions. Neither the sharp reaction in farm commodity prices in early nor the months ' downslide last fall and winter proved contagious. The management of inventories has been carried out in a spirit of caution rather than pessimism. Production which on account of inventory reductions has fallen below the rate of sales in many lines should before too long come back at least into line with current sales if nothing occurs to create more pessimistic anticipations Aggressive merchandising efforts have been producing favorable results in many markets. New investment in plant and equipment was higher in the first quarter of than a year earlier and is continuing at a high level. Investment plans as reported by recent surveys indicate no early let-down of serious proportions though there is considerable uncertainty about the situation months hence. Housing starts after reaching a low point in the winter have moved sharply upward to a level only just below that of a year ago. Business credit is in general available in ample amount and on favorable terms and there is no evidence of serious banking pressure on borrowers to liquidate their loans The strength of the economy is further fortified by many governmental policies and programs. Federal State and local governments have now undertaken many of the urgent public works which were deferred during the war and expenditures for these purposes will be expanding The payment of unemployment insurance and other social-security benefits has helped to sustain buying power and the demand for goods. The farm-price-support policy which was so important in the winter of and again in early gives assurance that there will not be a collapse of rural buying such as that which occurred in The international situation is responsible for an increase in combined Government expenditures for foreign aid and military preparedness which contribute to the domestic demand for goods and services. Through deposit insurance and other banking and financial measures the economy is protected to a high degree against financial crisis Both reflecting and reenforcing these elements of strength is the fact that disposable income has been well maintained. Gross national product national income consumers ' disposable income and consumer expenditures are at or near the levels of a year ago. Furthermore consumers and business firms have large resources of liquid assets and there has been no threatening increase of personal and business indebtedness such as that which in earlier periods has created vulnerability. Private debt is low and both home and farm mortgages are to a large extent on an amortized basis Evidence of the sort presented provides a basis for belief that we may have the unique and fortunate experience of liquidating a major inflation without falling into a severe recession ELEMENTS OF UNCERTAINTY In spite of these elements of strength the situation is beset with many uncertainties and problems. The most serious fact confronting us is that the decline which has reached serious proportions in some sectors of the economy has not yet been reversed Nonagricultural employment has declined by nearly million since a year ago mainly because of a substantial drop in manufacturing employment. Unemployment now stands at million above a year ago Roughly measured total production of goods and services in the first six months of measured in real terms appears to have been about V/2 percent below the last half of ( See chart ) The drop in industrial production has been more striking the index in June of this year being about percent below the peak level of last autumn. The sharpness of the recent declines in manufacturing is shown by a fall of percent between March and June of the present year It is probable that the growing industry practice of paid vacations will augment the drop in the production index during the summer months. The summer unemployment figures will reflect as usual the large number of persons who temporarily enter the labor force Total private investment a key element in the picture which reached a seasonally adjusted annual rate of more than billion dollars in the fourth quarter of fell by about percent to a 32-billion-dollar rate in the second quarter of This represents mainly a change-over from net accumulation of inventories to net liquidation. There has not been a similar decline in the level of investment in new construction and equipment Since its peak in August the wholesale price index has declined by about percent and since the end of by about percent. The consumer price index has declined by percent since the same peak month and by percent since the end of last year. The decline in personal incomes has been more moderate than might have been expected being in the first half of only percent below the second half of The uneasiness and business hesitation arising from all these circumstances will not be cleared away until actual developments introduce a new note into the business outlook. In the meantime business sentiment might be so adversely affected that the potential recuperative influences outlined earlier would not come into play. If uncertainty about the future should reach the point of distinct pessimism orders and inventories might be sharply reduced production cut back and investment plans shelved to an extent that would initiate a further spiral of unemployment loss of consumer income and decline in consumer demand The weight of evidence as we see it does not support so gloomy an outlook But we may still face an unsatisfactory alternative. While the decline may be halted or even reversed a satisfactory expansion might not follow Our real need is for industrial production not only to rebound to the level of present consumption but also for both production and consumption to continue to rise sufficiently to absorb a labor force which is both growing in size and increasing in productivity per man THE PROCESS OF PRICE AND INCOME ADJUSTMENT Previous Economic Reports have repeatedly pointed out that price levels which were geared to war-created temporary factors of demand and shortages of supply could not be sustained indefinitely. The downward CHART ECONOMIC INDICATORS CHANGES FROM 2nd HALF TO 1st HALF PERCENTAGE CHANGE PERCENTAGE CHANGE EMPLOYMENT Y//////A UNEMPLOYMENT NONAGRICULTURAL TOTAL CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT AGRICULTURAL EMPL0YMENT PRODUCTION PRODUCT ( PRICES ) GOODS AND UTILITIES ilii ! INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION PRIVATE CONSTRUCTION * HI BUSINESS : : : : : : : : : : : : ! I ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; ; : ; ; : PUBLIC EXPENDITURES CONSTRUCTION FOR NEW PLANT EQUIPMENT PURCHASING POWER NATIONAL INCOME IUUIUUUUUI FARM INCOME ( MANUFACTURING ) CORPORATE PROFITS AFTER TAXES PRICES * WHOLESALE CONSUMERS Eftfi&Sa OTHER * * ALL AND FOODS WITHOUT ALLOWANCE FOR INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT SOURCE : BASED ON DATA I APPENDIX D N adjustments now under way are a reflection of the fact that full production can no longer be absorbed by the market at peak price levels In its initial stages the process of downward price readjustment is almost certain to be accompanied by some declines in production and employment Price declines not only affect the critical relationships among various prices and the size and the distribution of money incomes. They have in addition two other important effects : the favorable effect of increasing the purchasing power of the dollar and the unfavorable effect of generating anticipations of further price declines which lead to postponement of buying thus depressing the levels of production employment and incomes Fortunately the process of price adjustment has been in the main orderly Although in individual cases it has been sharp it has not been widely characterized by dumping at distress prices. Its orderly character is in large part due to the fact that it has been occurring while consumer demand though weakened is still at very high levels with residential construction and investment in plant and equipment still very high and with government expenditures still rising. In the case of agricultural prices an additional factor has been the existence of support prices which while they have not prevented sharp fluctuations in prices have been effective in limiting the extent of the price fall The question arises nonetheless as to the extent to which the price cuts which have been made thus far have helped to stimulate demand. In the case of wholesale prices the reductions appear to have had little effect in stimulating business demand. For this there are two reasons : ( a ) The initial effect of price cuts when a trend is reversed is to create the expectation of additional price cuts thus further drying up demand a tendency which is reinforced by the fact that so many of the price cuts have been so slight in amount thus far ; and ( b ) there is the natural desire on the part of business to reduce inventories in a period of slackening demand before reordering on a more normal basis even in those areas where the price declines have been substantial. Though inventories were not out of line with sales business has been sensitive to the possibility of inventory losses due to price declines. The tendency to liquidate inventories accompanied by cut-backs of new orders has brought further downward pressure on prices and production In the case of consumer prices the declines as pointed out earlier have been much more limited than in wholesale prices. In individual cases where large cuts in prices have been made for sales promotion or where new lines at much lower prices have been introduced consumer response on the whole has been relatively favorable. One of the distinctive features during the war and the postwar inflation was the reduction in the volume of and the actual disappearance of many stripped models and lowpriced items of apparel and house furnishings which had formed so large a part of the sales during prewar years. With the weakening of consumer demand there is a growing trend now for manufacturers to reintroduce and emphasize such low-priced items to make products available to consumers at prices which they are able to pay. The relatively favorable showing in these lines indicates that consumers are actively seeking them. Taking consumer prices as a whole however the declines that have taken place have not been great enough to encourage consumers to expand their purchases of consumer goods The process of price adjustment to date suggests that further price reductions made promptly to promote volume and not tardily in response to falling sales are essential. Where and how they are made is also important While increasingly active competition has already brought about part of the needed adjustment there are many fields where the power to " administer " prices is strong and where the practice of price leadership is wellentrenched. It is in these fields that the capacity of businessmen to take the long view and to adopt policies conducive to fundamental and healthy economic readjustment will be put to the test. If while other prices are falling they cut production to whatever degree is necessary to maintain their prices they will impair the effort to maintain economic activity at the highest possible level Businessmen generally will not believe that any important group of goods can escape from the forces which are strong enough to compel the current general reduction in the price level and they will be unsure about the situation until price cuts which they believe are inevitable have been made on all important groups of goods and the results can be observed Competition will sooner or later force some kind of adjustment in these areas but voluntary and well-calculated price reductions now with a view to maintaining volume would be highly preferable to forced and possibly more drastic reductions later on A difficult problem of price adjustment is presented by the public-utility services especially transportation where competition is not directly effective Their prices are a substantial element in the cost of production of manufactured goods and instead of falling they are still rising in response to past advances in the cost of materials and labor. Public utility commissions as well as company executives have the special responsibilities of adjusting rates in relation to changed cost and demand conditions with special emphasis upon the interests of the economy as a whole The process of widespread price readjustment is not pleasant nor easy to effect. Weaker firms are overtaken by financial difficulties. Instances of inefficiency in management and low productivity of labor which tend to be condoned in times of inflation have to be eliminated. These are necessary conditions for establishing a firm economic base from which a new expansion can be projected What price adjustments will prove feasible and helpful must be considered in close connection with wage and other income adjustments Price reductions add to real income only if consumers ' money incomes are not correspondingly reduced. This leads to special concern for protecting those major sources of income upon which demand so largely rests. The attempt to secure lower prices through wage cutting would clearly be damaging at a time like the present when consumption demand is proving inadequate and business slack is developing. A sound first rule to apply now is that the general level of wage rates should at least be maintained. Beyond that there is a strong presumption in favor of having money wages move upward over the years to participate in the gains of technological progress and increased productivity. There are difficulties in applying the general principle to specific situations but this adaptation can be worked out through sound collective bargaining. Particular consideration should be given to those in the lower wage brackets With wage negotiations now under way in a considerable number of basic mass-production industries there is a possibility of an impasse While a still very high cost of living encourages a determined attitude on the part of labor the uncertain business situation encourages an equally determined attitude on the part of management. Should industry-wide strikes result they would not merely reduce the spending ability of the directly affected workers but would also spread loss of production and income to other areas and thus darken the business outlook. At the present time both employers and workers should strive to work out adjustments which will help to stimulate activity bearing in mind the need both for holding business costs down and for maintaining consumer purchasing power at high levels If wage incomes are maintained this obviously places a limit upon the extent to which prices can be adjusted downward. There would be no purpose and much potential damage in an attempt to get back to some drastically lower price level by wage cutting since incomes are now geared to prices substantially higher than before the war or immediately after the war. Such an effort would involve a deep and vastly unsettling decline in wages as the accompaniment to a prolonged period of severe depression From that practically no one would gain ; the economy would lose tragically Another example of the necessity of maintaining adequate buying power is to be found in the agricultural situation. The decline in the prices of farm products which began early last summer was not arrested until the prices of wheat corn tobacco cotton and hogs were close to or even below Government support levels. Farm income as a whole has been only moderately affected because lower prices have been in part offset by high yields But the prospects of another year of large crop production on top of present carry-overs indicate that the problems of supporting farm prices will be increasingly difficult The vulnerability of a small-unit industry whose markets are dominated by exchange and auction methods of sale has led to the development during the past years of governmental price supports to agriculture. It is now widely recognized that this institutional development has protected the economy against a danger of collapse in a major segment which on past occasions has tended to undermine the whole structure. While this institutional development needs still further improvement in the light of experience there is also need for further reduction of the prices of industrial products bought by farmers THE NEED FOR MAINTAINING THE RATE OF INVESTMENT The contraction in business investment this year has been due mainly to inventory liquidation but the completion of many postwar expansion and modernization programs adds an element of uncertainty to the future of investment in plant and equipment. Fortunately only a moderate curtailment of investment in plant and equipment has occurred and no severe curtailment is clearly in sight for the remainder of this year. Whether the liquidation of inventories during the first half of is followed by a more general investment slack next year depends in large degree upon the extent to which investment incentives continue to appear adequate. This in turn depends upon the speed with which the price and inventory adjustments result in an upturn in production and the extent to which other recessionary factors are offset by stimulative developments The problem of investment is closely connected with the profit question The maintenance or advance of consumer incomes during a period when price reductions are in process requires business to operate on narrower margins and for the time being to take smaller profits. In this connection businessmen should realize that it is safer to pursue a course of accepting minimum profits or even temporary losses than to conduct a rear-guard action to protect profit per unit. If in weakening markets downward price adjustments are resisted the effect is to reduce production and employment. A lower use of productive capacity and a more precarious structure of prices would be a much more serious deterrent to new investment than a situation in which basic adjustments supported a larger use of capacity In at least one respect moreover increased pressure on profit margins provides a stimulus to investment. With capacity in many fields now relatively adequate future investment will stem in larger degree from the competitive urge for modernization and improvement. This motive for investment will be strongest in an atmosphere of active competition where the maintenance of profit margins is subordinated to maintenance of competitive position as the primary aim of business pricing and investment policies The problem of adequate investment can not however be solved simply by making the price adjustments which are appropriate to weakening markets. These adjustments merely provide a sounder foundation from which to start. The actual decision to invest depends on business judg- ment concerning future markets and possibilities of profitable return A farseeing realization of the prospects for development is required and this is peculiarly needed at the present time. If businessmen act in the conviction that employment and the use of capital resources can with our present economic " know-how " be maintained at high levels with only minor dips of a readjustment character then they will go ahead with investment plans which will be adequate for a growing economy The investment plans reported recently while they show some decline are still at a high level. They presumably were based upon careful technological and managerial analyses of what is needed for firms to keep abreast of advancing techniques of changing consumers ' tastes and habits and of the predictable growth of population. While those plans represent the companies ' present intentions they could easily be curtailed if the business outlook should deteriorate and such curtailment would have the effect of aggravating the downward movement Among the foremost purposes of public economic policy must be that of keeping private investment incentives active. This it can do by providing supports which improve the short-run and long-run business outlook and by encouraging those institutional improvements which facilitate the investment process. When such measures are inadequate Government must take some direct responsibility for stimulating and supplementing private activity PUBLIC AND PRIVATE RESPONSIBILITIES The task now confronting us is made more challenging because the problem is not simply to prevent a further weakening of the economic situation but instead to reverse the trend and move toward higher levels of production and employment. We can not be satisfied with a static economy even if that could be achieved. Mere retention of current levels of production would mean that unemployment would grow from year to year and that we would fail to use our known capacity to lift the living standards of our people. With a growing labor force increased productivity new tools and improved business efficiency both production and employment must expand if we are to fulfill the conditions of a healthy economy. While the goal for of a million more jobs and a 4-percent increase in production set forth as our objective in January is not now being achieved the domestic aspirations of our people and the imperatives of world conditions alike require that we regain rapidly the full utilization of our material and human resources It is plain from the preceding analysis of current conditions and trends that the direction of further developments can not be forecast with any certainty. There is a considerable possibility that present adjustments will lead after some further decline this summer to an increase in production and employment. But there is still reason for real concern that the present slack may take a more serious recessionary turn or not be succeeded by an expansion to satisfactory levels of employment and production. Consequently it is necessary to approach the situation with positive and constructive measures rather than to assume that the recuperative factors at work are adequate in themselves The Employment Act of is designed to encourage an economy of free competitive enterprise. Our businessmen workers farmers and consumers create the Nation 's wealth and it is their decisions which will primarily determine whether the economy will move up or down and whether the Government will be required to play a larger or a smaller part. It is eminently desirable in the current situation that each of these groups base its action upon confidence in the long-run future of the American economy and thus contribute to the most favorable outcome. In this Midyear Economic Review we have sought to highlight those lines of private action which are most needed in this task But while we point out the course of private action that our analysis convinces us would be beneficial to the economy we are quite aware that many individuals feel compelled to act in accordance with what they feel is likely to happen in the short run rather than in accordance with what they would like to see happen over a more extended period. No one can quarrel with this natural rule of self-preservation but it indicates the need for the cultivation of a general economic environment in which all who participate in the Nation 's economic affairs would be justified in following en masse a course which few of them could run the risk of following alone It was with this dilemma in mind that the framers of the Employment Act also underscored the role of Government policy to promote through all its resources the objectives of maximum employment production and purchasing power. This involves no departure from our national traditions. It is important that Government agencies both executive and legislative reexamine and reshape policy in the light of the situations which have been developing during the first half of this year and are in broad outline foreseeable as to the second half. We have learned through bitter experience that a little recession may lead into a big depression before we find the road to renewed prosperity and this experience dictates the timely and preventive use of public policy to supplement the efforts of private enterprise In seeking to define and apply these public policies we are not writing on a blank page. The mere fact that the Federal Government is currently withdrawing well over billion dollars a year from private-income channels and is disbursing a like or even greater amount into the market and income stream means that the Government is already the most influential single factor in the current operation of the economy. What the legislative representatives and the executive agents of the people decide to do by way of enlarging contracting or redirecting these money streams and how they shape by legislative act or administrative policy the institutions through II which workers traders and investors conduct their private affairs may sharply affect conditions in the next few months and strongly affect them for the longer pull During the years of inflation the President rigorously held expenditures to the lowest levels consistent with meeting the most pressing of our domestic needs and international requirements. This was for the purpose and had the effect of reducing inflationary pressures. Our analysis has indicated that with the abatement of inflationary pressures such Government outlays have operated in the main as a salutary sustaining force and the slashing of such expenditures at this time would aggravate deflationary trends. On the other hand an attempt to raise taxes at this time in order to produce a balanced Budget would increase the difficulties of business management in trying to effect cost and price adjustments to sustain volume operations in a weakening market or would lessen the disposable incomes of consumers or would have both of these consequences. In the presence of these opposing difficulties the appearance of a Government deficit will have to be accepted In addition to fiscal policy there is essential need for promotion by Government of conditions under which the generality of businessmen will have the highest attainable confidence about the future course of economic development and therefore make those decisions which will contribute most to a favorable outcome. Similarly Government policies which support the maintenance and exercise of consumer purchasing power lend strength to the business system and to general public confidence. We have also determined that those unemployed in the process of economic transition whether they be many or few are entitled to such protection as our rich economy can reasonably provide because too much of the cost of such disturbances should not be borne by a particular group. And finally without a premature commitment of resources it is wise to prepare and make ready those programs of Government action which should be available to support economic expansion if the forces of the market alone should fail to provide the needed uplift. The understanding by the community that a far-sighted program has been adopted should in itself be a powerful factor in holding business activity on a high level Delay in implementing these principles would prove costly in terms of economic waste and loss of confidence. Action in time through the cooperative efforts of public and private instrumentalities at all levels will demonstrate that we have learned to pursue the twin objectives of economic stabilization and economic welfare under our free and democratic institutions II. Economic Indicators and the Nation 's Economic Budget The adjustment of the economy to a new price level following the abatement of postwar inflationary forces proceeded throughout the first half of without developing a sharp recessionary spiral. At midyear the process of transition is continuing in orderly manner T H E COURSE OF EMPLOYMENT AND PRODUCTION Employment In June of this year total civilian employment stood at million ; in June of last year at million During the first quarter of this year the monthly average of total civilian employment was about million compared with million during the first quarter of last year an increase of about But during the second quarter of this year the monthly average was million a drop of approximately from the average of million for the second quarter of last year. The pick-up in employment which occurred in the second quarter of last year has not been equaled this year Employment which rose by nearly million from March to June rose by slightly less than million from March to June ( See chart and appendix table D-7. ) In January the objective of maximum employment for the year was set at about million more jobs than in Developments during the first half of this year have fallen short of this objective and the trend of employment has not compared favorably with the first half of The most significant employment development of has been the substantial decline in employment opportunities in nonagricultural industries particularly in manufacturing. Nonagricultural employment has averaged about less during the first half of this year than during the first half of last year and it is currently nearly million below the level of months ago. Aside from government employment none of the major industry divisions during the first half of registered significant increases in employment over the first half of Transportation and service industries have shown some employment losses but most significant for the state of the economy has been the substantial decline in manufacturing employment which had by May fallen by nearly percent from the peak CHART LABOR FORCE Increased unemployment and decreased nonagricultural employment ( mainly in manufacturing industries ) highlighted labor force developments in the first half of MILLIONS OF PERSONS * MILLIONS OF PERSONS * UNEMPLOYMENT ARMED FORCES TOTAL LABOR FORCE CIVILIAN EMPLOYMENT MILLIONS OF PERSONS1 * MILLIONS OF PERSONS. * UNEMPLOYMENT ( magnified scale ) / V * i t * \ .k.. % : \ \ i f * * t i I i \ J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M A M J J A S O N O J F M A M J * I YEARS OF AGE AND OVER SOURCE ; DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE level of last September. The decline in manufacturing was about equally divided between durable and nondurable goods industries. ( See appendix table D-8. ) This downward trend in nonagricultural employment has been somewhat obscured by increases in the number of persons engaged in agriculture which have resulted in the average total volume of civilian employment for the first half of being only slightly less than the average for the first half of But it must be remembered that agricultural employment is subject to wide fluctuations because of weather conditions and that in periods of declining markets some industrial workers who would otherwise be unemployed support themselves by farm work. Both these factors appear to have played some part in increasing the level of farm employment from an average of million in the first months of to an average of million in the first half of ( See chart ) The true employment picture is disclosed not only by the numbers employed but also by the hours worked. These have declined significantly in some industries. In manufacturing as a whole the average of weekly hours has declined by more than hour between the first half of and the first half of This has resulted both from the elimination of much of the overtime that was still present a year ago and from the institution of shortened workweeks in industries where output has been reduced. Bureau of the Census data show that in May of this year about million persons were working a shortened workweek by reason of slack work material shortages job turn-over and similar economic factors compared with last September. In addition about persons with regular part-time jobs in May wanted and would have accepted fulltime work compared with about last September Against the declines in employment and hours in manufacturing there has been some increase in Government and agriculture. Partly because of the long hours worked in agriculture the total man-hours worked in the whole economy in the first half of were practically unchanged from those of the first half of last year. On a seasonally adjusted basis they were perhaps to percent below those of the last half of The difference between unemployment this year and last year can not be shown solely by the employment figures because there has been a growth in the labor force which would require more employment this year than last year to sustain maximum employment and hold unemployment to minimum practical levels. The average total labor force during the first half of this year was about million higher than that for the first half of Unemployment during the first months of averaged almost million compared with million during the first months of a difference of about million which means that there has been practically no absorption of this labor force increase into employment. Actually average civilian employment decreased by about balancing an equivalent increase in the armed forces. While unemployment in decreased from million in March to million in May and stood at million in June in it increased from million in March to million in May and stood at million in June Adult male workers have been at least as severely hit by declines in employment opportunities as have women and boys. This has been particularly noticeable since last autumn as employment declines have been registered in the heavy manufacturing industries The duration of unemployment is a significant indicator of the extent to which unemployment is primarily frictional or something more basic By June the number of persons unemployed weeks or longer had risen to compared with in June and last October Furthermore had been out of work for half a year or longer about double the number at the same time last year The number of persons unemployed more than a week and claiming unemployment compensation under State programs throughout the Nation early in June was percent of the total covered compared with percent last October. In most of New England the number amounted to more than percent in June Other States where unemployment is relatively heavy are California New Jersey New York South Carolina and Tennessee. The number of areas in which labor supply remains tight has diminished rapidly. Out of nearly major labor market areas were in tight supply last fall but by midwinter the number had fallen to and by early summer to The employment developments of the first months of this year may be summarized by saying that the weakening in the first quarter was more than seasonal and that continued declines in manufacturing in the second quarter outweighed seasonal gains in construction and other outdoor activities With unemployment now in excess of % million we have clearly passed the point where we can consider it primarily a " spot " or local problem In fact unemployment and underemployment have become widespread both industrially and geographically with heavy concentrations in many industrial centers It is estimated that during the past few months one out of four unemployed persons was not eligible for public unemployment benefits. In most cases ineligible persons were not covered by any plan or had been unemployed so long that their unemployment benefit rights had been exhausted Production The dollar value of all goods and services produced ( the gross national product ) during the first half of was about V/2 percent below the level of the second half of ( See appendix table D-l. ) Part of this drop was due to a decline in prices. Rough adjustments for price changes suggest that the actual output of all goods and services together dropped CHART INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION Total industrial production has declined since reaching a postwar occurred in almost peak last all major about fall Declines percent have industrial groups PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE TOTAL INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION I I A A S O N D I J F M I M I J DECREASES SINCE POSTWAR PERCENTAGE PEAKS * INDUSTRY GROUPS I99 S55< * >rVWWWX> xxxxxxxxx ^ TOTAL DURABLE GOODS Nonferrous Metals a Products Machinery KXXXXXXXX Iron a Steel yxxxAX ^ > V9WWS.W KtfXXX Lumber a Products Stone,Clay a Glass Products Transportation Equipment TOTAL NONDURABLE GOODS r Textiles a Products Rubber Products Alcoholic Leather F Beverages Products Paper a Products Chemicals f : : : : : ; : : : : : Petroleum a Coal Products Printing a Publishing Tobacco Products Manufactured Food Products m TOTAL Fuels Metals I DECREASES 8ASE0 ON P R E L I M I N A R Y I JUNE FIGURES. OATES OF POSTWAR PEAKS VARY SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM MINERALS by something like V/2 percent. This contrasts with the goal of maximum production of goods and services which we estimated in January at from to percent above the output of The most .persistent and substantial declines have been in industrial production ( manufacturing and mining ) which on a seasonally adjusted basis declined continually after last November and by June was about percent below the high level attained last fall. This rapid fall in industrial output in contrast with the relative stability of the nonindustrial segment of the economy has been typical of past recessionary movements. For manufactures the seasonally adjusted index which in June was percent of the average and reached a peak of in October declined to by March and to by June. During the early part of this period of decline reductions were greater in the production of nondurable goods than in the production of durable goods. In May and June however output of nondurable goods has shown little further decline while output of durables has fallen off considerably. For the minerals the seasonally adjusted index which stood at in November fell to in May of this year and with coal output curtailed declined further to in June. ( See chart and appendix table D-13. ) Situations in the major industry groups have varied. Some of the largest declines ( percent or more ) from postwar peaks are found in nonferrous metals and products textiles and textile products rubber products alcoholic beverages leather products machinery and lumber and products each of which has been declining for more than a year. Iron and steel production is currently also about percent below its first quarter peak with pronounced drops during recent weeks On the other hand automobile production has increased and activity in the tobacco products printing and publishing and most manufactured food products industries has shown little or no decline The volume of private nonresidential construction put in place so far this year has declined compared with the same period in but this decline has been virtually balanced by increases in public construction ( See appendix table D-14. ) New nonfarm housing units started through June are about percent fewer than the number started in the same period last year but starts in June were about the same as in June ( See chart p. ) This year 's agricultural production for human use is likely to approach that of unless weather becomes less favorable. Production of most livestock products is running slightly ahead of and an appreciable increase in hog marketings is in prospect toward the end of the year Another large wheat crop is being harvested. Preliminary information indicates a total crop acreage about the same as last year 's and except for continuing drought in the Northeast weather in the major agricultural areas so far has been generally favorable for crop development PRICES. WAGES AND PROFITS Prices Prices during the first half of declined on a broad front thus marking the first general reversal in the upward trend of prices which followed World War II. This decline signalized the end of the inflationary process that began in was held under control from to the middle of and then rapidly accelerated with the lifting of government price controls. At their August peak wholesale prices had increased about percent above and about percent above June Consumers ' prices also reached their peak in August but with less extreme advances about percent above and about percent above June ( See chart ) Wholesale prices. Compared with their previous large rise the declines in wholesale prices during the first half of have in the main been moderate and orderly although there have been sharp declines in individual commodities. Wholesale prices through June have declined about percent from their postwar peak and about percent from December They have now returned to the levels prevailing in August or about percent above the level and about percent above the June level. As the following table shows the price declines from the peaks have been unevenly distributed with the largest declines in farm products and foods chemicals and hides and leathers. ( See table and chart ) TABLE Changes in wholesale prices Commodity group Date of postwar peak Percentage cha to postwar p from June All commodities. Farm products Foods Other than farm products and foods Hides and leather products Textile products Fuel and lighting materials Metals and metal products Building materials Chemicals and allied products.. Housefurnishing goods _ Miscellaneous. _ Special groups : Raw materials _ Semimanufactures Manufactured articles._ _ August January August /September \ November December 1947._ May November January September January December 1948._ January July August August Preliminary estimates based on weekly indexes for June Based on index for May ; June not available Source : Department of Labor. ( See appendix table D-20. ) Percentage change to June * from Postwar December ' a-7.3 CHART PRICE CHANGES The fall in prices from the postwar peaks has been much greater for wholesale prices than for consumers ' prices. Compared with the previous large increases from and from June the declines have been very moderate. Rents continued to advance PERCENTAGE CHANGE \ WHOLESALE PRICES TO POSTWAR PEAK ALL COMMODITIES | | i i | | l l j j | | JUNE TO POSTWAR PEAK POSTWAR PEAK TO JUNE FARM PRODUCTS FOODS OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS CONSUMERS ' PRICES TO POSTWAR PEAK ALL ITEMS I l l l l l JUNE TO POSTWAR PEAK POSTWAR PEAK TO MAY FOOD APPAREL RENT I SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR POSTWAR PEAK IS MAY During the first quarter of the outstanding development was a sharp drop in farm and wholesale food prices in late January and early February reminiscent of the drop during the same period a year earlier. Some farm commodities notably corn fell substantially below their support prices but from mid-February forward there occurred a sizeable recovery in the levels of farm and food prices. Prices of fuel oils continued weak and weakness developed in scrap metals and in lead and zinc. By the middle of the quarter the general level of industrial prices had begun a downward drift as the prices of metals and metal products building materials and fuel and lighting materials turned down. The prices of textiles and other industrial groups continued the decline which had begun in In the second quarter while farm and food prices fluctuated most groups of industrial prices declined fairly continuously. Particularly striking were the series of declines in lead zinc and copper as well as in scrap metals Lead and zinc which had advanced more than percent and percent respectively during dropped percent and percent between March and June of Copper which had advanced less than percent during declined percent from April to June The declines in scrap-metal prices which began before the break in the primary CHART WHOLESALE PRICES Industrial prices declined steadily through the first half of Farm and food prices after considerable fluctuations ended the period with a moderate net decline PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVERAGE FARM PRODUCTS \ OTHER THAN FARM PRODUCTS AND FOODS N D J F M A M J J A S N SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR metals were somewhat greater scrap lead zinc copper and steel declining on the average about percent. By midyear some firming in the markets for lead and copper was noticeable. The base prices of steel remained steady but some steel producers lowered prices on individual products where their prices were out of line with the general level. The cost of steel to consumers declined through the disappearance of gray-market premiums some revisions of extras and the end of high-cost conversion deals Consumers3 prices. The general course of consumers ' prices during the first half of differed considerably from that of wholesale prices declining only slightly from the levels at the end of and only moderately from the August peak. Consumers ' prices declined during the first two months of continuing the fall that began in October then recovered slightly and finally dropped again in May. By May consumers ' prices were percent below the December level and percent below the August peak. This still left them about percent above the level and about percent above the June level. ( See table and chart ) CHART CONSUMERS ' PRICES Consumers ' prices declined only slightly during the first half of with food prices varying considerably. Rents continued to advance while many other retail prices declined steadily PERCENT OF AVERAGE PERCENT OF AVEIRAGE FOOD * / APPAREL ^ ^ s * v. ^ /. ITEMS * i i i i i i t i i t * ALSO INCLUOES HOUSEFURNlSHINGS FUEL ELECTRICITY REFRIGERATION AND MISCELLANEOUS GOODS ANO SERVICES NOT SHOWN OftTHIS CHART SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR There was no uniform pattern in the price changes of the major groups of consumer items during the first half of Retail food prices which are a dominant factor first declined then recovered part of the decline then weakened again following the course of wholesale food prices. Meat prices in particular were strong in the second quarter. Apparel and house * furnishings dropped steadily during the first half of continuing the downturn that began in late ; fuel electricity and refrigeration advanced slightly during the first quarter to a new postwar peak and then began to decline. The miscellaneous category rose during most of the period reflecting the increase in the cost of transportation the rise in gasoline prices and the continuing upward movement in such items as medical care and other services. Rents which had previously increased much less than other prices advanced steadily through the period The changes in consumers ' prices during the first half of and from their postwar peaks are shown in the following table : TABLE Changes in consumers ' prices Group Date of postwar peak Percentage change Percentage change to postwar peak _Jto_May from from All items Food Apparel Rent Fuel electricity and refrigeration Housefurnishings Miscellaneous /August \ September July October Mayl949__ March October April June } Postwar December Source : Department of Labor. ( See appendix table D-19. ) Wages and labor relations As opened the average real earnings of wage earners were slightly higher than a year earlier. This improvement had occurred however only in the closing months of when the modest decline in the cost of living served to increase slightly the real value of workers ' money wages Such wage increases as occurred during the first half of had only limited effect on the average of wages earned and were at least in manufacturing more than offset by declines in the average length of the workweek. Consequently average weekly money earnings fell in all manufacturing after reaching a postwar peak of $ in December and by May had declined to $ In some manufacturing and other industries the first half of the year registered declines in average hourly earnings as overtime work and other premium payments were reduced or eliminated and as some wage rates were reduced. ( See appendix tables D-9,D-10 andD-11. ) The slight declines in the earnings of wage workers were approximately balanced during the half year by further slight declines in the cost of living leaving average real weekly earnings of all wage earners practically unchanged The first half of was marked by delays in settlement of labor contracts in some of the major industries ; by a number of important instances such as in the textile and apparel industries where wage increases were either denied or not sought ; by some scattered wage reductions ; and by the settlement of many contracts particularly in local industries such as local public utilities construction and printing which provided for wage increases and frequently additional benefits in the form of health or welfare plans retirement programs or additional paid holidays. Such increases in wage rates as occurred in manufacturing industries were typically between and cents an hour. The most important agreement of the year to date was that between the railroads and the nonoperating unions which provided a retroactive 7-cent-an-hour wage increase and a reduction to start in September in the workweek from to hours without a reduction in pay for approximately employees With major negotiations still unsettled in coal rubber and steel as well as in automobile electrical machinery and most other metal-working industries the wage developments of the second half of the year will overshadow those of the first half. In fact the development of a trend in wage settlements which might have widespread effects necessarily awaits the settlements in the dominant mass-production industries which are still engaged in negotiation Labor relations during the first half year were relatively undisturbed by major work stoppages. Coal miners were out on two occasions the " memorial " stoppage in March and the " stabilizing inactivity " stoppage in June and the Ford company was struck for weeks in May. Aside from these disruptions most work stoppages during the months were essentially local in nature and generally of limited duration For the first months of the year the number of work stoppages was about percent greater than in the corresponding period of ; idleness resulting from this year 's stoppages however is estimated to be approximately one-third less than the January to June period of This development is at least in part a reflection of the postponement of negotiations in the major mass-production industries to midyear with the result that the second half of the year may witness a more crucial testing of labor relations than the first Profits After attaining record levels in profits declined during the first half of reflecting the reductions in prices and production. Corporate profits before taxes ( not adjusted for inventory valuation ) which were estimated at billion dollars in and at a peak annual rate of billion dollars in the fourth quarter of declined to an estimated annual rate of billion dollars during the first half of a fall of percent from the level of and of percent from the peak rate of the fourth quarter of Corporate profits after taxes were at an annual rate of billion dollars in the first half of compared with billion dollars in and an annual rate of billion dollars in the fourth quarter of that year. ( See appendix tables D-27 through D-31 for statistics on corporate profits. ) Corporate profits after taxes in the first quarter of represented about percent on sales and about percent on net worth compared with about percent on sales and about percent on net worth in A much more moderate decline was registered for unincorporated business and the professions net income before taxes ( not adjusted for inventory valuation ) declining from an estimated billion dollars in to an annual rate of billion dollars in the first half of a decline of somewhat more than percent. Net farm income before taxes declined from billion dollars in to an annual rate of billion dollars or about percent. ( See appendix table D-2. ) The decline in profits from the fourth quarter levels to the first quarter of affected most manufacturing groups. The largest declines were recorded for most nondurables and for such durable groups as electrical machinery fabricated metal products and motor vehicles. Chemicals on the other hand showed only a slight decline and apparel and printing showed increases. Compared with a year ago the following durable groups showed increases : nonferrous metals iron and steel and motor vehicles These differences in profit experiences reflected of course the uneven changes in rates of activity prices and costs among various industries The estimated annual rate of corporate profits before taxes of billion dollars in the first half of represents a decline of about billion dollars from the levels. This difference is about equal to the change in the replacements costs of inventories between the two periods with the prices of goods in inventories rising in and falling in ( This is discussed in more detail in appendix A-3 Business Account. ) Although the two profit rates after the inventory valuation adjustment are virtually identical for the two periods there was however an important difference in trend corporate profits rising quarter by quarter in but falling quarter by quarter in the first half of Although total profits for the first half of are considerably below the levels attained in this does not preclude the maintenance of healthy levels of return under conditions of high employment. In the present period of price-income adjustment the adverse effects of inventories acquired at high prices and of operating costs not yet fully pruned or shaken down color the picture unduly. Likewise we are now feeling the effects of reduced operating rates in many companies or industries due to current factors of uncertainty. As these are removed we shall have a better opportunity to ascertain what reductions in unit costs can be achieved by efficient management at high operating rates and what profit margins are needed to assure proper maintenance and expansion MONEY AND CREDIT The easy credit conditions which have prevailed since the war and which contributed to inflationary pressure have continued and are now an important element of strength when the process of readjustment entails difficulties in other aspects of the economy. Interest rates on business loans made by banks have risen slightly since the latter part of but the interest yield on corporate bonds and on Government securities has fallen. Pursuant to the policy of the Government to prevent excessive fluctuations in bond prices the Federal Reserve banks have sold substantial amounts of Government bonds in order to moderate the rise in market price. Further easing of credit conditions has been brought about by a reduction in reserve requirements and the Board of Governors has recently announced its policy to permit a decline in interest rates The requirements of business firms for working capital especially to carry increasing inventories and customer receivables lessened when acCHART BANK LOANS The decline of billion dollars in commercial bank loans during the first half of represented a decline in business loans at leading city banks MILLIONS OP DOLLARS MILLIONS OP DOLLARS ALL COMMERCIAL BANKS WEEKLY REPORTING MEMBER BANKS LEADING CITIES i I i F M I I A M J I J A I S O N A END OF MONTH ^ ESTIMATES BY COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS SOURCE : BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM M cumulation of inventories was arrested. After the close of the Christmas shopping season it was possible for business concerns to pay off bank loans and this process continued throughout the first half of this year. It affected the portfolios of the banks in the larger cities whose commercial loans declined about billion dollars or percent. ( See chart and appendix table D-23. ) Other types of loans by banks and total loans and investments by other financial institutions have been relatively stable Instalment buying adds to market demand during an inflationary movement but creates a condition which may aggravate a spiralling deflation Consumers who suffer a decline in income must reduce their current buying in order to meet their outstanding obligations on instalment contracts Instalment credit increased steadily after the war as durable goods especially automobiles became available but the total amount at the end of was not so high in proportion to consumer income as in ( See appendix table D-22. ) During the first half of instalment credit increased only half as rapidly as in the corresponding period of In view of the growing weakness in many consumer durable goods markets the regulations covering instalment credit were relaxed early in March and again in April The supply of money bank deposits and currency in the hands of the public declined by billion dollars in the first half of as a result of the reduction in business loans the lowering of prices and the seasonal accumulation of a Treasury cash surplus. Adjusted bank deposits were billion dollars on June and billion dollars a year earlier and currency outside banks declined from billion dollars to billion dollars. ( See appendix table D-24. ) The amount of bank deposits adjusted on December was billion dollars and currency outside banks was billion dollars T H E FLOW OF GOODS AND PURCHASING POWER Consumer income spending and saving Consumer disposable income was smaller in the first half of than in the last half of but the decline was less than that of the national income. Increased unemployment compensation payments offset in part the decline in wages and salaries and corporate income absorbed a considerable part of the impact of declining prices and sales. Personal taxes also declined. Consumption expenditures fell off more than disposable income so that personal saving was above the level of the first half of both absolutely and in relation to income. However there was a substantial drop in saving from the first to the second quarter Personal income. Personal income ran at the annual rate of about billion dollars during the half year a drop of about percent from the second half of In the second quarter of it was percent below CHART CURRENT NET PERSONAL SAVING Current net personal saving has increased substantially since Personal investment has absorbed a larger share of the saving increase and currency and bank deposits a smaller share BILLIONS OP DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS CURRENT NET PERSONAL SAVING Total 1949,1st. half ^ CURRENT NET PERSONAL SAVING SELECTED COMPONENTS CURRENCY AND BANK DEPOSITS " INVESTMENT ( GROSS ) i I -I -I LIQUIDATION OF DEBT -I 1st. half 1/ SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATE / INCLUDES SHARES IN SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATIONS * SAME AS CONSUMER SAVING IN THE NATIONS ECONOMIC BUDGET. * * NO CHANGE. * * * N O T AVAILABLE SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION the fourth quarter of The sharpest relative cut-back was in proprietors ' income farms and other unincorporated businesses and professions In absolute amount the largest decrease was in wages and salaries which account for nearly two-thirds of total personal income. Other income shares ( dividends rents and interest ) continued to increase although dividends turned down in the second quarter. An increase in government transfer payments to individuals mainly unemployment compensation benefits and payments to veterans for educational purposes partly offset the decreases in income from other sources. ( See appendix table D-3. ) The decrease in personal income in the first half of this year was partly compensated for by the rather sharp drop in income tax payments so that disposable personal income fell not much more than one percent from the level of the last half of Consumers ' prices meanwhile went down percent over the same period and with a slight increase in population real disposable income per capita remained about constant. ( See appendix tables D-4 and D-5. ) Personal consumption expenditures. Throughout rising personal income went increasingly into saving ( including personal investment ) with relatively small increases in personal consumption expenditures. ( See appendix tables D-4 and D-6. ) When income began to fall off in the first half of consumption expenditure in dollar terms dropped somewhat more than income. After the moderate price declines in the first half of the level of consumption was not changed significantly Important changes have been taking place in the structure of consumer demand during the postwar years. The proportion of disposable income spent for nondurable goods has been steadily declining since early Until this accounted for most of the increase in consumer saving since expenditures for durable goods and services rose nearly in proportion to income. In the first half of this year however expenditures for durable goods fell off significantly in relation to income. Meanwhile expenditures for services continued to go up and absorbed an increasing proportion of the declining personal income. This reflected in part continuing increases in rents and in prices of other services The fall in market demand for durable goods in the first half of this year was an important development in consumer purchasing. For major durables except some makes of automobiles market demand at current prices no longer exceeds supply Personal saving. Net personal saving increased both in absolute terms and as a ratio to disposable income from mid-1947 through the first quarter of but declined substantially in the second quarter. This saving has taken the form both of direct investment in homes farms and businesses and also of accumulation of liquid assets such as securities and bank deposits and the building up of insurance reserves. Increase in personal debt is offset against the increase in investments and liquid assets in order to arrive at net personal saving. This offsetting item increased greatly until the first quarter of Although net personal saving was increasing net liquid saving ( additions to currency and bank deposits securities and insurance reserves less the increase in consumer and mortgage debt ) declined from to and from to Saving was going increasingly into direct personal investment in homes and in farm and business inventories and plant and equipment. A considerable part of the increase in personal investment between and it is true was due to an increase in farm inventories which is largely involuntary. ( See appendix table B-4. ) Nevertheless the growth in investment as shown in chart is quite striking Since it constitutes a direct demand for goods and services it has been an important factor in sustaining the economy The trend of liquid saving on the other hand has until recently been downward. Liquid saving shows marked quarterly fluctuations as is shown in chart In the first quarter it is low because funds are withdrawn to pay taxes. In the first quarter of this year it amounted to about million dollars or less than half a billion at an annual rate. It contrasts sharply however with the billion-dollar reduction in liquid assets in CHART CURRENT NET LIQUID SAVING * Current net liquid saving in the last quarter of and in the first quarter of was sightly above the level of the previous year BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS CURRENT NET LIQUID SAVING / \ / ^ _ / ^ 1st. Qtr 2nd. Qtr 3rd. Qtr EXCLUDES GOVERNMENT INSURANCE ANO ARMED FORCES LEAVE BONOS SOURCE : SECURITIES ANO EXCHANGE COMMISSION th. Qtr the same quarter of The largest difference was in consumer debt where repayments exceeded new loans so that for the first time since the war there was a net contraction of consumer credit for the quarter as a whole. ( See appendix table B-5. ) Withdrawals of currency and bank deposits also were less than in the first quarter of last year Unlike direct personal investment liquid saving does not constitute a direct demand for goods and services. To maintain total demand the liquid savings put aside by some groups must be matched by borrowings on the part of other groups. A rising rate of saving in liquid form would reinforce the importance pointed to elsewhere in this report of maintaining a high level of business investment While as yet we have little evidence whether income has become more or less concentrated in the last year or months we do know that holdings of liquid assets are less evenly distributed throughout the population than they have been at any time since the end of the war. In early percent of families had no liquid assets and the percentage had increased to by early The number of families owning United States savings bonds has been declining ever since the war and it dropped substantially in and in The volume of deposits in the smaller bank accounts has likewise gone down over the past year and has gone down relatively more than have deposits as a whole Business investment and finance Total business investment in new construction equipment and inventory accumulation at a seasonally adjusted annual rate reached an all-time peak of billion dollars in the final quarter of This represented percent of the total national product of goods and services. In the first quarter of this private investment again adjusted for seasonal variation fell to billion dollars or percent of the gross national product and in the second quarter to billion dollars or percent. Comparing the adjusted annual rates in the fourth quarter of last year and the second quarter of this year total private investment declined by percent while the gross national product declined by only percent. Most of the decline in investment was due to a shift from net accumulation to net liquidation of inventories. ( For further details see appendix table C-l. ) This illustrates the greater relative fluctuation in investment outlays as compared with other expenditures a characteristic of previous swings in the business cycle. As earlier reports have stressed the unusually high ratio of business investment to consumption in the postwar period is significant because it raises the question whether it can be permanently maintained. As regards investment in expansion of inventories it is quite clear that the pace set in the first three postwar years was abnormally fast It is desirable to seek a more stable ratio of business investment to consumption. A downward swing in total investment may generate large-scale unemployment and business uncertainty if it is too abrupt and goes too far Too often in the past declines in investment have aggravated a depression trend as the reduction of employment and income in producers ' goods and construction industries weakened the consumer markets on which profitable further investment in facilities depended. The present problem is thus to see that business investment does not fall to levels below those needed for the maintenance of technological progress but provides for a healthy rate of growth. In this sector of the economy as elsewhere it is necessary to prevent some of the excesses of the boom from leading to excesses in the opposite direction Plant and equipment. The high levels of plant and equipment investment in recent years have been a response to high postwar levels of demand straining the capacity of facilities which in all but a few industries at the end of the war were still geared to prewar markets and production techniques. ( See chart ) A nongovernmental survey made late in indicated that the larger manufacturing concerns expanded capacity during the years at an average rate of about percent a year which is much faster than the long-run growth trend of industrial output in the past In the second quarter of the dollar rate of nonfarm plant and equipment outlays was apparently for the first time in the postwar period no higher than that of a year earlier although still at a very high level. The quarterly SEG-Gommerce sample survey of investment anticipations made in May showed that businessmen expected to spend percent less on plant and equipment in the third quarter of than in the second quarter of or the third quarter of Taking into account the decline in costs of construction and equipment this probably represents little change in volume. Though the plant and equipment investment outlays of gas and electric utilities are still running well above levels of a year ago those of most main fields of nonfarm business are expected to fall below those levels in the third quarter according to this survey. ( See appendix table D-15. ) Construction contracts and equipment orders indicate that plant and equipment outlays in the fourth quarter of this year will be below those of the fourth quarter of Projects already scheduled are generally being followed through but there appears to be hesitation in scheduling new major investment commitments in view of uncertainties as to markets prices and costs. Investment plans will of course be influenced by the trend of changing economic conditions If expenditures for plant and equipment should decline below current levels the decline would not reflect a general excess of productive facilities in relation to the needs of a maximum employment and production economy For such an economy present capacity in general is now no more than adequate and in some industries is distinctly inadequate. Continued long-run economic growth will call for further expansion of productive capacity though quite possibly not at as rapid a pace as in the first postwar years CHART NON FARM PLANT & EQUIPMENT OUTLAYS & INVENTORY ACCUMULATION Inventory accumulation gave way to liquidation in the second quarter of Seasonally adjusted outlays for plant and equipment turned down but were still close to peak levels BILLIONS OF DOLLARS BILLIONS OF DOLLARS PLANT AND EQUIPMENT O U T L A Y S ^ INVENTORY ACCUMULATION ( ADJUSTED FOR REVALUATION ) * * S E E APPENDIX TABLE C l SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Moreover there is no definite ceiling on the amount that might be spent continuously under favorable conditions for modernization of facilities. It appears in fact that in some important classes of capital goods including motor vehicles tractors locomotives railroad cars and oil refining equipment there is now a special backlog of deferred replacement needs arising from the unusually high proportion of over-age units in service Nonfarm business inventories. By the spring of postwar replenishment of stocks was completed in virtually all lines and the weakening sales and prices led businessmen in general to buy a little less than they expected to sell. Even though inventory accumulation had been generally moderate throughout and inventories were not out of line with current sales book values of inventories were sufficiently high to arouse caution when the outlook weakened. Business was sensitive to the effect of possible price declines on the value of such inventories based as they were on high postwar levels of prices The total book value of inventories in manufacturing and trade declined by billion dollars during the half year from billion at the end of to billion at the end of June Changes in book values reflected in part the price decline and the normal seasonal tendency for stocks to rise in the first quarter and to decline in the second. The most significant development was the shift from accumulation of nonfarm inventories at an annual rate of billion dollars during the first quarter after adjustment for revaluation and seasonal variation to liquidation at a similarly adjusted annual rate of billion dollars in the second quarter TABLE Changes in manufacturing and trade inventories and index of new orders [ Not adjusted for seasonal variation ] Item First Second Third Fourth First quarter quarter quarter quarter quarter April May ' Change in book value millions of dollars Inventories : Manufacturing and trade Manufacturing _ Materials and goods in process Finished goods.>_ Wholesale trade Betail trade Average quarter or month of = New orders received by manufacturers : All manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Preliminary estimates NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to total because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce The shift of inventory position shown in chart has had an important impact on producers ' order books and on the financial requirements of business in general as discussed elsewhere in this review. During at least the first or months of the year manufacturers ' stocks of finished goods awaiting sale rose while their stocks of materials and goods in process ( related to actual and prospective production ) were falling off. This held good in both durable and nondurable lines with the accumulation of finished stocks predominant in durables and the reduction of materials and process stocks predominant in nondurables. Attempts to cut inventories of materials were offset by an unwanted piling-up of unsold goods The relatively cautious and well-informed inventory policies of business in general in the postwar period as compared to previous periods of prosperity had moderated the potential inflationary effects of inventory buying and left the ratio of inventories to sales still low by prewar standards after years of postwar restocking. Adjustments in individual business and the broader adjustment to general business slackening in the first half of were therefore accomplished more quickly and with less effect upon production rates than had been the case in most comparable earlier periods. During the second quarter the stocks of retailers wholesalers and manufacturers all declined in both value and physical volume reflecting general expectations of falling sales and prices. At the middle of the year stocks were still a little below prewar ratios to sales and even the proportion of manufacturers ' stocks of finished goods to their total stocks was likewise still conservative by prewar standards. ( For further details see appendix tables D-16 D-17 and D-18. ) In a number of specific lines of business the liquidation of inventories had proceeded so far by the middle of that some recovery of business purchasing and even a moderate resumption of inventory accumulation in these lines could be expected later in the year. In other lines the outlook is for further liquidation Corporate finance. During the first half of the postwar corporate financing picture underwent a drastic change. In and corporations had used an average of billion dollars a year to finance inventory accumulation and expansion of customer financing but during the first six months of this year they needed no new capital for these purposes. On the contrary there was a net liquidation of these accounts to the extent of billion dollars. Funds obtained from this liquidation plus a continued high level of profits enabled corporations to reduce their existing indebtedness substantially principally in the form of bank loans and accounts payable and at the same time to finance a continued high level of plant and equipment expenditures. ( See appendix table D-32. ) Though the decline in financial requirements for increase of working capital was abrupt it represented a natural adjustment following a postwar period of restocking and rapidly rising prices in which the value of both inventories and credit to customers increased much more than would be required for long-run normal business growth. Even in as chart indicates there was a marked trend toward smaller new working capital requirements During the first months of internal sources of funds for new investment fell about percent below last year 's level. Because of general maintenance of dividend payments retained earnings fell by a greater proportion than total profits during this period. Depreciation reserves continued to rise moderately ; and in general corporations did not reduce their liquid assets significantly either to finance expansion or to reduce indebtedness Since this decline in internal funds was much less than the decline in total financial requirements corporations were able to reduce their total liabilities by more than billion dollars in the first half of This is in sharp contrast with the experience of the last several years. Corporations acquired debt capital to the extent of about billion dollars in and about billion dollars in The net reduction in total corporate liabilities was due to a very sharp decline in short-term debt partially CHART CORPORATE FUNDS SOURCES A N D USES The major changes in the corporate financial picture during the first half of were a liquidation of nearly billion dollars in inventories and customer receivables and a large repayment of bank and trade debt BILLIONS OF DOLLARS rlO SOURCES * RETAINED PROFITS * * a DEPLETION ALLOWANCES DEPRECIATION INCREASE IN BANK LOANS a MORTGAGES NET NEW ISSUES CHANGE IN TRADE DEBT USES i PLANT a EQUIPMENT OUTLAYS # lltim W ! k A INCREASE IN CHANGE IN CUSTOMER RECEIVABLES * * * * * * mmmm wmmm i FUNDS FOR " OTHER " SOURCES NOT SHOWN HERE PROFIT ESTIMATES FOR 1st HALF B COUNCIL OF ECONOMIC ADVISERS Y ANNUAL RATES NOT ADJUSTED FOR SEASONAL VARIATION SOURCES : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ESTIMATES BASED ON SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION AND OTHER FINANCIAL DATA i offset by an increase in long-term debt. During the first half of the year bank loans fell by about billion dollars and debts to other firms by billion dollars. On the other hand new bond issues and mortgage loans together exceeded the rate during this period. This is in part a reflection of the continued large demand for investment funds in the public utility field. Also corporations have used proceeds from long-term loans and bond issues to retire existing short-term indebtedness. Stock issues continued to be small in comparison with bond issues though there has been some rise in common stock financing The burden of corporate debt as measured by its relation to income is very much smaller at the present time than in either the 's or the 's. Moreover interest rates are significantly lower particularly in comparison with the 's In evaluating the present financial position of business firms it should be emphasized that there are wide differences in the financial positions of individual concerns and there is some evidence that in the present weakening of business conditions these differences have increased. Smaller corporations have experienced a relatively sharper decline in profits and their position with respect to liquid assets is not as favorable as that of the larger corporations Housing. Last year new dwelling units for nonfarm families were started according to estimates of the Department of Labor. ( See chart ) The total number of units added from all sources including conversions remodeling and shift from farm to nonfarm categories was considerably greater. This was a high figure but certainly inadequate to meet the needs of a growing population and improved standards of housing For example about the same number of dwelling units were started in with a much smaller population and a much smaller accumulated housing shortage. More important the distribution of this housing among various price ranges has been inadequately adjusted to the income structure. This creates the problem of avoiding a decline in housing construction when the relatively thin demand for high-priced housing is saturated In the first part of housing starts were less than a year earlier There has been a sharp upturn since March but even if a favorable trend continues it is certain that the output for as a whole will be far below the estimated need of well above million units a year exclusive of farm housing. From the viewpoint of investment and employment opportunities an expanding housing program would be an important stabilizing factor in an expanding economy. The problem is primarily one of housing costs in relation to the income structure There is evidence that economies are now being made through declines in cost of materials and narrowing of margins of contractors and subcontractors and that the efficiency of the new labor force trained since the war has increased. Partly in consequence of this the houses started this CHART NEW HOUSING STARTS In the latter part of housing starts fell below the previous year. There has been a more than normal upswing in and housing starts in June were about equal to the number for June THOUSANDS OF UNITS THOUSANDS OF UNITS I D I J F M A M SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF LABOR summer should sell for considerably less than the houses started last summer Price adjustments this year fall far short of an adequate alignment of housing costs to housing needs and to the incomes of purchasers. The housing problem is still outstanding and its solution will require redoubled efforts International transactions In the final quarter of the surplus of exports over imports of goods and services had increased for the first time since the inception of the European Recovery Program reversing more than a year of continuous decline. In the first half of the total export surplus continued to increase as is shown in chart and in table From an annual rate of billion dollars in the last quarter of it rose to an estimated annual rate of billion dollars in the second quarter of providing a moderate offset to the domestic forces making for sagging production and employment. ( The relation of the export surplus to the net foreign investment component of the Nation 's Economic Budget is explained in appendix A. ) TABLE United States exports and imports of goods and services [ Billions of dollars ] Exports of goods and services Period average. _ _ Annual rates : : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second ^ quarter Imports of goods and services i Surplus of exports of goods and services * i Includes income on investments > Estimates based on incomplete data Source : ] Department of Commerce The increase in the first part of this year took the form of an expansion in the surplus of exports of goods rather than of services resulting both from increased exports and reduced imports. The increase of merchandise exports resulted almost entirely from increased shipments to Asia chiefly to Japan and to western Europe the areas receiving increased government aid In the European Recovery Program had tended to support rather than increase our shipments to the participating countries. In the first quarter of exports to participating countries for the first time approached the level that had existed prior to the establishment of the program. Total exports of goods in the first months were almost as high as in the corresponding period of with agricultural exports percent higher in value and nonagricultural exports about percent lower. ( Additional information concerning merchandise exports is provided in appendix tables D-35 D-36 and D-37. ) As inflationary pressures have eased government export controls have been adapted to the changing situation. Until the latter part of the major emphasis in the administration of export controls was the protection of the supply needs of the domestic economy. At the beginning of there were still commodities on the list of items under export quotas Easing of the supply situation has made possible the removal of license control on exports of many goods and also the removal and liberalization of quotas on exports of many others that remained under license. Despite the imposition of license control on some additional items for security reasons the total number of commodities under license was reduced to by the end of June The dollar value of merchandise imports in the first half of the year fell almost percent below that of the rate prevailing in the last quarter of apparently reflecting mainly the movement of domestic business ac- CHART EXPORTS AND IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES The export surplus continued to rise in the first half of primarily because of declining imports BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES BILLIONS OF DOLLARS ANNUAL RATES EXPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES * EXPORT SURPLUS : : : : : : : IMPORTS OF GOODS AND SERVICES * Practically all of the export surplus was financed by ERP or other Government aid EXPORT SURPLUS * * * INCLUDES INCOME ON INVESTMENTS ESTIMATE BASED ON INCOMPLETE DATA SOURCE : DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 4O tivity. The physical quantity of imports after having moved upward irregularly but definitely for more than a year declined although foreign ability to supply exports continued to increase. In physical terms the level of imports in the first months of was only percent above prewar levels although the increase in domestic production and purchasing power above prewar was vastly greater and United States tariffs were lower. This level of imports is considerably lower than interwar relations between imports and domestic production would lead one to expect the difference being concentrated in Europe and Asia. ( Additional information relating to merchandise imports is shown in appendix tables D-38 D-39 and D-40. ) Until recently it was possible to regard the relatively low quantity of imports as a temporary result of the war-caused reduction in foreign capacity to export which left the United States demand for foreign goods unsatisfied If this were still the cause a fall in domestic business activity might not reduce imports correspondingly. The decline of imports in the first half of this year however indicates that the United States market demand for foreign goods was being substantially met at the going prices and exchange rates. This situation suggests that a continuation of recent declines in domestic demand and production would with present relations between foreign and American prices and present exchange rates result quite promptly in a further decline in the dollar value of our imports Under prevailing conditions of depleted dollar reserves there is a close relation between our foreign purchases and sales. A reduction in the dollars available to foreign countries therefore would tend to reduce domestic economic activity unless it were offset by changes in the amount of our foreign aid Foreign aid is not as great as it had been during the spring of when it reached a rate of billion dollars a year and accounted for nearly two-thirds of the total export surplus of goods and services. But as table shows payments made under it are now almost equal to the total export surplus. ( More detailed information relating to the balance of international payments and foreign aid is shown in appendix tables D-33 and D-34. ) Payments under the European Recovery Program are probably about at their peak. The effects of the program upon the domestic economy are felt before payments are made however. Taking into account the probable course of procurement to be authorized under the European Recovery Program it appears likely that the most intense effect of existing foreign aid programs upon the domestic economy has already been felt. Proposed military aid under the North Atlantic Pact is not expected to have any significant economic impact during Government aid and United States imports of goods and services have recently been virtually the entire source of dollars that foreign countries have employed currently for purchasing American goods and services. With foreign aid about at its peak and with imports showing a tendency to slacken no further impetus to domestic employment production and purchasing power appears likely to come from exports during the rest of this year TABLE Financing the surplus of goods and services supplied to foreign countries [ Billions of dollars ] Means of financing Surplus of exports of goods and services Period Government aid ( net ) Liquidation of foreign gold and dollar assets ( net ) a Other means of financing ( net ) * Annual rates : : First quarter Second quarterThird quarter Fourth quarter.. : First quarter Second quarter _ average Includes income on investments Includes grants and loans but excludes subscriptions to the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund. For detail see appendix table D-34 Includes net sales of gold to the United States and net liquidation of foreign dollar assets including long-term investments. Excludes liquidation of assets held by the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund Includes movement of United States private capital gifts net dollar disbursements by the International Bank and the International Monetary Fund and allowance for errors and omissions Estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce Government transactions In the main trends in the receipts and expenditure programs of the Federal State and local governments during the first months of this year have conformed to the picture set forth in the Council 's review in January In some cases however these trends have been sharper than anticipated As has been customary in previous reports all figures in this section are on the so-called consolidated cash basis rather than on the conventional budget basis. They reflect the volume of current cash transactions between government and the public and hence are useful in judging the immediate economic impacts of government programs. ( A detailed description of the concepts used is given in " The Budget of the United States " p. ) Cash payments by the Federal Government. Table shows the volume of Federal cash payments to the public classified according to function for and the first half of In terms of seasonally adjusted annual rates the total volume of payments increased by billion dollars or percent over during the first months of this year TABLE Federal cash payments to the public by function [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Function JanuaryJune National defense International affairs and finance _._ __ Veterans ' services and benefits Social welfare health and security _ _ Agriculture and agricultural resources Interest on the public debt _ Other _ Deduction from Federal employees salaries for retirement Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports JulyDecember January June i Total payments to the public i Estimates based on incomplete data ^ NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : See appendix A Three major areas of increase were already clear by the second half of namely purchases for defense international affairs and finance and Federal construction programs for resource conservation and development highways and other purposes. In addition the continuing decline in farm prices had led to an increase in net outlays for price support operations ; and there had been a significant increase in payments from unemployment insurance trust funds and in veterans ' benefit payments. Payment of National Service Life Insurance dividends is likely to start around the beginning of next year It was feared at the start of the year that certain of these expanding programs especially in the defense and construction fields might aggravate supply shortages and upward price trends which were then evident These difficulties have not developed and it is clear that Federal programs have provided substantial support to an otherwise weakening market situation. The increases in net outlays for farm price supports and in unemployment compensation payments were of course an automatic response to farm price declines and rising unemployment. They have partially offset the loss in farm and consumer incomes that would otherwise have taken place Cash payments by State and local governments. As nearly as can be determined from incomplete information payments by State and local governments still are following the upward trend which was described in the Council 's review in January Total payments for the first months of this year are estimated to have run at an annual rate of about billion dollars or about percent above the total for the year and about percent above the second half of As has been true since the end of the war public construction continues to be the most sharply rising component in the activities of State and local governments. State-local construction in was percent above the level and for the first half of this year it was percent above the same period of ( See appendix table D-14. ) While some prog * ress is thus being made in providing for schools hospitals streets and highways and other community facilities the requirements yet to be met are still very large. In terms of physical volume construction activity of State and local governments is still well below its level. The disappearance of inflationary pressures has been accompanied by an appreciable drop in construction costs. State and local governments should make sure that their planning is sufficiently advanced to allow them to take full advantage of this situation Staffs are still being expanded and salaries increased in line with postwar developments. The total number of employees of State and local governments was in January as compared with a year before an increase of } percent. An additional but temporary influence which has reenforced the upward trend of government cash payments has been the granting of veterans ' bonuses by a number of States Federal cash receipts from the public : the cash deficit. Federal cash receipts from the public for the first half of on a seasonally adjusted annual rate basis were about billion dollars only slightly below the level of the last months of although about billion dollars below the first part of and billion below the total for as a whole This reflects not only the fact that the drop in business activity during the first months of this year was moderate but also the fact that receipts from a number of taxes during these months reflected the activity levels of the preceding year. Recent declines in corporate profits for example will not be fully reflected in Federal cash receipts until the first half of The increase in expenditures and decline in receipts resulted in a cash deficit of about billion dollars ( annual rate seasonally adjusted basis ) for the first half of this year as compared with a cash surplus of about billion for the last half of and of billion for as a whole. Under existing legislation the continued upward trend in payments will result in a larger deficit for the year even with the maintenance of fairly high levels of business activity State and local cash receipts. On the basis of incomplete information it is estimated that the cash receipts of State and local governments during the first half of were equivalent to an annual rate of about billion dollars or about percent above the receipts of billion for the year If business activity remains fairly high the new taxes and increased rates which have been enacted since the war including a number of new municipal nonproperty taxes recently permitted by State enabling legislation may be expected to produce a continued upward trend in receipts The increasing reliance of State and local governments on sales and income taxes as compared with the relatively inflexible property tax however will tend to mean a greater responsiveness in State and local tax revenues to changes in general business conditions The estimates of the annual rates of cash payments and receipts for the first half of indicate a cash deficit of about billion dollars as compared with the figure of nearly million for the year The considerable increase in borrowing which has been required to meet large capital outlays and veterans ' bonuses has brought the gross debt of State and local governments close to its all-time peak in Despite this increase in debt however their fiscal position is considerably stronger than in the prewar period or in The total of State and local gross debt in was about times tax collections ( excluding unemployment compensation taxes ) whereas the ratio for both and was about State and local governments are therefore in a better position to borrow in order to maintain needed programs Table summarizes the aggregate cash transactions of all levels of government Federal State and local combined. Aggregate cash payments during the first half of are estimated to have been equivalent to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of about billion dollars or more than percent above the level of billion. The annual rate of cash receipts by all levels of government during this period is estimated at billion dollars or about percent below the level. On the basis of seasonally adjusted annual rates this is equivalent to a deficit in aggregate government transactions of about billion dollars as compared with a surplus of about billion dollars for as a whole and of about TABLE Government cash receipts from and payments to the public ( Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Receipt or payment JanuaryJune Cash receipts : Federal.. State and local Total cash receipts _ __ Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) : Federal State and local Total surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix A JanuaryJune l Cash payments : Federal __ _ State and local Total cash payments JulyDecember billion for the second half of The prospect is that this deficit will increase substantially in the second half of this year even if business activity continues at high levels Summary : The Nation 's Economic Budget For the first time since the immediate postwar readjustment period the Nation 's Economic Budget reflects a decline in business activity extending over months or more. As shown in the accompanying table the Budget total or gross national product declined about billion dollars ( seasonally adjusted annual rate ) from the second half of to the first half of This is a decline of about / percent in current dollars or about V/z percent after allowing for declining prices. ( See chart ) The percentage drop from the fourth quarter of last year to the second quarter of this year was about percent in terms of current prices The most conspicuous facts reflected in the Nation 's Economic Budget are that business investment shows a sharp reduction from the second half of to the first half of while consumer income and expenditures dropped only moderately. The decline in business investment represents CHART THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET CHANGES FROM 2nd HALF TO 1st HALF Increases in Government cash payments failed to offset declines in private expenditures especially investment in the first half of this year PERCENT OF 2nd half GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT ( t o t a l ) * CONSUMERS BUSINESS GOVERNMENT ( FEDERAL STATE LOCAL ) ALSO INCLUDES INTERNATIONAL ACCOUNT NOT SHOWN IN CHART INCLUDES RETAINED EARNINGS ADDITIONS TO RESERVES AND INVENTORY VALUATION ADJUSTMENT SOURCE : BASED ON DATA IN APPENDIX A largely a reversal in the trend of inventory accumulation which in turn largely accounts for the present decline in economic activity. This inventory adjustment has resulted from a basic discrepancy between the trend of increasing production and relatively stable consumer demand over the last few years. With the progressive fulfillment of extraordinary backlog demands over the past to months a slack developed first in the demand at prevailing prices for certain luxury items and subsequently for one category after another of consumers ' and producers ' goods. With production increasing more than consumption inventories were built up steadily. As consumers failed to absorb promptly the growing flow of goods TABLE The Nation 's economic budget [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] second half Economic group first half Receipts Expendi- Excess or Receipts Expendi- Excess or deficit tures tures deficit CONSUMERS Disposable income relating to current production Transfers and interest Disposable personal income Expenditures for goods and services Personal saving ( ) ._ _ -._ BUSINESS Retained business receipts Gross private domestic investment ._ S Excess of investment ( ) .__ INTERNATIONAL Net cash Government loan transfers abroad Net foreign investment _ Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) GOVERNMENT ( FEDERAL STATE AND LOCAL ) Tax payments or liabilities Adjustment to cash basis _ Cash receipts from the public Purchases of goods and services Oorernment transfers S _ Cash payments to the public Excess of receipts ( ) or payments ( ) s +S.0 ADJUSTMENTS For receipts relating to gross national product Other adjustments Total : Gross national product Estimates based on incomplete data Includes adjustment for inventory valuation. See appendix table A-3 NOTE. Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer payments and receipts and subtotals including them are in italics ; these items are not included in the gross national product Details will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : See appendix A swelling inventories induced business to cut down its orders and to stop and recently to reverse inventory accumulation The sharp cut in industrial production and the inventory decline had only a moderate effect on consumer income and expenditures for the first half of as a whole. A noticeable decline started however in the second quarter. The relatively high level of the first half of the year has been due to the fact that while employment in manufacturing and mining industries was curtailed employment in most other activities was maintained or increased ( after allowance for seasonal variation ) Thus productive activity employment and personal incomes derived from productive employment decreased much less in the aggregate than in manufacturing industries alone. As a strengthening factor there was a rise in expenditures by Federal State and local governments as indicated in the Nation 's Economic Budget table. Some of these additional government expenditures are reflected directly in an increase in transfer incomes derived from rising unemployment compensation and veterans ' allowances in part offsetting the decline in incomes derived from current production. For the first half CHART SAVING & ABSORPTION OF SAVING Consumer saving remained high in the first half of but the excess of business investment declined and the Government surplus was changed into a deficit BILLIONS OF DOLLARS SEASONALLY ADJUSTED ANNUAL RATES ABSORPTION OF SAVING ( ) SAVING ( ) | SECOND HALF CONSUMERS * * -BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL- * ) GOVERNMENT * ( FEDERAL STATE.LOCAL ) FIRST HALF CONSUMERS -BUSINESS INTERNATIONAL -GOVERNMENT ( FEDERAL,STATE LOCAL ) " PERSONAL SAVING SOURCE : THE NATION 'S ECONOMIC BUDGET ( Appendix A ) of the year government ran a deficit as compared with a surplus in the preceding period. ( See chart ) Some conditions are now favorable for a reversal of the downward trend in industrial production and employment. Inventories in several lines of business already have been brought into a better relationship with sales there are indications that prices are being brought into a better relationship with disposable incomes and it is probable that orders have in many cases been cut below the level justified by current markets. The expected further rise in government expenditures will continue to give support to demand There are other factors however which could produce a further weakening. For example present surveys indicate that business expenditures and investments in plant and equipment in the third and fourth quarter of may run increasingly below the levels attained in Thus if counteracting forces are not marshalled it is at least possible that the inventory and price adjustment may develop into an investment recession later this year or next year Despite the significance of investment it should be stressed that the downturn commenced with a failure of consumer markets to expand in line with total output. The maintenance and stimulation of consumer expenditures are essential both for maintaining total expenditure commensurate with our increasing productive capacity under maximum employment and for providing a substantial basis for a sustainable high level of investment itself Appendix A The Nation 's Economic Budget Tables Page The Nation 's Economic Budget Consumer account Business account ^ International account Government account ( Federal State and local ) Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowing calendar years A-7. Federal cash payments to the public by function calendar years and A-8. Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient calendar years and NOTE. In these tables revised estimates for net foreign investment and construction have been substituted for those included in the national income and product accounts published by the Department of Commerce in the Survey of Current Business February and May The revised construction series and estimates of the international transactions of the United States have been published separately in recent issues of the Survey All components of national income and product are subject to revision in the forthcoming ( July ) Survey of Current Business A-l A-2 A-3 A-4 A-5 A-6 The Nation 's Economic Budget The Nation 's Economic Budget ( table A-l ) is designed to show significant changes in the economy as they are indicated by the receipts and expenditures of consumers business and government and by net transactions with the rest of the world. The net additions to and absorption of saving of these groups are also shown in the Budget. The total of the Nation 's Economic Budget measures the gross national product i. e. total current production of goods and services. On the receipts side the total consists of wages and salaries retained business earnings and other incomes relating to current production. On the expenditure side it consists of purchases of current output Besides expenditures for current output and the corresponding receipts there are transfers of purchasing power such as government payments to social security beneficiaries and veterans ' pensions. While governmental transfers do not arise from current production as a source of purchasing power they are not different from any of the payments that do. They contribute to spendable income and have an important bearing on production and prices. Omitting transfers from government accounts would understate the size and impact of government budgets on incomes and expenditures of consumers and business and on foreign transactions. They are therefore included in the Nation 's Economic Budget In order to distinguish between expenditure for goods and services and transfers the former are shown in roman type and the latter in italics in the Nation 's Economic Budget. Only the former are added to arrive at the total which equals the gross national product or expenditure TABLE A-l. The Nation 's economic budget [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] second half first half Economic group Receipts first half Excess of Excess ^ of Excess of Expendi- receipts Receipts Expendi- receipts Receipts Expendi- receipts ( ) or ( ) or ( ) or tures tures tures deficit deficit deficit ( ) ( ) ( ) CONSUMERS Disposable personal income Expenditures for goods and services Personal savings ( ) __ \ Disposable income relating to current production.. Government transfers and net interest payments BUSINESS Retained business receipts from current production Gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) INTERNATIONAL Government loan transfers abroad _ Net foreign investment. _ Excess of rceeipts ( ) or investment ( ) G O V E R N M E N T ( Federal State and local ) Tax payments or liabilities Adjustment to cash basis S Cash vavments to the vublic Excess of receivts ( ) or Davments ( } * Cash receipts from the public Purchases of goods and services Government transfers _ ADJUSTMENTS Gross national product S.I For receipts relating to gross national product Other adjustments +1.S i Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Items relating to current production of goods and services are shown in roman type. Transfer payments and receipts and subtotals including them are in italics ; these items are not included in the gross national product Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Explanatory notes : Lines : See table A-2 Consumer Account Lines : See table A-3 Business Account Lines : See table A-4 International Account Lines : See table A-5 Government Account Line : Includes the statistical discrepancy and the current surplus of Government enterprises less Government subsidies. The statistical discrepancy represents the difference between two independent estimates of gross national product one arrived at by estimating the income received from current output and one by estimating expenditures for this output. The adjustment for statistical discrepancy brings the estimate on the receipts side into agreement with that on the expenditure side of the accounts Line : An adjustment is necessary to balance the sum of the transfers on the receipts side with that on the payments side because of the fact that somewhat different bases for measurement have been used in estimating various components of receipts and payments. Most of the discrepancies reduce to a difference in timing between the recording of a receipt and a payment. A correction must be made for the difference between the time a tax liability is incurred or payments are made and the time a receipt is recorded by the Government. Payment is sometimes made for goods produced in a previous period ; interest payments on a cash basis differ from the accrued interest shown under consumer receipts etc Sources : This table is based on the national income and product statistics of the Department of Commerce with revised figures for net foreign investment and construction and on Federal cash receipts from and payments to the public estimated by the Bureau of the Budget Since the transfers of the government augment the receipts of consumers business or foreign countries the transfer payments and receipts of transfers are conceptually equal. The small discrepancy between the totals is due to statistical problems of measurement Tables A-2 through A-5 contain the accounts of consumers business international transactions and the government. They indicate how the receipts and expenditures in each account have been derived and present some break-down of the totals where this is feasible Consumer account Table A-2 shows personal income and its principal components personal taxes and a break-down of expenditures by important classifications. Consumer income includes the net profits of unincorporated businesses and farms ( proprietors ' income ) Expenditures for construction of dwellings are considered as a business investment and hence are not included in consumption expenditure. Personal saving is a residual figure derived by deducting consumption expenditures from disposable income TABLE A-2. Consumer account [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Receipts or expenditures Receipts : Personal income arising from current production of goods and services : Wage and salary receipts and other labor income Proprietors ' and rental income Dividends and private interest _ Business transfer payments _ first half * First half Second half Total _ Plus : Net interest paid by Government Other Government transfer payments Equals : Total personal income Less : Personal tax and nontax payments Equals : Disposable personal income Expenditures : Durable goods.._ Nondurable goods Services _ ._ Total expenditures Personal saving * i Estimates based on Incomplete data * See also appendix tables B-4 D-4 and D-5 NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Business account The business account is shown in table A-3. Business income includes undistributed corporate profits and the adjustment for corporate inventory valuation plus capital consumption allowances for both corporate and noncorporate business. Because there is no information on noncorporate entrepreneurial withdrawals it is impossible to include an estimate of retained earnings for unincorporated business in business income. They are therefore included in personal income. On the other hand investment includes not only the investment of all business but also the investment of individuals in homes. Business income and expenditures are therefore not entirely comparable The inventory valuation adjustment is included as a business receipt in the Nation 's Economic Budget tables to make the profits estimates consistent with the national income and product basis of accounting. Business income both corporate and noncorporate is reckoned by business inclusive of changes in the book value of inventory. The gross national output or product for any period includes only the real change in inventories ( net change in physical volume valued at current prices ) An adjustment is therefore made in proprietors ' and in corporate net income so that the income basis of accounting agrees with the product basis. ( In table proprietors ' income is included net of the inventory valuation adjustment. ) This does not necessarily imply that business receipts should be valued after inventory valuation adjustment for purposes other than national income accounting The point has been frequently made that the book profits overstate the real position of business during the period when reported book profits are rising since part of the profits have to be devoted to replacing inventories at higher prices and hence are not available to finance the expansion of plant and equipment or for other purposes. Thus during when reported corporate book profits were estimated at billion dollars before taxes it was also estimated that the additional costs of replacing inventories of corporations amounted to billion dollars thus yielding profits before taxes adjusted for the higher cost of replacing inventories of billion dollars With the reversal of the price movement during the first half of the replacement costs of inventories have fallen. Since business in the main calculates the value of its inventories on the basis of cost or market price whichever is lower the effect of declining prices is to cause book profits to fall as inventories are marked down to the lower prices. In addition of course profits may fall because production or dollar margins are reduced. During the first half of corporate book profits are estimated to have been running at an annual rate of billion dollars before taxes but this is after an estimated write-down of inventories at an annual rate of billion dollars. If the estimated corporate book profits of billion dollars ( annual rate ) is adjusted for the write-down in inven- tories the estimated corporate profits before taxes for the first half of would then amount to billion dollars ( annual rate ) which is the same as the level of profits before taxes in similarly adjusted for the change in the replacement costs of inventories TABLE A-3. Business account [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Receipts or investment First half Receipts : Corporate profits before tax Less : Corporate profits tax liabilities _ _ Dividends Equals : Corporate undivided profits Plus : Capital consumption allowances Corporate inventory valuation adjustment * M0.9 Equals : Retained earnings and additions to reserves Private domestic 4gross investment : Construction Residential nonfarm Nonresidential Producers ' durable equipment Change in inventories Nonfarm only._ _ __ __ _ _.- Total gross private domestic investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) _ __ Second half first half * Estimate based on incomplete data Estimates by the Council of Economic Advisers This adjustment is required because corporate income is reckoned inclusive of changes in the book value of inventory as is customary in business accounting whereas only the value of the real change in inventories is counted as current output in the gross national product * Incorporates new construction series not previously included in the gross national product NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Based on estimates of the Department of Commerce International account The international account is designed to summarize our economic relations with the rest of the world. Net foreign investment shows the increase or decrease in claims against other countries and international institutions The figure is arrived at by taking the surplus of exports over imports of goods and services including investment income and deducting net gifts i. e. " unilateral transfers " since such gifts do not increase our claims on the rest of the world. Errors and omissions in the balance of payments statistics are treated as being entirely in the capital account. Government gifts or unilateral transfers are now an important magnitude because of the European Recovery Program. Since Government and private gifts are not included in net foreign investment they are included in Government and personal expenditures for goods and services in arriving at total national outlays Government gifts comprise only part of Government aid to foreign countries. Loans to foreign governments and subscriptions to international organizations such as the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund are also important. Loans and subscriptions constitute a transfer of purchasing power. At the time they are paid in cash these loans and investments are included in Government transfer payments and as a receipt in the international account of the Nation 's Economic Budget. The difference between these receipts and net foreign investment or " excess of investment " represents the portion of the surplus of exports of goods and services that is financed by other means than Government cash loans or subscriptions and Government and private gifts From the standpoint of the break-down of the Government cash payments into expenditures for goods and services and transfers there is an anomaly in considering unilateral transfers or gifts as a goods and services expenditure rather than a transfer item. This treatment is necessary however because the national income accounts include net foreign investment ( the surplus of exports less gifts ) rather than the total surplus of exports as a component item. If such gifts were not included in goods and services expenditures the national output would be understated Differences of concept exist between government grants and loans as included in the balance of payments accounts and in the goverment cash accounts ( table A-8 ) Surplus property credits and other aid which does not involve an outlay of cash by the Federal Government are not included in cash accounts. Long-term loans and subscriptions to the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development are included in the cash accounts when the cash is transferred TABLE A-4. International account [ Billions of dollars annual rates ] Receipts or investment First half Receipts : Net long-term loans Payments to the International Monetary Fund and International Bank 3___ Equals : Net foreign investment Excess of receipts ( ) or investment ( ) _._ _ _ __ _ first halfi _ | Total Government loan investments abroad Investment : Excess of exports of goods and services over imports _ Less : Net unilateral transfers : Government Private __ Second half * i Estimates based on incomplete data a Includes only cash withdrawals under loan agreements. Does not include noncash transactions such as lend-lease and surplus property credits as shown in appendix table D-34 Cash payments on subscriptions * Does not agree with unilateral aid included in table A-8 which is on a Daily Treasury Statement basis For a further break-down of Government unilateral transfers see table D-34 Government account The government account reconciles cash receipts from and payments to the public with the government revenue and expenditure estimates which have been incorporated in the national income and product accounts. It also provides a break-down of government receipts and expenditures into Federal and State and local components.1 There are several important differences between the concept of government revenue appropriate to the national income accounts and cash receipts from the public. In the national income accounts corporation income taxes are included on a liability basis and personal taxes on a payments basis. In the case of corporations there is a lag of about a year between the time a liability is incurred and the time payment is made to the government. The difference between corporation tax liabilities and government receipts for the same period may be substantial. Receipts of income taxes also lag somewhat behind payments under the withholding system In addition cash receipts include some items of revenue which are not derived from current production and are consequently not included in the income and product accounts ; for example receipts from the sale of surplus property and various items of miscellaneous receipts. ( See table A-6. ) Noncash items such as government contributions to retirement funds for employees are excluded. These are intragovernmental transfers rather than cash payments to the public Similarly cash payments are more inclusive than the concept of government expenditures appropriate to the income and product calculations Government loans ordinarily do not appear anywhere in government expenditures in the income and product series. An important exception is crop-secured loans made by the Commodity Credit Corporation. The commodities which secure these loans are considered as an addition to government inventory or capital formation and the loan as an expenditure for goods and services Cash receipts from the public and payments to the public represent a consolidation of the United States budget with the Government trust and corporation accounts. All intragovernmental or noncash transactions have been eliminated. A detailed explanation of this consolidation may be found in the Budget of the United States Government for the fiscal year p. A summary of the derivation of cash receipts and payments from budgetary receipts and expenditures for calendar year was presented in the Council 's Annual Review of January pp. and 6o TABLE A-5. Government account { Federal State and local ) [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Receipt or expenditure first half * First half Second half Cash receipts from the public Expenditures : Purchases of goods and services : Federal * State and local Tax and nontax payments or liabilities : * Federal State and local _ Total Adjustment to cash basis : Noncash receipts s__ __ Excess of cash receipts over tax liabilities or payments Total _ Other Government payments : Transfers to individuals. __ Cash interest payments to the public _ _ Loans to foreign governments and subscriptions to the International Bank and International Monetary Fund _ _ All other s Cash surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) _ Total Cash payments to the public ADDENDUM Federal : Cash receipts Cash payments _ Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) State and local : Cash receipts Cash payments Surplus ( ) or deficit ( ) * Estimates based on incomplete data Personal and indirect business tax payments and corporation tax liabilities. Includes contributions for social insurance Consists of deductions from Government employees ' salaries for retirement funds and Government contributions to retirement funds national service life and Government life insurance funds * Includes excess of corporation tax receipts over liabilities and excess of personal tax receipts over payments. Cash receipts also include some items of miscellaneous internal revenue not included in tax and nontax payments such as receipts from sales of surplus property Sales of surplus property of billion dollars in the first half of and billion dollars in the other periods have been deducted from gross expenditures * Does not agree with net interest paid by government ( table A-2 ) which is on an accrual basis See table A-4 International Account Includes all other cash payments less non-cash payments for goods and services. Other cash payments include net payments by Government corporations ( except capital formation ) net prepayments and the excess of checks paid over checks issued. Non-cash purchases of goods and services include deductions from Government employees ' salaries for retirement funds and the Government contribution to such funds NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding 6i In the cash payments series the receipts of the Government corporations have been offset against the expenditures and only the net expenditure has been included. The same treatment is accorded the Post Office because of the quasi-commercial character of its operations.2 Grants-in-aid to State and local governments are included as a cash payment of the Federal Government and are not counted as either a cash receipt or payment of the States and localities The major revenue sources of the Federal Government are shown in table A-6 Cash Receipts from the Public and Federal Gash Surplus. Expenditures according to major governmental function are shown in table A-7 Gash Payments to the Public. In table A-8 Federal expenditures have been classified by recipient whether individuals businesses foreign countries or States and localities. In most cases the term " recipient " means the initial recipient. However this classification has not been followed in the case of a considerable part of the expenditure for international aid. All such expenditures have here been classed under international aid even though some relate to direct purchases by the United States Government from business in order to show a comprehensive total for the aid programs. The same procedure has been followed in the case of State and local aid programs although the amounts of direct procurement by the Federal Government are not considerable A similar line of reasoning was applied to the postal deficit the entire amount of which has been included as a subsidy to business. Wages and salaries paid to postal employees consequently do not appear under wages and salaries in table A-8 but have been netted against postal receipts to arrive at the total deficit The national income and product accounts include the purchases of Government enterprises ( in general the Post Office and Government corporations ) on capital account their net interest payments and their operating surplus or deficit. See table III Consolidated Government Receipts and Expenditures Account in the Survey of Current Business July TABLE A Federal cash receipts from the public other than borrowings calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Cash receipts from Federal cash receipts from the public : Direct taxes on individuals _ ~ Direct taxes on corporations Employment taxes Excises and customs _ Surplus property receipts Deposits by States unemployment insurance Veterans ' life insurance premiums _ Other .._ _ Less : refunds of receipts Total Federal cash receipts from the public Second half First half first half * * Estimates based on incomplete data Includes personal income taxes and estate and gift taxes NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding TABLE A-7. Federal cash payments to the public by function calendar years and [ Billions of dollars annual rates seasonally adjusted ] Function National defense International affairs and finance __ Veterans ' services and benefits Social welfare health and security Agriculture and agricultural resources Interest on the public debt Other _ Deduction from Federal employees ' salaries for retirement Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Total cash payments to the public. * Estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding First half Second half first hain TABLE A-8. Federal cash payments to the public by type of recipient calendar years and [ Billions of dollars ] Cash payments to Individuals : Salaries and wages of Federal personnel : Military i Civilian Allowances to dependents of military personnel _ Readjustment benefits pensions and other payments to veterans 3_ Social insurance beneficiaries Loans to home owners * _ Interest * Others Total- TotalBusiness and farmers : Subsidies and other payments to farmers Loans and investments. __ Interest Subsidy arising from postal deficit8 Home-mortgage purchases from financial institutions Other ' I International : Loans and grants European Recovery Program Other loans to foreign governments ( net withdrawals ) Other grants Payments to the International Monetary Fund and International Bank io_ Other " Total- State and local governments and public agencies : Grants-in-aid Interest. Loans Total Total Federal cash payments to the public Clearing account for outstanding checks and telegraphic reports Excluding terminal leave pay Civilian wages and salaries exclude pay-roll deductions for Federal employees ' retirement and post office wages and salaries Also includes cash terminal leave pay to enlisted personnel cashing of terminal leave bonds musteringout pay and payment of Government and national service life insurance benefits to veterans ' beneficiaries * Repayments exceed loans Includes interest payments on the Federal debt and a small amount of interest on tax refunds. Interest figures in this table are not comparable with those in table A-2. Interest in that table includes payments to unincorporated business as well as to individuals and is adjusted for certain interaccount transfers Consists of cash trust account payments other than payment of social insurance benefits and Government and national service life insurance. Such items as repayments of personal funds of military and civilian personnel located overseas which were deposited in trust accounts and payments of earnings to prisoners of war are included Less than million dollars s In cash payments to the public the Post Office is included on a net basis. The whole deficit is shown here as a subsidy and is included in the business category because the deficit arises primarily out of the subsidy to mail other than first class Equals the excess of Federal cash payments to the public over the sum of all other payments shown in this table. Includes mainly Government purchases of goods and services from business Estimates are on a Daily Treasury Statement basis which does not necessarily agree with U. S. Govern0 ment aid to foreign countries as shown in appendix tables D-33 and D-34 Includes other Government expenditures abroad and payments for membership in international organi1 zations other than listed above Appendix B The Distribution of Income and Liquid Assets and Personal Saving Tables Page B-l. Share of total money income received by each tenth of the Nation 's spending units when ranked by size of income and B-2. Distribution of spending units by income levels before and after Federal income tax and B-3. Distribution of spending units by size of liquid asset holdings in early and B-4. Components of net personal saving and B-5. Components of net personal liquid saving and The Distribution of Income and Liquid Assets and Personal Saving The distribution of income and liquid assets According to information recently made available in the Survey of Consumer Finances,1 there was no increase in the concentration of income between and In fact the data indicate some decrease in the degree of concentration but in view of various considerations mentioned below this conclusion can not be accepted unreservedly TABLE B-l. Share of total money income received by each tenth of the Nation 's spending units when ranked by size of income and * Percent of total money income before Federal income tax Spending units ranked from lowest to highest income By tenths Lowest tenth Second tenth Third tenth Fourth tenth Fifth tenth. Sixth tenth Seventh tenth Eighth tenth Ninth tenth Highest tenth __ _ Cumulative Percent of total money income after Federal income tax By tenths Cumulative Income data for are based on interviews in January-March ; for on interviews in JanuaryMarch Estimated liability on Federal income tax excluding tax on capital gains. The tax liability was not obtained directly from interviews or from tax returns but from comprehensive data on family composition and income obtained in connection with the Consumer Finances Surveys. Certain improvements in techniques of estimating the tax liability were made in the Survey so that the results should be somewhat more reliable than in ( See the Federal Reserve Bulletin July and August ) Source : Based on data from the and Surveys of Consumer Finances conducted for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System by the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan The methods used in the survey are described in the Federal Reserve Bulletin June p Table B-l shows the percent of total money income received by each tenth of the Nation 's spending units,2 both before and after liabilities on the Federal income tax have been deducted. In the poorest three-tenths of the Nation 's spending units received percent of total income while in the percentage of income received by these groups increased slightly In contrast the upper two-tenths received and percent in the years respectively. Of course the upper groups do not necessarily consist of the same families in the years. The effect of the Federal income tax was to This survey is conducted annually for the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System by the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan. Through the courtesy of the Federal Reserve and the Survey Research Center these materials were made available prior to their publication in the Federal Reserve Bulletin. For a more extended treatment of the results of the survey see the Federal Reserve Bulletin June and forthcoming issues A spending unit consists of related persons who live together and pool their incomes for their major items of expense make income after tax or disposable income somewhat more equally distributed than income before tax The liabilities for Federal income tax by income class were determined by estimating the liability for the families included in the Survey of Consumer Finances.3 They were not obtained by direct interview or from tax returns but are based on extensive data regarding family composition and income Since certain improvements in estimating techniques were made between and we are probably not justified in inferring from the statistics that the effect of the tax in reducing income inequality was greater in than in The Revenue Act of did make certain changes in the tax structure which affect the after-tax distribution. The provision that income of married couples may be split for tax purposes operates mainly to the advantage of those with incomes in the high surtax brackets. Its effect would not be appreciable for families below the top decile. As shown in table B-2 only percent of the spending units have incomes before tax of $ or over and it is above this level that the split-income provision has a marked effect in reducing tax liabilities. Thus the provision may not change the entire after-tax income distribution greatly because of the small proportion of families affected. The Revenue Act of also raised exemptions thus freeing many families of moderate income from paying taxes at all Rate reductions were also somewhat greater in the low tax brackets In addition to changes in the revenue structure the upward movement in income between and must be considered. Other things being equal a general increase in incomes increases the effectiveness of a given progressive tax structure in increasing the equality of income after tax since more people become subject to tax and many are taxed at higher rates The relation between the distribution of income before and after tax is thus affected by changes in the tax structure and by changing levels of income Too much emphasis should not be given to small year-to-year shifts in the percent of income received by any decile. More data on the distribution of income in the postwar period will become available when the Statistics of Income for and are published by the Bureau of Internal Revenue Further the existing body of data provided by the Census Bureau and other Government agencies,4 as well as the Survey of Consumer Finances has not yet been fully analyzed.5 Samples of to spending units have been used in the consumer finance surveys. Owing to the dispersion of higher incomes it can not be expected that a completely representative sample of the highest dollar incomes was obtainable and it is possible that the amount of income received by the highest tenth is underestimated For the sampling and interview methods employed in the Survey see the Federal Reserve Bulletin June p. See Current Population Reports Series P-601 No. and No. U. S. Census Bureau Also publications by the Bureau of Labor Statistics Bureau of Agricultural Economics and the Bureau of Human Nutrition and Home Economics For an analysis of trends in income distribution before and after Federal income tax from the prewar to the postwar period see the Annual Economic Review by the Council of Economic Advisers January appendix B TABLE B-2. Distribution of spending x units by income levels before and after Federal income tax and Percent of spending units Money income class Before tax Aftertax Before tax After tax Under $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ and over All income levels See table B-l footnote Source : See table B-l Table B-2 shows the distribution of spending units by income level. As prices and incomes rose from to and from to spending units moved upward along the income scale. However even in a third of the spending units had income after taxes of less than $ It is to be noted that the distribution contains many single-person spending units whose income is on the average lower than that of families of two or more as well as retired families and persons whose income is temporarily low for one reason or another.6 Total income may also be more ample than money income ; for example farm families receive considerable income in the form of home-produced fuel and food TABLE B-3. Distribution of spending units by size of liquid asset holdings in early and Percent of spending units Amount of liquid assets l None $ to $ $ to $ $ to $ $ and over All units i Includes all types of U. S. Government bonds checking accounts and savings accounts in banks postal savings and shares in savings and loan associations and in credit unions Source : See table B-l A high concentration of saving and of asset holdings is one consequence of an unequal distribution of income. The proportion of spending units with no liquid assets has increased from percent in to percent An investigation of the characteristics of persons and families in the lower income groups is contemplated by the Joint Committee on the Economic Report. The results of this survey should aid in appraising the social economic and individual causes of lowincome status in as is shown in table B-3. Due to the increase in the number of spending units over the period however the absolute number of spending units with liquid assets has increased TABLE B-4. Components of net personal saving and [ Billions of dollars ] Components Liquid saving : Currency a n d b a n k deposits ( net c h a n g e ) _ P r i v a t e insurance a n d pension reserves ( net change ) Securities ( net c h a n g e ) Total liquidation of business debt Investment : Nonfarm residences ' Inventories : Nonfarm _ Farm Nonfarm plant and equipment Farm construction and equipment _ ._ _ Liquidation of business debt : Nonfarm Farm L __ Total gross investment Depreciation i Total net investment Statistical discrepancy Total personal saving " Liquidation of mnrtg ^ gp dp.bt f< Liquidation of consumer debt i Total liquid saving __ _ ' * Preliminary Includes saving and loan shares Excludes armed forces terminal leave bonds < Mortgage debt to institutions on l-to-4 family nonfarm dwellings Largely attributable to purchases of automobiles and other durable consumer goods although includes some debt arising from purchases of consumption goods fi Differs from the Securities and Exchange Commission 's concept of liquid saving in that it excludes additions to Government life insurance or pension reserves and armed forces leave bonds Construction of l-to-4 family nonfarm dwellings less net acquisition of properties by nonindividuals plus construction of nonprofit institutions * The statistical discrepancy arises out of the attempt to reconcile liquid saving as estimated by the Securities and Exchange Commission with personal saving as estimated by the Department of Commerce Statistical errors and omissions may be in liquid saving personal saving or in tne other items. However the data underlying liquid saving are considered somewhat more satisfactory than the items of reconciliation. Personal saving is a residualfigureobtained by deducting personal consumption expenditures from disposable personal income NOTE. Data presented here include recently revised series of the Securities and Exchange Commission Revisions of the Department of Commerce data will appear in the Survey of Current Business July Source : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce Personal saving Tables B-4 and B-5 present the data underlying text Charts and The most conspicuous characteristic of table B-4 is the postwar growth in gross personal investment and the decline in current saving in liquid form Increases in expenditures for nonfarm residences and for farm construction and equipment were substantial between and The increase in inventory accumulation is mainly due to farms where a liquidation of over billion dollars in was followed by almost a billion of net accumulation in The accretion of farm inventories is included in both farm income and saving although such accumulation may not reflect a voluntary decision to save so much as a bountiful harvest. The accumulation of nonfarm inventories may also be involuntary at times and was probably so in some types of business toward the end of The increase in real personal investment in while striking is somewhat less so when the inventory situation is taken into account As table B-5 shows there was a small amount of liquid saving in the first quarter of In interpreting the significance of the quarterly changes in liquid saving it must be kept in mind that the figures are not adjusted for seasonal variations. Thus it is comparisons with the same period in the previous year that are significant. Liquid saving declined steadily throughout and the first half of This trend was interrupted in the middle of and in the final quarter of and the first quarter of net liquid saving rose above the levels of the previous year Net liquid saving in the first quarter is always low because currency and bank deposits are drawn down to pay taxes. The change in net liquid saving from the first quarter of to the first quarter of is due principally to the fact that in the first quarter of for the first time repayments on consumer debt exceeded consumer borrowing. This largely reflects changes in the demand for consumer durables. Withdrawals of currency and bank deposits were also less than last year and the rate of increase in mortgage debt was less TABLE B-5. Components of net personal liquid saving and [ Billions of dollars " not adjusted'for seasonal ] variation ] Net change Component first First Second Third Fourth First Second Third Fourth quarquar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- ter * ter ter ter ter ter ter ter ter Currency and bank deposits * _ Private insurance and pension reserves.. Securities : United States savings bonds Other U. S. Government * __ State and local government Corporate and other Liquidation of mortgage d e b t 3a Liquidation of consumer d e b t Total liquid saving ' : i $ \ ( * ) t.l : S +.i l.i is i \ i Estimates based on incomplete data * See footnote on corresponding item in table B-l Excludes armed forces terminal leave bonds Less than million dollars Differs from the Securities and Exchange Commission 's concept of liquid saving in that it excludes additions to Government life insurance or pension reserves and armed forces leave bonds NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Securities and Exchange Commission Appendix C Surveys of Actual and Intended Business Investment Contents Business investment as measured in the Nation 's Economic Budget Nonfarm plant and equipment outlays Equipment orders and construction contracts and permits as measures of prospective business investment activity Business investment surveys by the McGraw-Hill Publishing Co Business surveys by Dun & Bradstreet Other private investment surveys Page Tables C-l. Gross private domestic investment and its components G-2. Manufacturers ' sales and new and unfilled orders in selected durable-goods industries January-May and C-3. Outlays for new plant and equipment as estimated by McGraw-Hill survey C-4. Percentage changes in actual and expected plant and equipment outlays and inventories as reported in Dun & Bradstreet May survey Appendix C Surveys of Actual and Intended Business Investment The crucial importance of business investment outlays in maintaining economic activity and promoting increased productivity is generally recognized. In recent years private and public statistical agencies have devoted increasing effort to determining how much business investment is currently being made and how much is planned Several fairly comprehensive reports on investment activity are now established on a periodic basis in addition to numerous one-time one-industry and local surveys. A variety of approaches is justifiable in a field where measurement is at best rough and uncertain and the survey techniques are still in process of experimental development The consensus of recent investment surveys has already been indicated in those sections of the review referring to business investment. The total level of such investment in the first half of showed a considerable decline from the levels primarily on account of a cessation of inventory growth. Plant and equipment outlays exceeded those of the first half of Businessmen reported plans for a somewhat lower rate of outlays in the second half of than in the second half of and information on their advance commitments in the form of plant construction contracts and equipment orders lends credence to that outlook. The size and duration of the decline however are still quite uncertain. There is a substantial " shelf " of contemplated private investment for the next several years though plans so far ahead can not be regarded as either firm or complete In interpreting investment survey results it is important to be aware of the special features of the various approaches and their relations to one another. This appendix describes the nature and scope of some of the major comprehensive periodic surveys Business investment as measured in the Nation 's Economic Budget The expenditures side of the business account of the Nation 's Economic Budget ( see appendix table A-3 ) constitutes that part of the gross national product known as gross private domestic investment. Estimates of this item are prepared quarterly by the Department of Commerce and are released about weeks after the end of the quarter. Preliminary estimates appear somewhat earlier in the first issue of Economic Indicators after the end of the quarter Gross private domestic investment includes not only business outlays for plant and equipment but also private nonbusiness construction ( residential institutional etc. ) and additions to the physical volume of business inventories. The relative magnitudes of these various types of private investment over the past years are shown in table C-l It should be noted that the construction and equipment investment outlays in this and all other surveys here discussed are in gross terms. No deduction is made for depreciation retirements or obsolescence. The net addition to the Nation 's stock of private structures and equipment after allowance for capital consumption is of course much smaller than the indicated gross investment and in some prewar years was negative. However the gross private domestic figures exclude maintenance and repair work on structures and equipment which may in practice involve substantial real additions to capital TABLE G Gross private domestic investment and its components [ Billions of dollars ] Total gross private domestic investment Period Nonfarm producers ' Farm equipment and con- equip- Other ment private struction and concon- strucEquip- Construc- struc- tion Total ment tions tion Increase in business inventories Nonfarm Farm 1939_ _ Annual rates seasonally justed : First quarter Second quarter ad- Total producers ' durable equipment less " farm machinery and equipment " and " tractors. " These figures thus include all business motor vehicles some of which were sold for farm use ; and exclude all tractors some of which were sold for nonfarm use Industrial public utilities gas and oil well drilling warehouses office and loft buildings stores restaurants garages and hotels Farm construction ( residential and nonresidential ) plus " farm machinery and equipment " and " tractors. " These figures thus include all tractors some of which were sold for nonfarm use and exclude all business motor vehicles some of which were sold for farm use Nonfarm residential religious educational social and recreational hospital and institutional and miscellaneous nonresidential After inventory revaluation adjustment Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data N O T E D e t a i l will not necessarily add to t o t a l s because of rounding S o u r c e : D e p a r t m e n t of Commerce The inventory accumulation item on the other hand does represent a net accretion of goods in stock the excess of additions over withdrawals for the period. This difference in treatment as between fixed-capital and inventory outlays calls for caution in interpreting the total private investment figures. Another difference is that the fixed-capital outlays represent essentially voluntary decisions to invest whereas inventory accumulation is frequently ( as in the first quarter of ) involuntary The nonfarm inventory figures included in table C-l and in the Nation 's Economic Budget tabulations are shown after " revaluation adjustment. " That is they show the physical change in stocks ( valued at average prices for the period ) rather than the change in book values which would reflect also the change in prices at which stocks were carried on the books. Farm inventory changes are estimated directly in terms of changes in physical quantities valued at average current prices and are thus comparable without revaluation adjustment to the adjusted nonfarm inventory changes Nonfarm plant and equipment outlays The second third and fourth columns of table C-l show the new construction and equipment outlays ( i. e. the gross investment in facilities ) by nonfarm business as estimated on the basis of construction contract awards and shipments of equipment and included in the totals of gross private domestic investment and the gross national product Another approach to measurement of nonfarm plant and equipment outlays uses a quarterly questionnaire survey addressed to a sample of nonagricultural business concerns. This survey is a joint undertaking of two Federal agencies the Securities and Exchange Commission canvassing most of the corporations registered with the Commission while the Office of Business Economics of the Department of Commerce canvasses a sample of unregistered manufacturing concerns. It is somewhat similar to the official Government survey made annually in Canada though coverage is much more comprehensive in the latter The questionnaires are filled out for the most part in the middle month of each quarter ; results are jointly released by the two agencies shortly before the end of that quarter. Questions cover ( ) the expected outlays for new plant and for new equipment during the next quarter ; ( ) the estimated outlays during the current quarter and ( ) the actual outlays during the previous quarter. For each quarter 's outlays there are then three successive reports at 3-month intervals : expected outlays ( released a fortnight or so before the quarter begins ) estimated outlays ( released a fortnight or so before the quarter ends ) and reported past outlays ( released about ^ months after the quarter has ended ) The latest available results are shown in appendix table D-15 Although these surveys cover nearly the same concept of nonfarm plant and equipment as the corresponding gross national product components in the second column of table C-l above the correspondence is not exact The three most important conceptual differences are : The SEG-Commerce survey estimates do not allow for the initial facilities outlays of firms newly established during the period covered whereas the GNP items do. This can be a sizable item in periods when many new firms are being started particularly in the manufacturing and trade fields where the turn-over of firms is relatively rapid.1 Outlays charged as current expense are omitted in the SEG-Commerce surveys but covered in the GNP series The GNP estimates of producers ' durable equipment include an allowance for automobiles bought by individuals but used wholly or in part for business purposes. Such purchases do not appear in the outlays reported in the SEG-Commerce surveys In addition to the regular questions on investment outlays for the previous current and next quarters the SEC-Commerce questionnaire has in recent years inquired annually as to expected investment and expected sales for a whole calendar year. These questions last answered in February showed that nonfarm business as a whole expected virtually the same level of dollar sales in as in and about percent less dollar investment.2 Discrepancies between levels of investment outlay reported in advance as anticipations and those reported later as actually realized may arise from : ( ) changes in business plans as to physical volume of facilities expansion and improvement ( ) errors in businessmen 's forecasts of the rate at which work will proceed on projects already planned ( ) errors in businessmen 's forecasts of the cost of projects under way or planned as construction costs and equipment prices change and ( ) the lack of complete accuracy and representativeness with which any sample survey must reckon. It is not yet possible to evaluate each of these bases of discrepancy well enough to make definite adjustments for them in interpreting currently reported anticipations though analysis of accumulated survey data will eventually throw much light on this problem. During the postwar period actual investment outlays have tended to run moderately higher than anticipated outlays particularly in the case of the anticipations for a whole year in advance. This is probably due in part to the rising trend of construction and equipment costs through and in part to the fact that some outlays only tentatively planned or scheduled for a following period are likely to be omitted from reported anticipations. It remains to be seen how these survey biases will operate during a phase of constant or declining levels of cost and total investment For further details see Capital Requirements of New Trade Firms Survey of Current Business December For further details of this survey see Plant and Equipment Programs and Sales Ex- pectations in Survey of Current Business April Equipment orders and construction contracts and permits as measures of prospective business investment activity Equipment orders. Further light on the prospective trend of business investment expenditures is afforded by sample surveys of new orders for producers ' durable equipment as reported by makers of various equipment items. ( See table C-2 below. ) Such information is collected monthly by the Department of Commerce and is released about weeks after the end of the month to which it relates. The latest data available as of midyear extend through May TABLE C-2. Manufacturers3 sales and new and unfilled orders in selected durable- goods industries January May and Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Peak month Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Item monthly average dollar volume = Sales : Durable goods Electrical machinery and equipment Machinery other than electrical _ Iron steel and products. ( Sept. ) ( Dec. ) __ ( June ) ( Oct. ) .._ New orders : Durable goods Machinery including electrical Iron steel and products.. ( Mar. ) ( June ) ( Mar. ) Percentage change in dollar volume during month Unfilled orders : Durable goods Machinery including electrical _ _ Iron steel and products.- Prelimary estimates Indexes are adjusted for differences in length of months but not otherwise adjusted for seasonal variation Percentage changes based on unweighted aggregates of reported data All durable goods industries reporting unfilled orders Source : Department of Commerce Construction contracts and permits. These sources of information are useful for projecting investment because contracts are let and permits secured considerably in advance of the bulk of actual expenditures. To use an extreme case a dam built for a private power company may require or years for completion. Once it is reported that the dam has been or will be started it is possible to calculate with a relatively small margin of error what the rate of expenditure will be throughout the construction operation Contracts are reported by the F. W. Dodge Co. for Eastern States and on a somewhat less comprehensive basis by the Engineering News Record for the United States as a whole. Other sources are used by the Department of Commerce to supplement data from these two major sur- veys and adjustments are made for undercoverage and errors in reporting. The resulting material is then translated into a forecast of nonresidential private construction activity to months in advance. The scope of these estimates is wider than that of the SEG-Commerce survey discussed in the section on nonfarm plant and equipment in this appendix since it includes private institutional building contracts. Equipment outlays however are not covered The Department of Commerce construction expenditures figures as shown in appendix table D-14 are not strictly comparable by categories with the SEG-Gommerce survey figures because of different classification procedure One series reports according to function the other according to ownership If a utility company for example lets a contract for a residential or commercial structure the contract series will report that activity as residential or commercial while the SEG-Commerce series will report it as utility investment Figures for private nonfarm residential construction are derived by the Department of Labor principally from reported building permits ( adjusted for lapses for time lags between permit issuance and start of work and for underreporting of permit evaluation ) supplemented by sample field surveys in nonpermit-issuing areas Projections of rates of residential activity from these sources are made in a fashion similar to that for nonresidential construction. These figures are currently more reliable than the historical series for through because of improvements in sources of data and methods of collection. This should be borne in mind in comparing the current series with the published data for this 15-year period. The series does not include data for housing activity in the field of conversions or remodeling. In some periods in the business cycle or during wartime conversion or remodeling may account for a sizable proportion of the total volume of residential units provided The construction forecasts are reliable for one quarter in advance. Their reliability diminishes beyond that point. The margin of error for the third quarter ahead has been as much as percent. The magnitude of the error will vary first with any divergence from the assumptions regarding the business cycle and second with unforeseen changes in the rate of expenditures in the construction field itself Business investment surveys by the McGraw-Hill Publishing Co Late in the economic staff of the McGraw-Hill Publishing Go. conducted a sample interview study of larger concerns in the fields of manufacturing mining and transportation. This was combined with similar surveys in the electric and gas utility fields by the Electrical World magazine and the American Gas Association to yield a set of estimates of total plant and equipment investment plans for business in general ( exclusive of farming trade and services ) The results were released in January 8o A similar survey had been undertaken a year previous and it is understood that another is planned in late As to investment levels in the McGraw-Hill survey gave indications in close correspondence with the one made by the SEC and the Department of Commerce during the first quarter of this year. The McGraw-Hill survey also inquired as to investment plans for future years through actual and expected increases in manufacturing capacity replacement value of plant and equipment in place and policies followed in planning modernization of facilities. The significance of findings on this range of questions will be better subject to evaluation as surveys of this nature are repeated and the reports given thorough comparative analysis Table G-3 summarizes the findings of the McGraw-Hill survey as to actual plant and equipment outlays in and contemplated outlays for the succeeding years TABLE G-3. Outlays for new plant and equipment as estimated by McGraw-Hill survey [ Millions of dollars ] _ _ _ _ __ ( * ) Industry group Total all industry groups covered Manufacturing _ Steel Chemicals Petroleum refining Machinery other than electrical Electrical machinery __ Autos Transportation equipment Food Other manufacturing Mining __ Electric utilities Gas utilities Railroads Other transportation and communications Exclusive of gas utilities outlays Electrical World survey American Gas Association survey * Not available Source : McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Business surveys by Dun & Bradstreet This firm which had previously made a number of Nation-wide sample surveys of business expectations inaugurated recently a frequent periodic schedule of inquiries. The questionnaires are distributed by Dun & Bradstreet representatives to a sample of the approximately major concerns on whom regular calls are made for other purposes. The concerns are nearly all engaged in manufacturing and trade with net worth of $ or more. The questionnaire is designed for speedy response and tabulation and results are released within a few weeks after the interviews The scope of material covered in these surveys is still subject to change as further tests are made. The most recent survey made in May 8i included questions on sales new and unfilled orders volume of production plant and equipment outlays employment and inventories. For each item respondents were asked to compare ( ) the previous months ( ) the current month and ( ) the next months with the corresponding periods of last year. In addition to these percentage changes respondents also stated their sales and tangible net worth and their plant and equipment outlays in and in the second half of that year The latest results relating to investment items ( plant and equipment outlays and inventories ) are summarized in table C-4 TABLE C-4. Percentage changes in actual and expected plant and equipment outlays and inventories as reported in Dun & Bradstreet May survey Inventories ' ( book value at end of month ) Plant and equipment outlays JanuaryApril July-December May April May December Median percentage change from period in to corresponding period in All concerns ( manufacturing and trade ) Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Wholesale Retail... Range of percentage changes covered by middle percent of replies All concerns ( manufacturing and trade ) Manufacturing Durable goods Nondurable goods Wholesale Retail.. to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to to Source : Dun & Bradstreet In interpreting these results two technical features of the survey should be taken particularly into account though it is not yet possible to indicate the amount of error or bias involved : The tabulated results are unweighted medians and quartiles of reported percentage changes. Although the degree of coverage is higher for larger concerns it does not appear to be sufficiently higher to give their replies a weight corresponding to the relative importance of such concerns in investment outlays. The result is an emphasis on the position of concerns at the small end of the range covered. However an opposite bias is presumably introduced by the omission of concerns with net worth less than $ A substantial proportion of concerns presumably reported no change in plant and equipment outlays because such outlays in both of the two periods compared were zero or negligible. Inclusion of these reports inflates the middle group in the distribution and reduces the median change in either direction Other private investment surveys Interest in current and prospective business investment trends is so lively that a considerable number of independent surveys have been made recently most of them covering only certain lines of business. The greatest significance attaches to some of those which are made on a regular periodic basis with relatively full coverage and which inquire as to expected future investment outlays as well as those of the past year. Among those worthy of mention are the surveys conducted by trade associations in the electric power gas and steel industries. In the industries just named ( but in few others ) related capacity estimates are also obtainable Appendix D Statistical Tables Relating to Employment Production and Purchasing Power Contents National income or expenditure : D Gross national product or expenditure D National income by distributive shares D Personal income D Disposition of personal income D Per capita disposable income in current and dollars D Personal consumption expenditures Employment and wages : D Labor force employment and unemployment D Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments D Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries D-10. Average hourly earnings in selected industries D l l Average weekly hours in selected industries Production and business activity : D-12. Physical production index of goods and utilities D-13. Industrial production index D-14. New construction activity D-15. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment D-16. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade D-17. Manufacturers ' inventories by stage of fabrication and as ratios to sales D-18. Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Prices : D-19. Consumers ' price index D-20. Wholesale price index D-21. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Pa ge Money banking and credit : D-22. Consumer credit outstanding D-23. Loans and investments of all commercial banks and weekly reporting member banks D-24. Adjusted deposits of all banks and currency outside banks D-25. Estimated ownership of Federal securities D-26. Bond yields and interest rates selected years Corporate profits and finance : D-27. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations D-28. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations D-29. Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment private manufacturing corporations by industry groups D-30. Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry groups D-31. Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size classes D-32. Sources and uses of corporate funds International transactions : D-33. The international transactions of the United States D United States Government aid to foreign countries D-35. United States merchandise exports including reexports by areas quarterly average and D-36. United States domestic merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and D-37. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and D-38. United States general merchandise imports by areas quarterly average and D-39. United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic classes quarterly average and * ; D-40. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic classes quarterly average and Summary : D-41. Changes in selected economic series since and Page Ill TABLE D Gross national product or expenditure [ Billions of dollars ] Period Gross national product GovernGross Personal ment purprivate consumpNet foreign chases of domestic investment goods and tion expenditures investment services Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half i First quarter. Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter i Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Published revised estimates for net foreign investment ( ) and construction ( ) have been substituted for those included in the national income and product series of the Department of Commerce Further revisions of these and other components of national income and product series will be published in the Survey of Current Business July Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-2. National income by distributive shares [ Billions of dollars ] Proprietors ' and rental income Corporate profits and inventory valuation adjustment Corporate profits a Period ( ) Annual rates seasonally adjusted First quarter Second q u a r t e r Third quarter Fourth quarter.. L949 First quarter Second quarter _ First half Second half First half National income is the total net income earned in production by individuals or businesses. The concept of national income currently used differs from the concept of gross national product in that it excludes depreciation charges and other allowances for business and institutional consumption of durable capital goods Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor income ( see appendix table D-3 ) and employer and employee contribution for social insurance Net income after inventory valuation adjustment which amounted to million dollars in and to million dollars ( annual rate ) in the first half of Federal and State income and excess-profits taxes Less than $ Estimates based on incomplete data ; profits and total national income for first quarter and all items for second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Revised estimates of the national income and product series will be published in the Survey of Current Business July Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-3. Personal income [ Billions of dollars ] Period DiviSalaries ProprieTotal dends and Transfer Nonagriwages cultural personal and other tors ' and personal payments personal rental income labor ! income interest3 income income income Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half s First quarter Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter ( ) Differs from " compensation of employees " in appendix table D-3 in that it excludes employer and employee contributions to social insurance. Includes wage and salary receipts and other labor incomecompensation for injuries employer contributions to private pension and welfare funds pay of military reservists not on full-time active duty ( pay for full-time active duty included in military wages and salaries ) directors ' fees jury and witness fees compensation of prison inmates Government payments to enemy prisoners of war marriage fees to justices of the peace and merchant marine war-risk life and injury claims See appendix table D-3 for major components See appendix table D-28 for dividend payments Equals personal income exclusive of net income of unincorporated farm enterprises farm wages agricultural net rents agricultural net interest and net dividends paid by agricultural corporations s Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Revised estimates of the national income and product series will be published in the Survey of Current Business July Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-4. Disposition of personal income Personal income Period Less : Equals : Personal Equals : Less : Personal Dispos- consump- Personal able tax and net tion I nontax personal saving payments income expenditures Net saving as percent of disposable income Billions of dollars _ _ _ __ ._ __ Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half i First quarter Second quarterThird quarter.. Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter V Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Revised estimates of the national income and product series will be published in the Survey of Current Business July Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-5. Per capita disposable income in current and dollars Period Disposable Population Consumers ' personal ( thouincome price index ( billions of sands ) * = dollars ) Per capita disposable personal income Current dollars dollars Not adjusted for seasonal variation Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half * First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter. First quarter Second quarter * Annual rates seasonally adjusted Estimated population of continental United States including armed forces overseas ; annual data as of July and quarterly and semiannual data as of middle of period interpolated from published monthly estimates Current dollars divided by the consumers ' price index on the base = to give a rough measure of changes in buying power of disposable income The consumers ' price index has been roughly adjusted to take account of the understatement during the price control period. This adjustment is in line with the report of the Technical C ommittee ( better known as the Mitchell Committee ) on the consumers ' price index. The unadjusted index will be found in appendix table D-19 * Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Revised estimates of the national income and product series will be published in the Survey of Current Business July Sources : Department of Commerce ( disposable income and population ) and Department of Labor consumers ' price index ) TABLE D-6. Personal consumption expenditures [ Billions of dollars ] Nondurable goods Period Total Durexpend- able itures goods Services Total Food i Clothing Other Total Housing Other Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half... Second half First half 3_ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) First quarter... Second quarter. Third quarter. _ Fourth quarter First quarter Second quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Includes alcoholic beverages Includes imputed rental value of owner-occupied dwellings Estimates based on incomplete data ; second quarter by Council of Economic Advisers * Not available NOTE : Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Revised estimates of the national income and product series will be published in the Survey of Current Business July Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D Labor force employment and unemployment [ Thousands of persons years of age and over ] Civilian labor force Total labor force ( including armed forces ) l Period Monthly average : Armed forces i Total civilian labor force Employment Total Nonagricultural UnemAgricul- ployment tural 52,49G [ _ First half Second half _ First half January February March. April May June _ _ _ July August September October. November December January. February March April May. June _. _ Data for exclude about members of the armed forces who were outside the continental United States in and who were therefore not enumerated in the census. This figure is deducted by the Census Bureau from its current estimates for comparability with data Includes part-time workers and those who had jobs but were not at work for such reasons as vacation illness bad weather temporary lay-off and industrial disputes NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Department of Labor ( ) and Department of Commerce ( ) TABLE D Number of wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments ^ x [ Thousands of employees ] Manufacturing Period Total wage and Nonsalary Dura- durawork- Total ble ble ers goods goods Mining GovTransernCon- portament tract tion Fi- Service ( Fedcon- and Trade nance eral struc- public State tion utili and ties local ) Monthly average : _ 7,r ~ First half- Second half. 16> First half3. 4,G ~ ~ L,690 L L,716 S492 ] ( ) ( ) January February March April May June July August September _ _ October November... December.._ '44,600 ' January February March Aprils May * Includes all full- and part-time wage and salary workers in nonagricultural establishments who worked or received pay during the pay period ending nearest the 15th of the month. Excludes proprietors selfemployed persons domestic servants and personnel of the armed forces. Not comparable with estimates of nonagricultural employment of the civilian labor force reported by the Department of Commerce ( appendix table D-7 ) which include proprietors self-employed persons and domestic servants ; which count persons as employed when they are not at work because of industrial disputes bad weather or temporary lay-offs and which are based on an enumeration of population whereas the estimates in this table are based on reports from employing establishments Not available Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-9. Average gross weekly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Total Monthly average : TTT-U Bitumi- Build- Class I Hotels nous ing con- steam Tele- w noie- Retail ( year phone railDura- Noncoal structrade round ) * sale roads ble durable mining tion trade goods goods ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) $ ( ) $ $ ( ) $ $ $ ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) $ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) < j First half Second half..- $ 1930._._ _ .._ 1937._ 1939____ _.__ _. First half * January February March April May June July August September.. October November.. December January February March April ._ May ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips is not included Not available Not available. New series beginning April ; includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees * Annual average includes retroactive pay increases not included in the monthly averages Not strictly comparable with previous data Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data Data reflect work stoppages NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for payroll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly payroll and employment figures are used Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-10. Average hourly earnings in selected industries Manufacturing Period Monthly average : Bitumi- Buildnous ing conNoncoal strucTotal Durable durable mining tion goods goods Class I steam Tele- Whole- Rptail Hotels ( year sale rail- phone trade trade round ) ! roads $ $ $ First half Second half... First half January February March April May June July... August September. __ October November December January February March April May ( ) $ $ ( ) ) ( $ < * > ( ) * ( ) ( ) ( ) ) ( $ $ ) $ $ ( ) * Money payments only ; additional value of room board uniforms and tips is not included Not available Not available. New series beginning April ; includes only employees subject to provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act and is not comparable with preceding series which includes all employees Annual average includes retroactive pay increases not included in the monthly averages Not strictly comparable with previous data Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for pay-roll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly pay roll and employmentfiguresare used Source : Department of Labor TABLE D Average weekly hours in selected industries Manufacturing Period Bitumi- Build- Class I ing nous steam TeleconNoncoal railDurable durable mining struc- roads phone Total goods tion i goods Monthly average : ( ) C1 ) ) ) ) C ) ) ( ) 1942..__ First half Second half... ) C1 ) Whole- Retail sale trade trade Hotels ( year round ) ) ) ) ) ) ) Firsthalff January February March April May June. _ July August September.. October November.. December January February March * April * May * ( ( ( ( ) Not available Average for the year not available because new series was started in April Not comparable with previous data * Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data Data reflect work stoppages NOTE. Data are for production workers in manufacturing and mining hourly-rated employees in railroads and for all nonsupervisory employees in other industries. Data are for pay-roll periods ending closest to the middle of the month except in railroads where monthly pay-roll and employment figures are used Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-12. Physical production index of goods and utilities 1929-A9 [ = ] Nonagricultural production AgriTotal culturpro- al production duction Total Period Weights : Total Nonagricultural Industrial production ConstrucTotal Manu- Miner- tion factures als Transportation Electric and gas utilities _ __ First half Second half First n a if s ( ) eo ( ) w ( ) no All half year data have been seasonally adjusted except the electric and gas utilities for which no satisfactory adjustment factor is available Computed from the Department of Commerce national income data. The weight factors are percentages of the national income for each industry to the total for the industries. The weight for construction has been adjusted to include force account and other construction done outside of the contract construction industry the weights for other industry groups to exclude such construction Not available. See footnote * Because of the extreme seasonal nature of agricultural crop production only an annual index has been computed Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data Sources : Based on the following data : Agricultural production : Department of Agriculture index of farm output which measures the physical volume of farm production for human use Minerals : Federal Reserve index of mineral production Manufactures : Federal Reserve index of manufacturing production Construction : Department of Commerce value of new construction activity deflated by their index of construction costs and converted into relatives with as Transportation : Department of Commerce index of transportation. The figures for and are estimated by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on the basis of transportation data Electric and gas utilities : Based on the following series : Electric power generated for public use as reported by the Federal Power Commission and sales of gas to consumers as reported by the American Gas Association. The two series are converted into relatives with the average for the period as The relative series are combined into an index of public utility production with electric power given a weight of and gas the respective percentages of the revenues of each of the utilities to the total revenues produced by both in the base period TABLE D-13. Industrial production index [ = seasonally adjusted ] Total industrial production Period Manufacture Minerals Total Durable Nondurable Monthly average : First half Second half _ _ _ __- _ .__ First half * January. _ February March April _ May _ June July August September _ October November December January February March April May June ' _ _ Preliminary estimates based'on incomplete data Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE D-14. New construction activity ^ [ Value put in place millions of dollars ] Private construction Public construction Total Resinew Non- Pub. con- Total den- resilic tial struc- pri- build- den- utilition i vate tial ty ing ( non- build- and farm ) ing farm Period By source of funds By type of construction MiliTotal tary pubState and fed- High- Other lic Feder- and erally fipubal local nanced ways lic industrial _ _ Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal variation 1948-FirsthalL Second half First half January February March April May June July August September October November December. __ January. _ February March _._._ April May a. June Excludes construction expenditures for crude petroleum and natural-gas drilling and therefore does not agree with the new construction expenditures in the gross national product Excludes farm and public utility ; for includes negligible amount of public industrial and commercial building not segregable Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Sources : Departments of Commerce and Labor xoo TABLE D-15. Business expenditures for new plant and equipment [ Millions of dollars ] Manufacturing and mining Transportation Period Total Total Manufacturing Mining Railroad Hiiectric and gas utilities Other ( ) ( ) ( < ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ( ) ) ( ) ( ( ) ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Commercial and miscellaneous ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( * ) ( ) < ) ) ( ( ) ( ) ( ( ( ( Annual rates not adjusted for seasonal variation First half Second half First half 8_ First quarter Second quarter. Third quarter.. Fourth quarter. First quarter 8__ Second quarter J Third quarter. 5fi0 iExcludes agriculture * Commercial and miscellaneous includes trade service finance and communication for all years shown Prior to miscellaneous also included transportation other than railroad and electric and gas utilities which are not available separately for these years Not available separately for years prior to Included in commercial and miscellaneous prior to J Estimates for first and second quarter are preliminary actual expenditures ; the third quarter o is based on anticipated capital expenditures of business NOTE. These figures do not agree with the totals included in the gross national product estimates of the Department of Commerce principally because the latter cover agricultural investment and also certain equipment and construction outlays chareed to current expense. Figures for are Federal Reserve Board estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other data Detail will not necessarily add to totals because figures are rounded to the nearest $ Sources : Securities and Exchange Commission and Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) IOI TABLE D-16. Inventories and sales in manufacturing and trade [ Not adjusted for seasonal variation ] Wholesale Manufacturing Period Retail trade Millions of dollars Ratio of Millions of Ratio of Millions of average average dollars dollars inveninventories to tories to Invenmonthly Inven2 monthly Inventories i Sales sales tories i Sales tories i Sales Ratio of average inventories to monthly sales First half Second half January February March April May June July August September October November December.. January February March April4 May Book value end of period Monthly average shown for year and half year and total for month Book value based on centered averages of month-end figures Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. The inventory figures in this table do not agree with the estimates of " change in business inventories " included in the gross national product since they cover only manufacturing and trade rather than all business and show inventories in terms of current book value without adjustment for revaluation or seasonal variation Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce IO2 TABLE D-17. Manufacturers ' inventories by stage of fabrication and as ratios to sales [ Not adjusted for seasonal variation ] Nondurable goods industries Durable goods industries Period Book value of inventories at end of period ( millions of dollars ) Ratio of average inventories lto monthly sales Book value of inventories at end of period ( millions of dollars ) Ratio of average i n v e n t o r i e s to monthly sales * Materials Materials Materials Materials and goods Finished and goods Finished and goods Finished and goods Finished in process goods in process goods in process goods in process goods First half-Second half January FebruaryMarch April May June July August SeptemberOctober November. _ December. January February.. March April Maya Inventories based on centered averages of month-end figures Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Commerce IO3 TABLE D Sales stocks and outstanding orders at department stores Millions of dollars i Period Ratio of Outstocks standing to sales orders ( end of month ) Ratio of orders to sales Ratio of orders to stocks ( ) ( * ) Sales ( total for month ) Stocks ( end of month ) First half._ Second half First half Monthly average : ( ) January February March April May June July August- September October November December January February March April May ._ _ Not adjusted for seasonal variation Not available Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. These figures represent retail sales stocks and outstanding orders as reported b y a sample of of the larger department stores located in various cities throughout the country and are not estimates of total sales stocks and outstanding orders for all department stores in the United States. Data are not available prior to Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System IO4 TABLE D-19. Consumers ' price index For moderate-income families in large cities [ = ] Period All items Food Apparel Rent Fuel elec- House tricity furMisceland re- nish- laneous frigerings ation _ First half Second half 1935._._ __. First half K January February._ March April May _ _ June July August September October November December _ January February. _ March April May * Average of data for January through May Source : Department of Labor TABLE D-20. Wholesale price index [ = ] Other than farm products and foods Period __ Second half First half ._ Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data Source : Department of Labor ! First half January February March April May June July August September October November December January February March April May June1 IO6 TABLE D-21. Indexes of prices received and prices paid by farmers and parity ratio Prices received Period Prices paid ( including interest and taxes ) Parity ratio l August ^ July 19U = Monthly average : First half Second half First half _ January February March April May June July August September October. November December January February March April.. May June __ __ Ratio of prices received to prices paid ( including interest and taxes ) Source : Department of Agriculture TABLE D-22. Consumer credit outstanding [ Millions of dollars ] End of period Installment credit Total consumer credit Total Automobile sale credit Charge accounts Other i Other consumer credit [ ^ First half-. Second half _. First half * January February. _ March April May __ June July August-,.. SeptemberOctober November, December. January February.. March April May * June Includes other sale credit and repair and modernization loans insured by Federal Housing Administration Includes single-payment loans of commercial banks and pawnbrokers and service credit Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) IO8 TABLE D-23. Loans and investments of all commercial banks and weekly reporting member banks [ Billions of dollars ] Weekly reporting member banks All commercial banks Investments End of period Total loans and investments June21930 June June2 June June2 obligations Other securities Total Commercial industrial and agricultural _ _ January February March July August September. October November December.-. _ _ ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) _ _ _ January February ' March fi Aprilfi5 May .__ June 6_ U. S. Government _ June _ April May._ June Total June Loans U ) ans * Reporting date nearest end of period June data are used because complete end-of-year data prior to are not available for U. S. Government obligations Not available prior to May when the loan classification was revised * Beginning June reported gross i. e. before deduction of valuation reserves instead of net as previously reported Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Not available NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) log TABLE D-24. Adjusted deposits of all banks and currency outside banks [ Billions of dollars ] End of period * Total deposits adjusted and currency outside banks Demand deposits adjusted J Time deposits * Currency outside banks _ 193O._._ __ 1936-.._ ._ First half Second half First half * January February. March April May June July August September October November December.- January -_ February 5_ March April * May8 June4 i Reporting date nearest end of period Includes demand deposits other than interbank and S. Government less cash items in process of collection Includes deposits in commercial banks mutual savings banks and Postal Savings System Estimates by Council of Economic Advisers Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ( except as noted ) IIO TABLE D-25. Estimated ownership of Federal securities [ Billions of dollars par values * ] Gross debt and guaranteed obligations outstanding Held bjr public End of period Total Held by U. S Government agencies and trust funds Total Nonbank private State Federal corpoIndiand local Com- Reserve rations viduals govern- mercial banks and ments * banks associations * First half _ Second half First half January February.. _ March April __ May_ June July _ August __ _ September OctoberNovember _ _ December January February. _ __ March April6_ May June __ _ __ _ United States savings bonds series A-D E and F are included at current redemption values Includes trust sinking and investment funds of State and local governments and their_agencies and Territories and insular possessions Includes commercial banks trust companies and stock savings banks in the United States and in Territories and insular possessions. Figures exclude securities held in trust departments Includes insurance companies mutual savings banks savings and loan associations dealers and brokers and foreign accounts in this country. Beginning with December the foreign accounts include investments by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Monetary Fund in special noninterest bearing notes issued by the U. S. Government. Beginning with June includes holdings of Federal land banks Includes partnerships and personal trust accounts Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Treasury Department ( except as noted ) III TABLE D-26. Bond yields and interest rates } selected years [ Percent per annum ] U. S. Government security yields Period average average average Bank rates on shortterm business loans Bankers acceptances daysNew York Federal Reserve Bank discount rateNew York Bonds month Aaa certifiLongcates of term par-I years bonds indebted- tially tax- and over ness exempt taxable Baa bonds ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) * <1.00 U.00 average average average average average average average High grade corporate bond yields ( Moody 's ) average First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter... Second quarter e ( ) Tax exempt prior to March ; taxable thereafter Average of yields on all outstanding partially tax-exempt Government bonds due or callable after years from to ; after years from to ; and after years from Not available * From October to April a preferential rate of percent was in effect for advances secured by Government securities maturing in year or less * No partially tax-exempt bonds due or callable in years * Average of April and May data Sources : Treasury Department Moody 's Investors Service and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System TABLE D-27. Profits before and after taxes all private corporations [ Billions of dollars ] Period Corporate profits before taxes Corporate profits after taxes Corporate tax liability l Total Dividend payments Undistributed profits Annual rates seasonally adjusted First half Second half First half F irst quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter * _ Second quarter Federal and State corporate income and excess profits taxes Minus million dollars Estimates based on incomplete data ; by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce ( except as noted ) TABLE D-28. Sales and profits of large manufacturing corporations3 [ Millions of dollars ] Nondurable goods industries ( corporations ) * Durable goods industries ( corporations ) i Period Profits Profits Sales Sales Before taxes After taxes Before taxes After taxes _ _ _ _ Totals for period not adjusted for seasonal variation First half Second half First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter ___ Revised series : See Federal Reserve Bulletin June for similar data for the following industry groups ; primary metals and products machinery automobiles and equipment foods and kindred products chemicals and allied products and petroleum refining Source : Compiled by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and based on published reports of various industrial corporations " TABLE D-29. Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment private manufacturing corporations by industry groups Ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity Selected quarters Total Industry groups First quarter Fourth quarter first quarter Before Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Rubber products..Leather and leather products. Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) __ Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Food .-Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products -_ _ Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products _ Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) After Federal taxes Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products. Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries All private manufacturing corporations.. Food Tobacco manufactures _ Textile mill products _ Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products _ _ _ Fabricated metal products _ Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-30. Relation of profits before and after taxes to sales private manufacturing corporations by industry groups Profits in cents per dollar of sales Selected quarters Total Industry groups First quarter Fourth quarter first quarter Before Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations Food Tobacco manufactures Textile mill products Apparel and finished textiles Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures.. Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products.. Products of petroleum and coal Rubber products Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) After Federal taxes All private manufacturing corporations. Food Tobacco manufacturesTextile mill products ._ Apparel and finished textiles. Lumber and wood products. Furniture and fixtures Paper and allied products Printing and publishing ( except newspapers ) Chemicals and allied products Products of petroleum and coal __ Rubber products _ Leather and leather products Stone clay and glass products Primary nonferrous metal industries Primary iron and steel industries. _ Fabricated metal products Machinery ( except electrical and transportation ) Electrical machinery Transportation equipment ( except motor vehicles ) Motor vehicles and parts Instruments ; photographic and optical goods ; watches and clocks Miscellaneous manufacturing ( including ordnance ) Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission n6 TABLE D Relation of profits before and after taxes to investment and to sales all private manufacturing corporations by size classes Before Federal taxes Assets class ( thousands of dollars ) Total Selected quarters After Federal taxes First quarter Fourth quarter Total first quarter Selected quarters First quarter Fourth quarter first quarter Ratio of profits ( annual rate ) to stockholders ' equity All sizes to to to to 9P,999 and over.- Profits in cents per dollar of sales All sizes to to to to and over. Sources : Federal Trade Commission and Securities and Exchange Commission TABLE D-32. Sources and uses of corporate funds [ Billions of dollars ] Use or source of funds first half Uses Plant and equipment outlays Inventories ( change in book value ) Changes in customer receivables Other current assets Sources Internal Retained profits and depletion allowances Depreciation allowances Reduction in cash and U. S. Government securities External Change in trade debt Change in Federal income tax liability. Other current liabilities Change in bank loans Change in mortgages Net new issues _ Bonds Stocks o Q <4.2 Discrepancy ( uses less sources ) _ ( ) ( ) Excludes banks and insurance companies Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data. Not adjusted for seasonal variation Less than million dollars Preliminary estimates by Council of Economic Advisers NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce estimates based on Securities and Exchange Commission and other financial data TABLE D-33. The international transactions of the United States [ Millions of dollars ] Exports of goods and services : Recorded coods ' Other goods3 Total goods Services -Income on investments Total exports Imports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods3 Total goods Services Income on investments Total imports. Surplus of exports of goods and services : Recorded goods Other goods Total goods Services _ Income on investments Total surplus of exports Means offinancingsurplus of exports of goods and services : Liquidation of gold and dollar assets by foreign countries Dollar disbursements by : International Monetary Fund International Bank United States Government sources : Grants .._ _ Long and short term loans United States private sources : Remittances Long and short term capital._ Total means of financing Errors and omissions total total SecFirst Second Third Fourth First ond Total quar- quar- quar- quar- quar- quarter ter ter ter ter ter i I } Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data Figures for recorded exports of goods in and have been adjusted to include goods shipped to United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas in order to make them comparable withfiguresfor Such shipments are included in exports as recorded by the Bureau of the Census in but were not so included in prior years Includes goods sold to or bought from other countries that have not been shipped from or into the United States customs area and other adjustments Not available Allfiguresfor means offinancingare on a net basis For detail see table D-34 NOTE. Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-34. United States Government aid to foreign countries [ Millions of dollars ] Type of aid A. Unilateral payments : Lend-lease UNRRA and post-UNRRA.. Civilian supplies distributed by the armed forces Transfers to Philippines Chinese aid Greek-Turkish aid International Refugee Organizations Interim aid- _ _ European Recovery Program. Other Total unilateral payments. Less unilateral receipts Equals net unilateral payments B. Long-term loans and investments : Lend-lease credits Surplus property including ship sales Export-Import Bank loans United Kingdom loan Subscription t o International Bank International Monetary Fund European Recovery Program Other total First Second Third Fourth First Total quar- quar- quar- quar- quarter ter ter ter ter total Second quarter i ( ) ( ) Total Less repayments Equals net long-term loans and investments including International Bank and International Monetary Fund Less subscriptions to International Bank and International Monetary Fund Equals net long-term loans and investments excluding International Bank and International Monetary Fund Short-term loans ( net ) Total net unilateral payments loans and investments excluding International Bank and International Monetary Fund ( A+B+C ) Preliminary estimates based on incomplete data Not available Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D United States merchandise exports including reexports by areas quarterly average and Period Other Total ERP Other exports Canada Western Hemi- countries Europe including sphere reexports Asia * Australia and Africa Oceania Millions of dollars Quarterly average : First quarter.. _ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter.._ Second quarter ( ) ( ) ( 3> ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter.. Turkey is included with E R P countries and excluded from Asia. Exports to Germany in the postwar period relate almost wholly to exports to the three western zones Preliminary estimate based on incomplete data Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise including reexports shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in to goods destined to United States armed forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce I2O TABLE D-36. United States domestic merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and Total domestic exports Period Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Millions of dollars Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ First quarter... _ NOTE. Data in this table cover all domestic merchandise shipped from the United States customs area to foreign countries including in to goods destined to United States armed forces abroad for distribution in occupied areas as civilian supplies Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-37. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States domestic merchandise exports by economic classes quarterly average and [ = ] Total domestic exports Period Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Semimanufactures Finished manufactures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : First quarter. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter. Unit value indexes Quarterly average : First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter First quarter. _ NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including change in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade. The indexes for to are based on data which include goods destined to the United States armed forces abroad for distribution to civilians in occupied areas Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-38. United States general merchandise imports by areas,1936-38 quarterly average and Period Other Total general Canada Western Hemiimports sphere ERP countries l Other Europe Asia Australia and Africa Oceania Millions of dollars Quarterly average : First quarter.._ Second quarterThird quarter. _ Fourth quarter First quarter _2_ Second quarter ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter.. Second quarter Third quarter. Fourth quarter : First quarter... Turkey is included with E R P countries and excluded from Asia. Imports from Germany in the postwar period relate almost wholly to imports from the three Western zones Preliminary estimate based on incomplete data Not available NOTE. Data in this table cover all merchandise received in the United States customs area from foreign countries. General imports include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising channels plus entries into bonded customs warehouses Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-39. United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic classes quarterly average and Period Total imports for consumption Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Finished Semimanu- manufacfactures tures Millions of dollars Quarterly average : First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter- Fourth quarter First quarter. _ Percentage of total Quarterly average : First quarter. _ Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter. _ NOTE. Imports for consumption include merchandise entered immediately upon arrival into merchandising or consumption channels plus withdrawals from bonded customs warehouses for consumption Detail will not necessarily add to totals because of rounding Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-40. Indexes of quantity and unit value of United States merchandise imports for consumption by economic classes quarterly average and [ = ] Total imports for consumption Period Crude materials Crude foodstuffs Manufactured foodstuffs Finished Semimanu- manufacfactures tures Quantity indexes Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter Third quarter Fourth quarter _ First quarter Unit value indexes Quarterly average : First quarter Second quarter. _ Third quarter Fourth quarter First quarter NOTE. The indexes of quantity are a measure of the volume of trade after the influence on value of changes in average prices has been eliminated. The indexes of unit value provide a measure of change in the average prices at which trade transactions are reported in official foreign trade statistics including changes in average prices that result from changes in the commodity composition of trade Source : Department of Commerce TABLE D-41. Changes in selected economic series since and = Source : Appendix table No Economic series Year D-2. D-3- D-5- First half Second half first half Percentage changes second half to first half Gross national product Personal consumption expenditures.. Gross private domestic investment Net foreign investment Government purchases of goods and services National income ___ Compensation of employees Personal income Disposable personal incomePersonal net saving Per capita disposable personal income : Current dollars dollars Labor force including armed forces. Civilian labor force Employment Nbnagricultural Agricultural Unemployment See footnotes at end of table p. D-7. TABLE D-41. Changes in selected economic series since and Continued = Source : Appendix table No Economic series Year D-9 D-12 D-l ? Average gross weekly earnings : Manufacturing.. Bituminous coal mining Building construction Retail trade Physical production index of goods and utilities : total Agriculture Nonagriculture- First half ( ) Second half first half Percentage changes second half to first half ( ) ) pr< Durable manufactures Nondurable manufactures. Minerals D-14 New construction : total Private Residential Nonresidential Public utility and farm Public D-15- Business expenditures for new plant and equipment D-16 Inventories : Manufacturing. Wholesale Retail Sales : Manufacturing. Wholesale Retail i D-19 Consumers ' price index : All items Food Apparel Rent D-20- Wholesale price index : All commodities. __ Farm products Foods Other than farm products and foods.. D-21 Prices received by farmers Prices paid by farmers ( including interest and taxes ) Parity ratio D-22. Consumer credit outstanding end of period D-27 Corporate profits : Profits before taxesProfits after taxes Dividend payments.._ Undistributed profits ( * " D-35. D-38- Merchandise exports including reexports ] General merchandise imports ( ) Changes are computed from data as reported and therefore may aiffer slightly from changes computed from the indexes shown here Not available average = For sale by the Superintendent of Documents U. S. Government Printing OflQce Washington D C. Price cents